---
title: "The History of the Rechabites"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

_The History of the Holy Hermit Zosimus and of the Sons of Jonadab, the Son of Rechab_


## 1

<span id="v1_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  There was a certain amazing and virtuous man, who while dwelling in the desert for forty years did not eat bread, did not drink wine, and did not see the face of a mortal. 

<span id="v1_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  His name was Zosimus; and he earnestly was entreating God by night and by day to show him where he had translated the Blessed Ones, the sons of Jonadab, who were taken away from worldly life in the days of Jeremiah the prophet, and where God had made them dwell. 

And when the Lord saw the (self-)humiliation of this blessed one, Zosimus, for the sake of these Blessed Ones, then God heard his prayer and granted his request. 

<span id="v1_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And on one of the days while he was praying, a voice came to him? and an angel came toward him and said to him, “Zosimus, O man of God, I have been sent to you from the height (of heaven) to guide you and to show you the way so that you may journey and see these Blessed Ones as you petitioned the Lord. 

<span id="v1_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  However, do not boast in your mind (thinking thus), ‘Behold (for) forty years bread I have not eaten, and wine I have not drunk, 

<span id="v1_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  and the faces of men I have not seen (but) only the face of angels’; now approach.” 

## 2

<span id="v2_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Then I left the cave, 

<span id="v2_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  and traveled with the angel (for) forty days. I arrived at a certain place wearied and fatigued, and I collapsed from my exhaustion; afterward I prayed to God (for) three’ days. 

<span id="v2_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And a certain animal came and carried me away and traveled beneath me (for) many days until it reached the great ocean.

<span id="v2_4"><sup><small>(4,5,6)</small></sup></span>   And when I saw the great sea I was amazed! at its vastness and wondered? what I would do. 

<span id="v2_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And immediately a voice came to me, saying, “O man of God, never has a man proceeded (farther) or passed beyond me; merely perceive (this) and understand (it).” 

<span id="v2_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And I looked and (saw) in the midst of the sea (something) like a dense bulwark of cloud suspended upon the sea; and the top of the cloud extended! to the height of heaven. 

<span id="v2_8a"><sup><small>8a</small></sup></span>  And I thought that perhaps the Blessed Ones were in the midst of it, 

<span id="v2_9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  (because) I heard a voice from the midst of the cloud which said, “Father Zosimus.” Then (realizing my misconception) I praised and gave thanks to God, (to) him who makes mute natures to speak, to him who makes everything easy. 

## 3

<span id="v3_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And then I prayed to the LORD to deal with me as it pleases his will. 

<span id="v3_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And suddenly two luxuriant and very stately trees, larger than (any) I had ever seen, appeared on the shore of the sea. 

<span id="v3_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And then one of the trees bent itself downt and I securely grasped its branches. And it stretched out toward the height (of heaven) and lifted me up and carried me in its summit until the cloud was beneath (me). And also that other tree bent itself down toward it; and the one from here curved its summit and held me out to the one which was from the other side. 

<span id="v3_4"><sup><small>(4)4a</small></sup></span>  And descending, it dropped me in the midst of it. And thus by God’s guidance’ I passed over the great oceans and the cloud.

<span id="v3_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And I rested in (that) place (for) three days, while the praise of God did not cease from my mouth. Then I arose and traveled through the land that was in the midst of the sea; 

<span id="v3_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  it was pleasant and beautiful and filled with luxuriant trees, which were bearing pleasant and fragrant fruits. It was like a large and vast island, without a mountain or hill, adorned with flowers! and filled with many and delightful pleasures. 

## 4

<span id="v4_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  While observing the beauty? of that land, I approached a little (ways) and saw a certain naked man, who was seated. 

<span id="v4_2a"><sup><small>(2)2a</small></sup></span>   And I was afraid because of his appearance, 

<span id="v4_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  but said, “Peace to you, my brother.” 

<span id="v4_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Then he replied and said, “Come in peace; 

<span id="v4_5"><sup><small>(5,6,7)</small></sup></span>   and joy be with you 

<span id="v4_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  for I know that you are a man of God, otherwise you would not have been allowed‘ to enter here.” 

## 5

<span id="v5_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And again he asked me, “Have you come from the world of vanity?” 

<span id="v5_2"><sup><small>(2)2a</small></sup></span>   Then I said to him, “In truth I come from the world of vanity in order to see (all of) you. However, tell me, why are you naked?” 

<span id="v5_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  But he said to me, “You are he (who is) naked, and you do not discern that your garment is corrupted, but my own garment is not corrupted. If you wish to see me, however, come, gazeb toward the height of heaven.” 

<span id="v5_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And while gazing above I saw his face (to be) like the face of an angel. And my eyes were dimmed from fear; and I fell upon the land. 

## 6

<span id="v6_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And then he approached me and grasped me by my hands, and raised me up upon my feet. And he said to me, “Do not fear; for I am one of the Blessed Ones, whom? you have earnestly desired to visit. 

<span id="v6_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  But come with me and I shall take you to the holy Blessed Ones, my brothers. 

<span id="v6_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And traveling with me, holding my hands, he asked me concerning the world and all that (is) in it. And then he brought me to the assembly of the Blessed Ones. And after watching them I fell to the land and worshiped them. 

<span id="v6_3a"><sup><small>3a</small></sup></span>  It was the assembly of elect ones, (comprising both) splendid youths and honorable holy ones. 

<span id="v6_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And when these Blessed Ones saw me, they greatly marveled and asked! (each other) simultaneously, 

<span id="v6_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  “My brothers, has the end of the world arrived and consequently a man was able to come here?” 

<span id="v6_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And all of them rose up and prayed and petitioned the LORD to inform them (of the reason) for my incursion among them. 

<span id="v6_6a"><sup><small>6a</small></sup></span>  And God heard their prayer; and I watched and behold two angels descended from heaven, stood before the assembly of the Blessed Ones, and said to them, “The end has not yet arrived; do not be afraid by the coming of this man who is among you. He will remain among you (for) seven days. 

<span id="v6_6b"><sup><small>6b</small></sup></span>  Write out for him and inform him (about) all of God’s providence respecting you, and that he visits with you; however, that (man) shall (soon) go out! from you, and return to his place rejoicing.” 

<span id="v6_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And after the angels said these things to them, they ascended to heaven. 

## 7

<span id="v7_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Then the Blessed Ones rejoiced, and received me in peace. 

<span id="v7_1a"><sup><small>1a</small></sup></span>  And the holy ones, the Blessed Ones, delivered me to an attendant.

<span id="v7_1b"><sup><small>1b</small></sup></span>  And the holy ones said? to him, “Keep him, this our brother, with you (for) seven days.” 

<span id="v7_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And the holy attendant received me, and brought me to his tent, and I sat“ with him under these fair trees. 

<span id="v7_2a"><sup><small>2a</small></sup></span>  And in his presence I took delight in the delight of his prayers. For that place is like the Paradise of God and these Blessed Ones are like Adam and Eve before they sinned. 

<span id="v7_2b"><sup><small>2b</small></sup></span>  They fast from the ninth hour until the ninth; 

<span id="v7_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  and then they eats what they need from the fruits of these trees; for water which is sweet and delightful as honey flows from the roots of the trees. And each one drinks what he needs. And immediately they stop eating; from the ninth hour (on) they live alone. 

<span id="v7_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  When these families" of these Blessed Ones heard what was (happening) on my account, and (when) they were told by their brothers, “Behold, a certain man has come from the world of vanity,” 

<span id="v7_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  (then) they began to be disturbed and all of the fair families of the Blessed Ones came (persistently)? in order to see (the phenomenon), since amazement: possessed them because of me. 

<span id="v7_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And they (incessantly) questioned me concerning this world, and I (repeatedly) told them. 

<span id="v7_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  From the weariness, duration, and pain of the manner (of questioning), my soul quivered and I was unable to speak, because neither by night nor by day did they leave me alone to rest. And I asked that attendant and said to him, “I ask you, O Blessed One, do me a kindness; if they come to you and question you concerning - me, tell them, ‘He is not here,’ so that I may rest; (because) my soul is greatly harassed.” 

<span id="v7_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And that holy attendant, when he heard this (request) from me, cried out in a loud voice saying, “O My Blessed Fathers, misfortune is counted to me on this day.” Behold, I am almost like Adam in Paradise; for he through the advice of Eve transgressed the commandment. And this man through his evil advice, which he reveals (by) asking? (something) that would cause me (to sin), said to me, ‘Lie, and say to your companions that I am not here.’ 

<span id="v7_9a"><sup><small>(9)9a</small></sup></span>  Cast out this man from here so that he shall not implant (lies) in our place of captivity.”

<span id="v7_10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And many noble elders and spiritual youths, who were like angels of heaven, assembled, formeds? an assembly, and said to me, “O man of sin, go, exit from among us. We do not know how you prepared yourself so that you were able to come among us; 

<span id="v7_10a"><sup><small>10a</small></sup></span>  perhaps you wish to deceive us as the Evil One deceived our father Adam.” 

<span id="v7_11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  However, I, miserable Zosimus, fell upon my face before them, and with mournful tears entreated them earnestly and said, 

Have mercy upon me, O Blessed Ones; 

And forgive me my offense, O Earthly Angels.” 

And after I entreated them earnestly and abundantly, with difficulty hey had mercy upon me. 

<span id="v7_11a"><sup><small>11a</small></sup></span>  And all of them became very silent, and after a short (time) they said to me," “Tell us, our brother, all of those things which (transpired) so that you were able to visit us; be at rest and do not fear.” 

<span id="v7_12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  Then I told them the entire story, in what manner I requested God, “Show me your place.” 

<span id="v7_13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  Then the elders responded to me, “And now, our beloved, since God has answered you a and you have seen us and our place, what do you wish?” 

<span id="v7_14a"><sup><small>(14)14a</small></sup></span>  Then I said to them, “I beg (you) from your blessedness to write for me the history of (how) your entrance here (was possible), so that your history may be a good introduction and a beautiful example for everyone who wishes to be guided by the fear of God.” 


## 8

<span id="v8_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And they took tablets of stone’ and wrote on them as follows: Hear, all (of you) who are in the world of vanity, and perceive all the providence? which has la occurred after this manner; 

<span id="v8_1a"><sup><small>1a</small></sup></span>  we are called the sons of Rechab, we are from you; and behold we departed from your world to this place in which we (are) today.

<span id="v8_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  For in that time when Jeremiah, the prophet, announced and prophesied the ravaging and devastation (of) Jerusalem because of the sins of the sons of Israel, then behold shortly (thereafter) the destroyer came to ravage and slay them. Then Jeremiah, the prophet, rent his garments and was clothed in sackcloth, and sprinkled dust upon his head. And he showed! to the common folk the way of goodness; and urged! them to return to the LORD. 

<span id="v8_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Then our father Jonadab, the son of Rechab, heard how the prophet charged, “Do not eat bread, and do not drink wine until the LORD hears your petition.” And our father said to us, ‘“We must not eat bread and we must not drink wine; and we must not put on a garment. We must obey his word.” 

<span id="v8_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And we said to him, “We will do all that you have charged us.” 

<span id="v8_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And then we removed the garments from our bodies, and did not eat bread, and did not drink wine, and lamented with a great lamentation. And we offered prayers to God. 

<span id="v8_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And he accepted our petitions. And he turned back from his fierce anger. 

## 9

<span id="v9_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And after King Josiah died, another king ruled after him. 

<span id="v9_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And when he assembled together all the people of the Jews, (some) men? spoke to him because of us: “There is here a family“ which is from us but they do not act like us; and they are naked and neither eat (bread) nor drink (wine).” Then the king dismissed (them); 

<span id="v9_3"><sup><small>(3)</small></sup></span>  and he summoned us.

<span id="v9_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And when we came in before him, the king asked us, “Who are you and from which family' are you?” 

<span id="v9_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Then we answered him, “We are from this your people, and from the city Jerusalem; and we are sons of Jonadab, the son of Rechab.

<span id="v9_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And when Jeremiah, the prophet, in the days of the king who was before you, exhorted 

<span id="v9_6a"><sup><small>(7)6a</small></sup></span>  the common folk' to repent, 

<span id="v9_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  our father heard the word of the prophet and warned and charged us not to eat bread, drink wine, be anxious again about garments, or dwell in houses.” 

<span id="v9_10"><sup><small>(9)10</small></sup></span>  And God heard his prayer. And he removed his anger from the city. 

<span id="v9_10a"><sup><small>10a</small></sup></span>  And we loved him with all our soul and girded ourselves with his kindness. And this (his love) was pleasing in our eyes so that in this way we shall be leisurely naked all our days.” 

## 10

<span id="v10_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And the king said to us, “You are doing well; 

<span id="v10_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  but (now) mix with your people, and put on your garments, and eat bread, and drink wine, and forsake the LORD. And behold you will be obedient sons of our kingdom.” 

<span id="v10_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  But we answered the king, “We shall never break our promises to God; and we shall not cease from (obeying) the covenant with him forever.” 

<span id="v10_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And the king raged against us and charged (that) all of us be imprisoned in prison; and while we were imprisoned we kept vigil by prayer before God. 

<span id="v10_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  On the first night, a brilliant light shone upon us; and angels of God in glorious form appeared to us. And they led all of us out from prison, 

<span id="v10_5a"><sup><small>(6)5a</small></sup></span>  and placed us in the air that is above the land, 

<span id="v10_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  and brought us to this place (in) which you (now) see (us), and allowed us to dwell in it.

<span id="v10_7a"><sup><small>7a</small></sup></span>  And our virtuous wives, who with us had surrendered themselves to God, now abide separately among us in this land, while remaining as we (do) in a fast and prayer and praise to God. And after the angels of God brought us and placed us in this place in the midst of the water of this great sea, God commanded and the waters rose up from the deep abyss and encircled this place. 

<span id="v10_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And by the command of God a cloud became a bulwark above the water and rose up as far as heaven. 

## 11

<span id="v11_1a"><sup><small>(1)1a</small></sup></span>  And according to his will God assembled us on this island and did not scatter us upon the whole land; 

<span id="v11_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  but God placed us on this holy land. And we are without sins and evil and abominable thoughts. 

<span id="v11_2a"><sup><small>2a</small></sup></span>  And we are mortals; however, we are purified and spotless, and our souls and bodies are cleansed from all defilement; and we depend upon the hope of our LORD; and our sight is fixed continuously (and) unceasingly on the light of the future life. 

<span id="v11_2b"><sup><small>(4)2b</small></sup></span>  And from prayer to God we are not silent by night and by day, for this (offering of praise) is our occupation. 

<span id="v11_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And God commanded and this land brought forth for us pleasant and splendid trees which are filled (with) lovely, marvelous, and abundant fruits. 

<span id="v11_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And again from the roots of the trees flows sweet and delightful water; and from these fruits and water we take delight and rest and are sustained. 

<span id="v11_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  There is not among us vineyards, grain, husbandry, wood, iron, houses, buildings, gold, or silver; 

<span id="v11_5a"><sup><small>5a</small></sup></span>  and neither stormy weather nor rain is with us; neither snow nor ice. And the sun does not shine upon us, because the cloud, which encircles us like a bulwark, restrains it. 

<span id="v11_5b"><sup><small>5b</small></sup></span>  And the land in which we are is filled with a glorious light so darkness and night do not enter it. And we possess a shining appearance and dwell in light. 

<span id="v11_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And there are among us men who take wives and once only the man has intercourse with his wife. 

<span id="v11_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And then they are set apart from each other and they remain in purity for the remainder of their lives. And the memory of the delight does not arise in the mind of any of us. But they remain all their days as those who grow up in virginity. 

<span id="v11_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  But the wife conceives and bears two children; one of them is for marriage and the other grows up in virginity. And after this anner we have been commanded by God; and truly after this manner is our custom. 

## 12

<span id="v12_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  But there is among us no one who measures the years. 

<span id="v12_1a"><sup><small>1a</small></sup></span>  For the sake of those who (daily) live in purity and holiness, the years of their life shall increase; but the years of sinners shall decrease.‘ And no one among us computes months and years. 

<span id="v12_3"><sup><small>(2)3</small></sup></span>  But we are naked not as you suppose, for we are covered with a covering of glory; and we do not show each other the private parts of our bodies. 

<span id="v12_3a"><sup><small>3a</small></sup></span>  But we are covered with a stolei of glory (similar to that) which clothed Adam and Eve before they sinned. 

<span id="v12_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  We are nourished by the fruits of the trees at the ninth hour; not that the hours are distinguished among us, but when the time for our nourishment arrives, the fruits of the trees come among us, although they do not fall by our will. 

<span id="v12_4a"><sup><small>4a</small></sup></span>  And thus we are nourished from them sufficient (to) our need. And afterward we drink from the exceedingly good, sweet, and delightful water which comes out to us from the roots of the trees. 

<span id="v12_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And then the water returns and is gathered together (in its original place). 

<span id="v12_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  We have knowledge about you people who inhabit the world, and how you are. We know the works of the righteous and the works of the wicked, because the angels of God come among us continually and inform us concerning your deeds and the length' of your life. 

<span id="v12_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  We pray for you, petitioning God on your account because we are also from your (race) and from the sons of Adam. 

<span id="v12_7a"><sup><small>7a</small></sup></span>  And God set us apart and chose us according to his will; and he brought (and) placed us in this place in which we are (now). 

<span id="v12_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And the angels of God dwell with us and they announce to us those things which (happen) among you; and we rejoice at the good deeds which the upright who are among you do. 

<span id="v12_9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And we grieve over the sinners and pagans who are in the world; and petition God constantly to restrain his anger concerning you.

<span id="v12_9a"><sup><small>9a</small></sup></span>  To us the holy angels of God announce (both) the incarnation of the Word of God, who (is) from the holy virgin, the mother of God, and all those things which (he) provides and perfects and endures for the sake of the salvation of mortals. 

<span id="v12_9b"><sup><small>9b</small></sup></span>  And then we worship and acknowledge and glorify (him) for the sake of the glory of his incarnate life. 

<span id="v12_9c"><sup><small>9c</small></sup></span>  Then we ask for your love, O people, that you will not be unfaithful? when you chance to read this history. 

<span id="v12_9d"><sup><small>9d</small></sup></span>  Do not surrender. to the cruel and merciless ruler, but be shrouded by the secrets which were entrusted to you. 

<span id="v12_9e"><sup><small>9e</small></sup></span>  And let this history be for you the salvation of your lives. 

<span id="v12_9f"><sup><small>9f</small></sup></span>  Have regard to us in your hidden thoughts, be imitators of our way of life, pursue peace, cherish the love (that is) unchangeable, and love purity and holiness. 

<span id="v12_9g"><sup><small>9g</small></sup></span>  And you will be made perfect in all good things’? and inherit the kingdom of God. 

## 13

<span id="v13_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  we perceive (that) the holy fast of forty (days) of our Lorp (has begun when) the fruits of the trees are withheld and cease (developing). 

<span id="v13_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And on each of the days of the holy fast God causes to rain down upon us from heaven manna (similar to) that which he gave to our fathers when he led them out of Egypt. 

<span id="v13_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  We learn that the holy Passover will arrive when these trees among us flourish and produce magnificently sweet and abundant fruits. 

<span id="v13_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Then we know that the Passover of our LORD (has arrived). 

<span id="v13_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  But on the feast of our LORD’s resurrection from the grave we watch (for) three days and three nights. Then we are filled with gladness and rejoicing, perceiving that the holy feast of the resurrection of our Lord (has arrived). 

<span id="v13_5b"><sup><small>5b</small></sup></span>  And with a spiritual cheerfulness we rejoice while celebrating with the holy angels; likewise also we exult and sing praises during all of the noble and saving feasts of the providence of our Lord. 

<span id="v13_5c"><sup><small>5c</small></sup></span>  And all the assembly which (are) above us and all the heavenly hosts rejoice (with us) in these feasts. 

## 14

<span id="v14_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And again we announce to you, O brothers, that among us there is no sickness, pain, fatigue to our bodies, mutilation, weariness, or temptations; not even Satan’s power can touch us, for there is not among us rage, jealousy, evil desire, or hateful thoughts. But (we experience only) quietness and gladness; and (exhibit) love and affection toward God and each other.

<span id="v14_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And the soul of each of us is not wearied or sorrowful or wishes to stay behind when the angels of God come to guide it from the body. But we are glad and rejoice and the holy angels (rejoice) with us when they are sent out after the soul of each of us. 

<span id="v14_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  As the bride rejoices over her betrothed bridegroom, so the soul rejoices at the good news of the holy angels. For they (the angels) say to it nothing except this alone: “O pure soul, your LORD is calling you to come to him.” 

<span id="v14_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Then the soul with great rejoicing leaves the body to meet the angel. And seeing that pure soul, which has (just) left the body, all the holy angels unfold (for it) their shining stoles. 

<span id="v14_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And they receive it with? joy, saying, “Blessed are you, O pure soul, and blest, for you have thoroughly done the will of God, your LORD.” 

<span id="v14_5a"><sup><small>5a</small></sup></span>  And this (is how) he brings his providence to each one of us: 

## 15

<span id="v15_4"><sup><small>(1-3)4</small></sup></span>  (The soul) discerns and knows the day of its departure through a revelation from holy angels. 

<span id="v15_4a"><sup><small>4a</small></sup></span>  And we live an extremely long time; and the extent of our life (is) not brief and short as with you. 

<span id="v15_4b"><sup><small>4b</small></sup></span>  When the holy angels are sent among us, in this beautiful order (of which) we have informed you, they visit among us. 

<span id="v15_4c"><sup><small>(5)4c</small></sup></span>  However, first they come to our elders; and when the blessed elders see the angels who have come, they immediately with joy entreat (so that) all the blessed brothers assemble. 

<span id="v15_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And when all the people have assembled, immediately with praise we come with the angels to the place in which bodies are buried. 

<span id="v15_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And because we have nothing to use for digging, the angels themselves make a sepulchre for the bodies. And again when all of these (souls) have completed (their time), then they are separated from our assembly; and (each) departs with great joy. 

<span id="v15_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And all of us with exultation come near to it and offer it peace in the kiss of the Lord while it is being conducted and led (to the grave) by the holy angels. 

<span id="v15_9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And then the soul of our blessed brother leaves the body in which it had settled; 

<span id="v15_9a"><sup><small>9a</small></sup></span>  and with joy far removed from mourning it approaches and comes to the holy angels and ascends up to God with joy. 

<span id="v15_10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  But we with one accord see the soul when it leaves the body clearly and plainly; the appearance of the soul when it leaves the body is the likeness of a glorious light, and formed and imprinted in the likeness and type” of the body,” and it is spiritually flying. 

## 16 

<span id="v16_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And while we are looking at that holy and spotless soul, the holy angels Carry it away and salute it, and thus it ascends and goes up from us in glory. And after it ascends with them and passes into the region of the power of the highest heavens, then other orders (of angels) receive it with joy. 

<span id="v16_1a"><sup><small>1a</small></sup></span>  And the archangels salute it; and afterward they stretch out to it (their hands and lead it) to the thrones and dominions that (are) above them. And thus it goes up and ascends until it enters (before) and worships the Lord.

<span id="v16_1b"><sup><small>1b</small></sup></span>  And when the highest order of cherubim and seraphim receive it, they rise to the gate of the holy Trinity. 

<span id="v16_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Then the Son of God receives that soul from their hands and brings it (forward) so that it may worship his father. 

<span id="v16_5"><sup><small>(3,4)5</small></sup></span>  And when the soul falls down upon its face to worship before God, then the revelation is revealed to us, (and) all of us fall upon the land and worship the Lorp with the soul. 

<span id="v16_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And when God makes that soul rise from its worship, we also rise to our feet. 

<span id="v(7)7a"><sup><small>(7)7a</small></sup></span>  And then God sends that soul to a stately mansion (to await) the day of resurrection for (the rest of our) community. 

<span id="v16_7b"><sup><small>7b</small></sup></span>  Then we also go away from the body of that soul of our brother to our (own) assembly” and complete the service through praises to the Holy Spirit. 

<span id="v16_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And so we have engraved (upon) these tablets and sent (them) to you through the hands of our brother Zosimus. 

<span id="v16_8a"><sup><small>(3)8a</small></sup></span>  And again God, our Creator, has given us this (privilege): we hear the voices of the spirits and the praises of the angels, the hosts, and the heavenly orders, who continually praise God. 

<span id="v16_8b"><sup><small>(3)8b</small></sup></span>  When they praise (God), so also we in our land praise (him). 

<span id="v16_8c"><sup><small>8c</small></sup></span>  And the angels receive and transmit our prayers and our praises (by) entering and worshiping in love before that divine and mystic throne, (which) knows secrets. 

<span id="v16_8d"><sup><small>8d</small></sup></span>  And thus by the aid of the angels and the heavenly hosts our prayers pass on and find entrance before God. 

<span id="v16_8e"><sup><small>8e</small></sup></span>  This is all of our manner (of life). And we are truly called the Blessed Ones, because we experience the benevolence of God. 

<span id="v16_8f"><sup><small>8f</small></sup></span>  And we write and send (these tablets) to you, O people who dwell in that world of vanity, through the hands of this our brother Zosimus, who entered among us for your sake through the mercies (of God) and remained with us (for) seven days. 

<span id="v16_8g"><sup><small>8g</small></sup></span>  And accompanying him we traveled with him until (we came) to the shores of the great ocean.

## 17

<span id="v17_1a"><sup><small>(1)1a</small></sup></span>  And then all of us together knelt down upon the shores of the sea and prayed and petitioned God to be for our brother Zosimus a guide and a refuge. 

<span id="v17_3a"><sup><small>(2,3)3a</small></sup></span>  And then immediately in a moment a white cloud appeared above the sea and its top extended to the highest summit. 

<span id="v17_3b"><sup><small>3b</small></sup></span>  And we praised God, (confessing) that it is easy for him to do everything. 

<span id="v17_4a"><sup><small>(4)4a</small></sup></span>  Then suddenly two trees appeared in the middle of the sea and by a command of God one of these trees bent down toward me, Zosimus. 

<span id="v17_4b"><sup><small>4b</small></sup></span>  And it held me securely in its branches and stretched (itself) out to the height of heaven; and carried me and lifted me gently unto the summit and the top of that white cloud. 

<span id="v17_5a"><sup><small>(5)5a</small></sup></span>  And that second tree bent down toward me, then that (first) one now bent its head; and that (second) tree also bent down toward me, (lifted me up), and brought me to dry land. 

<span id="v17_5b"><sup><small>5b</small></sup></span>  And again I crossed the ocean, the great sea, and that cloud. 

<span id="v17_5c"><sup><small>5c</small></sup></span>  And I gave thanks unto and praised the merciful God, who fulfills the desires of those who fear him, and who hears their petition and saves them. 

## 18

<span id="v17_3"><sup><small>(1,2)3</small></sup></span>  And suddenly that animal arrived and carried me; 

<span id="v17_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  (and) it brought me to the cave while I praised and exalted God, who had answered me and heard my petition and fulfilled my desire. To him (be) praise, amen, from heavenly and earthly (beings) for all time, amen. 

(The Gk. contains chs. 19-23, which appear to be later expansions by a Christian. ) 


