---
title: "Crises Emergencies Exigencies"
description: 
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Future, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2023 Halbert Katzen, JD</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td></td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_ubannotated">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">UB Annotated — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

_By Halbert Katzen J.D._

> This cross-reference study was created to support the further development of the Topical Studies: [Is there an impending judgment of the living?](/en/article/Halbert_Katzen/A_Global_Catastrophic_Crisis_Event) and [A New Heaven And A New Earth](/en/article/Halbert_Katzen/A_New_Heaven_And_A_New_Earth).
{.is-info}

## History

### Lucifer Rebellion

> The Melchizedeks also maintain two special colleges on Edentia. One, the **emergency school**, is devoted to the study of problems growing out of the Satania rebellion. The other, the bestowal school, is dedicated to the mastery of the new problems arising out of the fact that Michael made his final bestowal on one of the worlds of Norlatiadek. This latter college was established almost forty thousand years ago, immediately after the announcement by Michael that Urantia had been selected as the world for his final bestowal. ([UB 43:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p1_6))

Paper 43: The Constellations; Section 5. The Edentia Fathers since the Lucifer Rebellion

> The rotation of the Most Highs on Edentia was suspended at the time of the Lucifer rebellion. We now have the same rulers who were on duty at that time. We infer that no change in these rulers will be made until Lucifer and his associates are finally disposed of.
> 
> The present government of the constellation, however, has been expanded to include twelve Sons of the Vorondadek order. These twelve are as follows: … ([UB 43:5.1-2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p5_1))

> 8. The Most High emergency administrator, the Vorondadek Son charged with the task of adapting the **emergency enactments** of the Norlatiadek legislature to the rebellion-isolated worlds of Satania. ([UB 43:5.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p5_10))

> 10. The Most High judge-advocate, the head of the **emergency tribunal** devoted to the adjustment of the special problems of Norlatiadek growing out of the confusion consequent upon the Satania rebellion. ([UB 43:5.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p5_12))

> 12. The Most High director, the president of the **emergency council** of Edentia. All personalities assigned to Norlatiadek because of the Satania upheaval constitute the emergency council, and their presiding officer is a Vorondadek Son of extraordinary experience. ([UB 43:5.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p5_14))

> This executive group of seven Lanonandeks constitutes the **expanded emergency administration made necessary by the exigencies of the Lucifer rebellion**. There are only minor courts on Jerusem since the system is the unit of administration, not adjudication, but the Lanonandek administration is supported by the Jerusem executive council, the supreme advisory body of Satania. This council consists of twelve members: ([UB 45:3.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/45#p3_9))

> Of the many reasons known to me as to why Lucifer and his confederates were not sooner interned or adjudicated, I am permitted to recite the following: … ([UB 54:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p5_1))

> 9. On Jerusem the personal representative of the Supreme Executive of Orvonton counseled Gabriel to foster full opportunity for every living creature to mature a deliberate choice in those matters involved in the Lucifer Declaration of Liberty. The issues of rebellion having been raised, the Paradise **emergency adviser** of Gabriel portrayed that, if such full and free opportunity were not given all Norlatiadek creatures, then would the Paradise quarantine against all such possible halfhearted or doubt-stricken creatures be extended in self-protection against the entire constellation. To keep open the Paradise doors of ascension to the beings of Norlatiadek, it was necessary to provide for the full development of rebellion and to insure the complete determination of attitude on the part of all beings in any way concerned therewith. ([UB 54:5.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p5_10))

> 11. An **emergency council** of ex-mortals consisting of Mighty Messengers, glorified mortals who had had personal experience with like situations, together with their colleagues, was organized on Jerusem. They advised Gabriel that at least three times the number of beings would be led astray if arbitrary or summary methods of suppression were attempted. The entire Uversa corps of counselors concurred in advising Gabriel to permit the rebellion to take its full and natural course, even if it should require a million years to wind up the consequences. ([UB 54:5.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p5_12))

> The outbreak of rebellion on Jerusem, the capital of Satania, was broadcast by the Melchizedek council. The **emergency Melchizedeks** were immediately dispatched to Jerusem, and Gabriel volunteered to act as the representative of the Creator Son, whose authority had been challenged. With this broadcast of the fact of rebellion in Satania the system was isolated, quarantined, from her sister systems. There was “war in heaven,” the headquarters of Satania, and it spread to every planet in the local system. ([UB 67:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p3_1))

> There is no end to the recital of the stirring events of these tragic days. But at last the final decision of the last personality was made, and then, but only then, did a Most High of Edentia arrive with the **emergency Melchizedeks to seize authority on Urantia**. The Caligastia panoramic reign-records on Jerusem were obliterated, and the probationary era of planetary rehabilitation was inaugurated. ([UB 67:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p3_10))

> This seven years of waiting was a time of heart searching and soul discipline. Such **crises in the affairs of a universe** demonstrate the tremendous influence of mind as a factor in spiritual choosing. Education, training, and experience are factors in most of the vital decisions of all evolutionary moral creatures. But it is entirely possible for the indwelling spirit to make direct contact with the decision-determining powers of the human personality so as to empower the fully consecrated will of the creature to perform amazing acts of loyal devotion to the will and the way of the Father in Paradise. And this is just what occurred in the experience of Amadon, the modified human associate of Van. ([UB 67:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p3_7))

### Adam

> Although the minds and morals of the races were at a low level at the time of Adam’s arrival, physical evolution had gone on quite unaffected by the **exigencies** of the Caligastia rebellion. Adam’s contribution to the biologic status of the races, notwithstanding the partial failure of the undertaking, enormously upstepped the people of Urantia. ([UB 78:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/78#p1_1))

### Melchizedek’s emergency bestowal

> 3. _Melchizedek of Salem._ This **emergency Son** of Nebadon inaugurated the third revelation of truth on Urantia. The cardinal precepts of his teachings were _trust_ and _faith._ He taught trust in the omnipotent beneficence of God and proclaimed that faith was the act by which men earned God’s favor. His teachings gradually commingled with the beliefs and practices of various evolutionary religions and finally developed into those theologic systems present on Urantia at the opening of the first millennium after Christ. ([UB 92:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/92#p4_7))

> And it was in consequence of having been thrown so completely on their own resources that Machiventa Melchizedek, one of the twelve planetary receivers, volunteered to do that which had been done only six times in all the history of Nebadon: to personalize on earth as a temporary man of the realm, to bestow himself as an **emergency Son** of world ministry. Permission was granted for this adventure by the Salvington authorities, and the actual incarnation of Machiventa Melchizedek was consummated near what was to become the city of Salem, in Palestine. The entire transaction of the materialization of this Melchizedek Son was completed by the planetary receivers with the co-operation of the Life Carriers, certain of the Master Physical Controllers, and other celestial personalities resident on Urantia. ([UB 93:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p1_3))

> It was shortly after the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah that Machiventa decided to end his **emergency bestowal** on Urantia. Melchizedek’s decision to terminate his sojourn in the flesh was influenced by numerous conditions, chief of which was the growing tendency of the surrounding tribes, and even of his immediate associates, to regard him as a demigod, to look upon him as a supernatural being, which indeed he was; but they were beginning to reverence him unduly and with a highly superstitious fear. In addition to these reasons, Melchizedek wanted to leave the scene of his earthly activities a sufficient length of time before Abraham’s death to insure that the truth of the one and only God would become strongly established in the minds of his followers. Accordingly Machiventa retired one night to his tent at Salem, having said good night to his human companions, and when they went to call him in the morning, he was not there, for his fellows had taken him. ([UB 93:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p8_1))

> And thus, in losing sight of Melchizedek, they also lost sight of the teaching of this **emergency Son** regarding the spiritual mission of the promised bestowal Son; lost sight of the nature of this mission so fully and completely that very few of their progeny were able or willing to recognize and receive Michael when he appeared on earth and in the flesh as Machiventa had foretold. ([UB 93:9.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p9_10))

> During the years of Machiventa’s incarnation the Urantia Melchizedek receivers functioned as eleven. When Machiventa considered that his mission as an **emergency Son** was finished, he signalized this fact to his eleven associates, and they immediately made ready the technique whereby he was to be released from the flesh and safely restored to his original Melchizedek status. And on the third day after his disappearance from Salem he appeared among his eleven fellows of the Urantia assignment and resumed his interrupted career as one of the planetary receivers of 606 of Satania. ([UB 93:10.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p10_1))

> Machiventa terminated his bestowal as a creature of flesh and blood just as suddenly and unceremoniously as he had begun it. Neither his appearance nor departure were accompanied by any unusual announcement or demonstration; neither resurrection roll call nor ending of planetary dispensation marked his appearance on Urantia; his was an **emergency bestowal**. But Machiventa did not end his sojourn in the flesh of human beings until he had been duly released by the Father Melchizedek and had been informed that his **emergency bestowal** had received the approval of the chief executive of Nebadon, Gabriel of Salvington. ([UB 93:10.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p10_2))

> As his was an **emergency bestowal** on Urantia, it does not appear from the records what Machiventa’s future may be. It may develop that the Melchizedek corps of Nebadon have sustained the permanent loss of one of their number. Recent rulings handed down from the Most Highs of Edentia, and later confirmed by the Ancients of Days of Uversa, strongly suggest that this bestowal Melchizedek is destined to take the place of the fallen Planetary Prince, Caligastia. If our conjectures in this respect are correct, it is altogether possible that Machiventa Melchizedek may again appear in person on Urantia and in some modified manner resume the role of the dethroned Planetary Prince, or else appear on earth to function as vicegerent Planetary Prince representing Christ Michael, who now actually holds the title of Planetary Prince of Urantia. While it is far from clear to us as to what Machiventa’s destiny may be, nevertheless, events which have so recently taken place strongly suggest that the foregoing conjectures are probably not far from the truth. ([UB 93:10.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p10_6))

> And this is the long story of the teachings of Machiventa Melchizedek on Urantia. It is nearly four thousand years since this **emergency Son** of Nebadon bestowed himself on Urantia, and in that time the teachings of the “priest of El Elyon, the Most High God,” have penetrated to all races and peoples. And Machiventa was successful in achieving the purpose of his unusual bestowal; when Michael made ready to appear on Urantia, the God concept was existent in the hearts of men and women, the same God concept that still flames anew in the living spiritual experience of the manifold children of the Universal Father as they live their intriguing temporal lives on the whirling planets of space. ([UB 98:7.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/98#p7_12))

### Times of Jesus

#### Crisis

> The **crisis** for the time being was over, but never was this incident forgotten in Nazareth. The agitation persisted; not again was Jesus in universal favor; the division of sentiment was never fully overcome. And this, augmented by other and subsequent occurrences, was one of the chief reasons why he moved to Capernaum in later years. Henceforth Nazareth maintained a division of sentiment regarding the Son of Man. ([UB 127:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/127#p2_10))

> Having made his decisions regarding such matters as food and physical ministration to the needs of his material body, the care of the health of himself and his associates, there remained yet other problems to solve. What would be his attitude when confronted by personal danger? He decided to exercise normal watchcare over his human safety and to take reasonable precaution to prevent the untimely termination of his career in the flesh but to refrain from all superhuman intervention when the **crisis of his life** in the flesh should come. As he was formulating this decision, Jesus was seated under the shade of a tree on an overhanging ledge of rock with a precipice right there before him. He fully realized that he could cast himself off the ledge and out into space, and that nothing could happen to harm him provided he would rescind his first great decision not to invoke the interposition of his celestial intelligences in the prosecution of his lifework on Urantia, and provided he would abrogate his second decision concerning his attitude toward self-preservation. ([UB 136:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/136#p7_1))

> Throughout a period of many years, Mary had always turned to Jesus for help in every **crisis** of their home life at Nazareth so that it was only natural for her to think of him at this time. But this ambitious mother had still other motives for appealing to her eldest son on this occasion. As Jesus was standing alone in a corner of the garden, his mother approached him, saying, “My son, they have no wine.” And Jesus answered, “My good woman, what have I to do with that?” Said Mary, “But I believe your hour has come; cannot you help us?” Jesus replied: “Again I declare that I have not come to do things in this wise. Why do you trouble me again with these matters?” And then, breaking down in tears, Mary entreated him, “But, my son, I promised them that you would help us; won’t you please do something for me?” And then spoke Jesus: “Woman, what have you to do with making such promises? See that you do it not again. We must in all things wait upon the will of the Father in heaven.” ([UB 137:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/137#p4_8))

Paper 152. Events Leading up to the **Capernaum** **Crisis** ([UB 152:0.0](/en/The_Urantia_Book/152#p0_0))

> Jesus then announced that he wished to withdraw for a few days of rest with his apostles before they made ready to go up to Jerusalem for the Passover, and he forbade any of the disciples or the multitude to follow him. Accordingly they went by boat to the region of Gennesaret for two or three days of rest and sleep. Jesus was preparing for a **great crisis of his life** on earth, and he therefore spent much time in communion with the Father in heaven. ([UB 152:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/152#p5_5))

> Jesus thus endeavored to prepare the apostles for the impending shock—the **crisis in the public attitude** toward him which was only a few days distant. He explained to the twelve that the religious rulers of Jerusalem would conspire with Herod Antipas to effect their destruction. The twelve began to realize more fully (though not finally) that Jesus was not going to sit on David’s throne. They saw more fully that spiritual truth was not to be advanced by material wonders. They began to realize that the feeding of the five thousand and the popular movement to make Jesus king was the apex of the miracle-seeking, wonder-working expectance of the people and the height of Jesus’ acclaim by the populace. They vaguely discerned and dimly foresaw the approaching times of spiritual sifting and cruel adversity. These twelve men were slowly awaking to the realization of the real nature of their task as ambassadors of the kingdom, and they began to gird themselves for the trying and testing ordeals of the last year of the Master’s ministry on earth. ([UB 152:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/152#p6_5))

> Jesus entered Jerusalem only once during this Passover, and that was on the great day of the feast. Many of the Jerusalem believers were brought out by Abner to meet Jesus at Bethany. During this sojourn at Jerusalem the twelve learned how bitter the feeling was becoming toward their Master. They departed from Jerusalem all believing that a **crisis was impending**. ([UB 152:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/152#p7_2))

Paper 153. The **Crisis at Capernaum** ([UB 153:0.0](/en/The_Urantia_Book/153#p0_0))

> Jesus comprehended that he faced the immediate declaration of avowed and open warfare by his increasing enemies, and he elected boldly to assume the offensive. At the feeding of the five thousand he had challenged their ideas of the material Messiah; now he chose again openly to attack their concept of the Jewish deliverer. This crisis, which began with the feeding of the five thousand, and which terminated with this Sabbath afternoon sermon, was the outward turning of the tide of popular fame and acclaim. Henceforth, the work of the kingdom was to be increasingly concerned with the more important task of winning lasting spiritual converts for the truly religious brotherhood of mankind. This sermon marks the **crisis in the transition** from the period of discussion, controversy, and decision to that of open warfare and final acceptance or final rejection.
> 
> The Master well knew that many of his followers were slowly but surely preparing their minds finally to reject him. He likewise knew that many of his disciples were slowly but certainly passing through that training of mind and that discipline of soul which would enable them to triumph over doubt and courageously to assert their full-fledged faith in the gospel of the kingdom. Jesus fully understood how **men prepare themselves for the decisions of a crisis** and the performance of sudden deeds of courageous choosing by the slow process of the reiterated choosing between the recurring situations of good and evil. He subjected his chosen messengers to repeated rehearsals in disappointment and provided them with frequent and testing opportunities for choosing between the right and the wrong way of meeting spiritual trials. He knew he could depend on his followers, when they met the final test, to make their vital decisions in accordance with prior and habitual mental attitudes and spirit reactions.
> 
> This **crisis in Jesus’ earth life** began with the feeding of the five thousand and ended with this sermon in the synagogue; the crisis in the lives of the apostles began with this sermon in the synagogue and continued for a whole year, ending only with the Master’s trial and crucifixion. ([UB 153:1.2-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/153#p1_2))

> “But in the work which is just ahead of us, and in that which remains for you after I go to the Father, you will be grievously tried. You must all be on your watch against fear and doubts. Every one of you, gird up the loins of your minds and let your lamps be kept burning. Keep yourselves like men who are watching for their master to return from the marriage feast so that, when he comes and knocks, you may quickly open to him. Such watchful servants are blessed by the master who finds them faithful at such a great moment. Then will the master make his servants sit down while he himself serves them. Verily, verily, I say to you that **a crisis is just ahead** in your lives, and it behooves you to watch and be ready. ([UB 165:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/165#p5_5))

> Early that morning David Zebedee had turned over to Judas the funds realized from the sale of the equipment of the Pella encampment, and Judas, in turn, had placed the greater part of this money in the hands of Simon, their host, for safekeeping in anticipation of the **exigencies** of their entry into Jerusalem. ([UB 172:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/172#p2_3))

> In a way, all of Jesus’ followers **sensed the impending crisis**, but they were prevented from fully realizing its seriousness by the unusual cheerfulness and exceptional good humor of the Master. ([UB 172:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/172#p2_5))

> Andrew had been released from all responsibility in the group management of his fellow apostles; accordingly, **in this greatest of all crises** in their lives, he was silent. After a short informal discussion, Simon Zelotes stood up on the stone wall of the olive press and, making an impassioned plea for loyalty to the Master and the cause of the kingdom, exhorted his fellow apostles and the other disciples to hasten on after the mob and effect the rescue of Jesus. The majority of the company would have been disposed to follow his aggressive leadership had it not been for the advice of Nathaniel, who stood up the moment Simon had finished speaking and called their attention to Jesus’ oft-repeated teachings regarding nonresistance. He further reminded them that Jesus had that very night instructed them that they should preserve their lives for the time when they should go forth into the world proclaiming the good news of the gospel of the heavenly kingdom. And Nathaniel was encouraged in this stand by James Zebedee, who now told how Peter and others drew their swords to defend the Master against arrest, and that Jesus bade Simon Peter and his fellow swordsmen sheathe their blades. Matthew and Philip also made speeches, but nothing definite came of this discussion until Thomas, calling their attention to the fact that Jesus had counseled Lazarus against exposing himself to death, pointed out that they could do nothing to save their Master inasmuch as he refused to allow his friends to defend him, and since he persisted in refraining from the use of his divine powers to frustrate his human enemies. Thomas persuaded them to scatter, every man for himself, with the understanding that David Zebedee would remain at the camp to maintain a clearinghouse and messenger headquarters for the group. By half past two o’clock that morning the camp was deserted; only David remained on hand with three or four messengers, the others having been dispatched to secure information as to where Jesus had been taken, and what was going to be done with him. ([UB 183:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/183#p4_2))

> Before Jesus was put on his cross, the two brigands had already been placed on their crosses, all the while cursing and spitting upon their executioners. Jesus’ only words, as they nailed him to the crossbeam, were, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.” He could not have so mercifully and lovingly interceded for his executioners if such thoughts of affectionate devotion had not been the mainspring of all his life of unselfish service. **The ideas, motives, and longings of a lifetime are openly revealed in a crisis.** ([UB 187:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/187#p2_4))

#### Emergency

> Philip came from a family of seven, three boys and four girls. He was next to the oldest, and after the resurrection he baptized his entire family into the kingdom. Philip’s people were fisherfolk. His father was a very able man, a deep thinker, but his mother was of a very mediocre family. Philip was not a man who could be expected to do big things, but he was a man who could do little things in a big way, do them well and acceptably. Only a few times in four years did he fail to have food on hand to satisfy the needs of all. Even the many **emergency demands** attendant upon the life they lived seldom found him unprepared. The commissary department of the apostolic family was intelligently and efficiently managed. ([UB 139:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/139#p5_4))

> May 22 was an eventful day in the life of Jesus. On this Sunday morning, before daybreak, one of David’s messengers arrived in great haste from Tiberias, bringing the word that Herod had authorized, or was about to authorize, the arrest of Jesus by the officers of the Sanhedrin. The receipt of the news of this impending danger caused David Zebedee to arouse his messengers and send them out to all the local groups of disciples, summoning them for an **emergency council** at seven o’clock that morning. When the sister-in-law of Jude (Jesus’ brother) heard this alarming report, she hastened word to all of Jesus’ family who dwelt near by, summoning them forthwith to assemble at Zebedee’s house. And in response to this hasty call, presently there were assembled Mary, James, Joseph, Jude, and Ruth. ([UB 154:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/154#p5_1))

> The apostles understood that Jesus was going to Jerusalem for the Passover. They knew that the Sanhedrin had broadcast a message to all Israel that he had been condemned to die and directing that anyone knowing his whereabouts should inform the Sanhedrin; and yet, despite all this, they were not so alarmed as they had been when he had announced to them in Philadelphia that he was going to Bethany to see Lazarus. This change of attitude from that of intense fear to a state of hushed expectancy was mostly because of Lazarus’s resurrection. They had reached the conclusion that Jesus might, in an **emergency**, assert his divine power and put to shame his enemies. This hope, coupled with their more profound and mature faith in the spiritual supremacy of their Master, accounted for the outward courage displayed by his immediate followers, who now made ready to follow him into Jerusalem in the very face of the open declaration of the Sanhedrin that he must die. ([UB 171:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/171#p3_4))

> The day after this double wedding Jesus held an important conference with James. He told James, confidentially, that he was preparing to leave home. He presented full title to the repair shop to James, formally and solemnly abdicated as head of Joseph’s house, and most touchingly established his brother James as “head and protector of my father’s house.” He drew up, and they both signed, a secret compact in which it was stipulated that, in return for the gift of the repair shop, James would henceforth assume full financial responsibility for the family, thus releasing Jesus from all further obligations in these matters. After the contract was signed, after the budget was so arranged that the actual expenses of the family would be met without any contribution from Jesus, Jesus said to James: “But, my son, I will continue to send you something each month until my hour shall have come, but what I send shall be used by you as the occasion demands. Apply my funds to the family necessities or pleasures as you see fit. Use them in case of sickness or apply them to meet the **unexpected emergencies** which may befall any individual member of the family.” ([UB 128:7.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/128#p7_13))

## Current Status

### Prediction

> Although Jesus referred one phase of the kingdom to the future and did, on numerous occasions, intimate that such an event might appear as a part of a **world** **crisis**; and though he did likewise most certainly, on several occasions, definitely promise sometime to return to Urantia, it should be recorded that he never positively linked these two ideas together. He promised a new revelation of the kingdom on earth and at some future time; he also promised sometime to come back to this world in person; but he did not say that these two events were synonymous. From all we know these promises may, or may not, refer to the same event. ([UB 170:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p4_15))

> While there is this dematerializing technique for preparing the Adams for transit from Jerusem to the evolutionary worlds, there is no equivalent method for taking them away from such worlds unless the entire planet is to be emptied, in which event **emergency installation of the dematerialization technique** is made for the entire **salvable** population. If some physical catastrophe should doom the planetary residence of an evolving race, the Melchizedeks and the Life Carriers would install the technique of dematerialization for all survivors, and by seraphic transport these beings would be carried away to the new world prepared for their continuing existence. The evolution of a human race, once initiated on a world of space, must proceed quite independently of the physical survival of that planet, but during the evolutionary ages it is not otherwise intended that a Planetary Adam or Eve shall leave their chosen world. ([UB 51:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/51#p2_3))

### Depiction

> Christianity exhibits a history of having originated out of the unintended transformation of the religion of Jesus into a religion about Jesus. It further presents the history of having experienced Hellenization, paganization, secularization, institutionalization, intellectual deterioration, spiritual decadence, moral hibernation, threatened extinction, later rejuvenation, fragmentation, and more recent relative rehabilitation. Such a pedigree is indicative of inherent vitality and the possession of vast recuperative resources. And this same Christianity is now present in the civilized world of Occidental peoples and stands face to face with a struggle for existence which is **even more ominous than those eventful crises which have characterized its past battles for dominance**. ([UB 195:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p4_4))

> Institutional religion cannot afford inspiration and provide leadership in this impending world-wide social reconstruction and economic reorganization because it has unfortunately become more or less of an organic part of the social order and the economic system which is destined to undergo reconstruction. Only the real religion of personal spiritual experience can function helpfully and creatively in **the present crisis of civilization**. ([UB 99:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/99#p2_1))

> When the planetary Vorondadek observer of Urantia—the Most High custodian who **not long since assumed an emergency regency of your world**—asserted his authority in the presence of the resident governor general, **he began his emergency administration of Urantia** with a full staff of his own choosing. He immediately assigned to all his associates and assistants their planetary duties. But he did not choose the three Personalized Adjusters who appeared in his presence the instant he assumed the regency. He did not even know they would thus appear, for they did not so manifest their divine presence at the time of a previous regency. And the Most High regent did not assign service or designate duties for these volunteer Personalized Adjusters. Nevertheless, these three omnipersonal beings were among the most active of the numerous orders of celestial beings then serving on Urantia. ([UB 109:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p7_7))

> Mortals of the realm are chosen for service in the reserve corps of destiny on the inhabited worlds because of: …
> 
> 1. Special capacity for being **secretly rehearsed for numerous possible emergency missions** in the conduct of various activities of world affairs.
>
> . . .
> 
> 3. The possession of a Thought Adjuster of extraordinary versatility and probable pre-Urantia experience in coping with planetary difficulties and **contending with impending world emergency situations**. ([UB 114:7.3-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p7_3))

> The twelve groups of Urantia destiny reservists are composed of mortal inhabitants of the sphere who have been rehearsed for numerous crucial positions on earth and are **held in readiness to act in possible planetary emergencies**. This combined corps now consists of 962 persons. The smallest corps numbers 41 and the largest 172. With the exception of less than a score of contact personalities, the members of this unique group are wholly unconscious of their **preparation for possible function in certain planetary crises**. These mortal reservists are chosen by the corps to which they are respectively attached and are likewise trained and rehearsed in the deep mind by the combined technique of Thought Adjuster and seraphic guardian ministry. Many times numerous other celestial personalities participate in this unconscious training, and in all this special preparation the midwayers perform valuable and indispensable services.
> 
> On many worlds the better adapted secondary midway creatures are able to attain varying degrees of contact with the Thought Adjusters of certain favorably constituted mortals through the skillful penetration of the minds of the latters’ indwelling. (And it was by just such a fortuitous combination of cosmic adjustments that these revelations were materialized in the English language on Urantia.) Such potential contact mortals of the evolutionary worlds are mobilized in the numerous reserve corps, and it is, to a certain extent, through these small groups of forward-looking personalities that spiritual civilization is advanced and the Most Highs are able to rule in the kingdoms of men. The men and women of these reserve corps of destiny thus have various degrees of contact with their Adjusters through the intervening ministry of the midway creatures; but these same mortals are little known to their fellows except in those **rare social emergencies and spiritual exigencies wherein these reserve personalities function for the prevention of the breakdown of evolutionary culture or the extinction of the light of living truth.** On Urantia these reservists of destiny have seldom been emblazoned on the pages of human history. ([UB 114:7.8-9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p7_8))

### Archangels and Most High observers

> On those worlds segregated in spiritual darkness, those spheres which have, through rebellion and default, suffered planetary isolation, an observer Vorondadek is usually present pending the restoration of normal status. **In certain emergencies this Most High observer** could exercise absolute and arbitrary authority over every celestial being assigned to that planet. It is of record on Salvington that the Vorondadeks have sometimes exercised such authority as Most High regents of such planets. And this has also been true even of inhabited worlds that were untouched by rebellion. ([UB 35:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p5_6))

> Urantia is not without proper and effective supervision from the system, constellation, and universe rulers. But the planetary government is unlike that of any other world in the Satania system, even in all Nebadon. This uniqueness in your plan of supervision is due to a number of unusual circumstances:
> 
> 1. The life modification status of Urantia.
> 2. The **exigencies** of the Lucifer rebellion.
> 3. The disruptions of the Adamic default.
> 4. The irregularities growing out of the fact that Urantia was one of the bestowal worlds of the Universe Sovereign. Michael of Nebadon is the Planetary Prince of Urantia.
> 5. The special function of the twenty-four planetary directors.
> 6. The location on the planet of an archangels’ circuit.
> 7. The more recent designation of the onetime incarnated Machiventa Melchizedek as vicegerent Planetary Prince. ([UB 114:0.4-11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p0_4))

> **In a crisis** the actual and sovereign head of the government, excepting in certain purely spiritual matters, would be this Vorondadek Son of Edentia now on observation duty. (In these exclusively spiritual problems and in certain purely personal matters, the supreme authority seems to be vested in the commanding archangel attached to the divisional headquarters of that order which was recently established on Urantia.)
> 
> A Most High observer is empowered, at his discretion, to seize the planetary government in times of **grave planetary crises**, and it is of record that this has happened thirty-three times in the history of Urantia. At such times the Most High observer functions as the Most High regent, exercising unquestioned authority over all ministers and administrators resident on the planet excepting only the divisional organization of the archangels. ([UB 114:4.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p4_3))

> This rather loosely organized and somewhat personally administered planetary government is more than expectedly effective because of the timesaving assistance of the archangels and their ever-ready circuit, which is so frequently utilized in planetary emergencies and administrative difficulties. Technically, the planet is still spiritually isolated in the Norlatiadek circuits, but **in an emergency** this handicap can now be circumvented through utilization of the archangels’ circuit. **Planetary isolation is, of course, of little concern to individual mortals since the pouring out of the Spirit of Truth upon all flesh nineteen hundred years ago.** ([UB 114:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p5_4))

> Even on Urantia, these seraphim teach the everlasting truth: If your own mind does not serve you well, you can exchange it for the mind of Jesus of Nazareth, who always serves you well. ([UB 48:6.26](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p6_26))

## General Administration and Rulings

> The Universal Father is not a transient force, a shifting power, or a fluctuating energy. The power and wisdom of the Father are wholly adequate to cope with any and all **universe exigencies**. As the **emergencies** of human experience arise, he has foreseen them all, and therefore he does not react to the affairs of the universe in a detached way but rather in accordance with the dictates of eternal wisdom and in consonance with the mandates of infinite judgment. Regardless of appearances, the power of God is not functioning in the universe as a blind force.
> 
> Situations do arise in which it appears that **emergency rulings** have been made, that natural laws have been suspended, that misadaptations have been recognized, and that an effort is being made to rectify the situation; but such is not the case. Such concepts of God have their origin in the limited range of your viewpoint, in the finiteness of your comprehension, and in the circumscribed scope of your survey; such misunderstanding of God is due to the profound ignorance you enjoy regarding the existence of the higher laws of the realm, the magnitude of the Father’s character, the infinity of his attributes, and the fact of his free-willness. ([UB 3:2.6-7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p2_6))

> 2. _The Bestowal Plan._ The next universal plan is the great Father-revelation enterprise of the Eternal Son and his co-ordinate Sons. This is the proposal of the Eternal Son and consists of his bestowal of the Sons of God upon the evolutionary creations, there to personalize and factualize, to incarnate and make real, the love of the Father and the mercy of the Son to the creatures of all universes. Inherent in the bestowal plan, and as a provisional feature of this ministration of love, the Paradise Sons act as rehabilitators of that which misguided creature will has placed in spiritual jeopardy. Whenever and wherever there occurs a delay in the functioning of the attainment plan, if rebellion, perchance, should mar or complicate this enterprise, then do the **emergency provisions** of the bestowal plan become active forthwith. The Paradise Sons stand pledged and ready to function as retrievers, to go into the very realms of rebellion and there restore the spiritual status of the spheres. And such a heroic service a co-ordinate Creator Son did perform on Urantia in connection with his experiential bestowal career of sovereignty acquirement. ([UB 7:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/7#p4_5))

> These beings are the only group of the Sons of God revealed to you whose origin is in the Paradise Trinity. They range the central and superuniverses, and an enormous corps is assigned to each local universe. They also serve the individual planets as do the other Paradise Sons of God. Since the scheme of the grand universe is not fully developed, large numbers of Teacher Sons are held in the reserves on Paradise, and they volunteer for **emergency duty** and unusual service in all divisions of the grand universe, on the lone worlds of space, in the local and superuniverses, and on the worlds of Havona. They also function on Paradise, but it will be more helpful to postpone their detailed consideration until we come to the discussion of the Paradise Sons of God. ([UB 19:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_3))

> Every ascendant mortal of insurrectionary experience who functions loyally in the face of rebellion is eventually destined to become a Mighty Messenger of the superuniverse service. Likewise is any ascendant creature who effectively prevents such upheavals of error, evil, or sin; for action designed to prevent rebellion or to effect higher types of **loyalty in a universe crisis** is regarded as of even greater value than loyalty in the face of actual rebellion. ([UB 22:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/22#p2_3))

> Trinitized Ambassadors are the emissaries of the Ancients of Days for any and all purposes, to any and all worlds or universes within the superuniverse of their assignment. They render particular and important services on the headquarters of the minor sectors, and they perform the numberless miscellaneous assignments of a superuniverse. They are the **emergency or reserve corps** of the Trinitized Sons of the supergovernments, and they are therefore available for a great range of duties. They engage in thousands upon thousands of undertakings in superuniverse affairs which it is impossible to portray to human minds since there is nothing transpiring on Urantia that is in any way analogous to these activities. ([UB 22:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/22#p6_3))

> The Solitary Messengers are able to function as **emergency lines of communication** throughout remote space regions, realms not embraced within the established circuits of the grand universe. It develops that one messenger, when so functioning, can transmit a message or send an impulse through space to a fellow messenger about one hundred light-years away as Urantia astronomers estimate stellar distances. ([UB 23:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/23#p3_5))

> Energy transmitters can function with regard to all forms of communicable perception; they can render a distant scene “visible” as well as a distant sound “audible.” They provide the **emergency lines of communication** in the local systems and on the individual planets. These services must be used by practically all creatures for purposes of communication outside of the regularly established circuits. ([UB 29:4.30](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_30))

> The primary seconaphim are found to incline by inherent nature towards seven types of service, and it is befitting that the first serials of this order should be so endowed as inherently to interpret the mind of the Spirit to the Ancients of Days: … ([UB 28:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/28#p4_3))

> 7. _The Reserve Corps._ A very large group of seconaphim, the seventh primary serials, are **held in reserve for the unclassified duties and the emergency assignments of the realms**. Not being highly specialized, they can function fairly well in any of the capacities of their diverse associates, but such specialized work is **undertaken only in emergencies**. Their usual tasks are the performance of those generalized duties of a superuniverse which do not fall within the scope of the angels of specific assignment. ([UB 28:4.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/28#p4_14))

> These tertiary seconaphim are the timesavers, space abridgers, error detectors, faithful teachers, and everlasting guideposts—living signs of divine surety—in mercy placed at the crossroads of time, there to guide the feet of anxious pilgrims in moments of great perplexity and spiritual uncertainty. Long before attaining the portals of perfection, you will begin to gain access to the tools of divinity and to make contact with the techniques of Deity. Increasingly, from the time you arrive on the initial mansion world until you close your eyes in the Havona sleep preparatory to your Paradise transit, you will avail yourself of the **emergency help** of these marvelous beings, who are so fully and freely reflective of the sure knowledge and certain wisdom of those safe and dependable pilgrims who have preceded you on the long journey to the portals of perfection. ([UB 28:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/28#p7_3))

> The cherubim and sanobim are the routine spirit workers on the individual worlds of the systems. On a nonpersonal assignment and in an **emergency**, they may serve in the place of a seraphic pair, but they never function, even temporarily, as attending angels to human beings; that is an exclusive seraphic privilege. ([UB 38:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/38#p7_4))

> 5. _Technicians._ These are the seraphim who help new ascenders adjust themselves to the new and comparatively strange environment of the morontia spheres. Life on the transition worlds entails real contact with the energies and materials of both the physical and morontia levels and to a certain extent with spiritual realities. Ascenders must acclimatize to every new morontia level, and in all of this they are greatly helped by the seraphic technicians. These seraphim act as liaisons with the Morontia Power Supervisors and with the Master Physical Controllers and function extensively as instructors of the ascending pilgrims concerning the nature of those energies which are utilized on the transition spheres. They serve as **emergency space traversers** and perform numerous other regular and special duties. ([UB 48:6.29](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p6_29))

> These bestowal attendants are completion seraphim; they have all traversed the circles of Seraphington and have attained the Seraphic Corps of Completion. And they have been further especially trained to meet the difficulties and to cope with the **emergencies associated with the bestowals** of the Sons of God for the advancement of the children of time. Such seraphim have all achieved Paradise and the personal embrace of the Second Source and Center, the Eternal Son. ([UB 39:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/39#p1_5))

> The High Commissioners begin their service on the planets as race commissioners. In this capacity they interpret the viewpoints and portray the needs of the various human races. They are supremely devoted to the welfare of the mortal races whose spokesmen they are, ever seeking to obtain for them mercy, justice, and fair treatment in all relationships with other peoples. Race commissioners function in an **endless series of planetary crises** and serve as the articulate expression of whole groups of struggling mortals. ([UB 37:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p5_5))

> All findings of the high universe advisory councils are referred either to the Salvington judicial bodies or to the legislative assemblies of the constellations. These high councils are without authority or power to enforce their recommendations. If their advice is founded on the fundamental laws of the universe, then will the Nebadon courts issue rulings of execution; but if their recommendations have to do with **local or emergency conditions**, they must pass down to the legislative assemblies of the constellation for deliberative enactment and then to the system authorities for execution. These high councils are, in reality, the universe superlegislatures, but they function without the authority of enactment and without the power of execution. ([UB 33:8.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/33#p8_5))

> These assistants to the Planetary Prince seldom mate with the world races, but they do always mate among themselves. Two classes of beings result from these unions: the primary type of midway creatures and certain high types of material beings who remain attached to the prince’s staff after their parents have been removed from the planet at the time of the arrival of Adam and Eve. These children **do not mate with the mortal races except in certain emergencies** and then only by direction of the Planetary Prince. In such an event, their children—the grandchildren of the corporeal staff—are in status as of the superior races of their day and generation. All the offspring of these semimaterial assistants of the Planetary Prince are Adjuster indwelt. ([UB 50:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/50#p3_5))

> In the universe of Nebadon the Father Melchizedek acts as the first executive associate of the Bright and Morning Star. Gabriel is occupied more with universe policies, Melchizedek with practical procedures. Gabriel presides over the regularly constituted tribunals and councils of Nebadon, Melchizedek over the **special, extraordinary, and emergency commissions and advisory bodies**. Gabriel and the Father Melchizedek are never away from Salvington at the same time, for in Gabriel’s absence the Father Melchizedek functions as the chief executive of Nebadon. ([UB 35:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p1_2))

> While the Melchizedek orders are chiefly devoted to the vast educational system and experiential training regime of the local universe, they also function in unique assignments and in unusual circumstances. In an evolving universe eventually embracing approximately ten million inhabited worlds, many things out of the ordinary are destined to happen, and it is in such **emergencies** that the Melchizedeks act. On Edentia, your constellation headquarters, they are known as emergency Sons. They are always ready to serve in all exigencies—physical, intellectual, or spiritual—whether on a planet, in a system, in a constellation, or in the universe. Whenever and wherever special help is needed, there you will find one or more of the Melchizedek Sons. ([UB 35:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p4_2))

> The Melchizedeks are the **first to act in all emergencies** of whatever nature on all worlds where will creatures dwell. They sometimes act as temporary custodians on wayward planets, serving as receivers of a defaulting planetary government. In a **planetary crisis** these Melchizedek Sons serve in many unique capacities. It is easily possible for such a Son to make himself visible to mortal beings, and sometimes one of this order has even incarnated in the likeness of mortal flesh. Seven times in Nebadon has a Melchizedek served on an evolutionary world in the similitude of mortal flesh, and on numerous occasions these Sons have appeared in the likeness of other orders of universe creatures. They are indeed the versatile and volunteer emergency ministers to all orders of universe intelligences and to all the worlds and systems of worlds. ([UB 35:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p4_4))

> THE Melchizedeks are widely known as **emergency Sons**, for they engage in an amazing range of activities on the worlds of a local universe. When any extraordinary problem arises, or when something unusual is to be attempted, it is quite often a Melchizedek who accepts the assignment. The ability of the Melchizedek Sons to **function in emergencies** and on widely divergent levels of the universe, even on the physical level of personality manifestation, is peculiar to their order. Only the Life Carriers share to any degree this metamorphic range of personality function. ([UB 93:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p0_1))

> While the Melchizedek orders are chiefly devoted to the vast educational system and experiential training regime of the local universe, they also function in unique assignments and in unusual circumstances. In an evolving universe eventually embracing approximately ten million inhabited worlds, many things out of the ordinary are destined to happen, and it is **in such emergencies that the Melchizedeks act**. On Edentia, your constellation headquarters, they are known as **emergency Sons**. They are always ready to serve in all **exigencies**—physical, intellectual, or spiritual—whether on a planet, in a system, in a constellation, or in the universe. Whenever and wherever special help is needed, there you will find one or more of the Melchizedek Sons. ([UB 35:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p4_2))

> The **Melchizedeks are the first to act in all emergencies of whatever nature** on all worlds where will creatures dwell. They sometimes act as temporary custodians on wayward planets, serving as receivers of a defaulting planetary government. In a planetary crisis these Melchizedek Sons serve in many unique capacities. It is easily possible for such a Son to make himself visible to mortal beings, and sometimes one of this order has even incarnated in the likeness of mortal flesh. Seven times in Nebadon has a Melchizedek served on an evolutionary world in the similitude of mortal flesh, and on numerous occasions these Sons have appeared in the likeness of other orders of universe creatures. They are indeed the versatile and volunteer **emergency ministers** to all orders of universe intelligences and to all the worlds and systems of worlds. ([UB 35:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p4_4))

> THE Melchizedeks are widely known as **emergency Sons**, for they engage in an amazing range of activities on the worlds of a local universe. When any extraordinary problem arises, or when something unusual is to be attempted, it is quite often a Melchizedek who accepts the assignment. The ability of the Melchizedek Sons to function in emergencies and on widely divergent levels of the universe, even on the physical level of personality manifestation, is peculiar to their order. Only the Life Carriers share to any degree this metamorphic range of personality function. ([UB 93:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p0_1))

> We have often speculated that Thought Adjusters must have volition on all _prepersonal_ levels of choice. They volunteer to indwell human beings, they lay plans for man’s eternal career, they adapt, modify, and substitute in accordance with circumstances, and these activities connote genuine volition. They have affection for mortals, **they function in universe crises**, they are always waiting to act decisively in accordance with human choice, and all these are highly volitional reactions. In all situations not concerned with the domain of the human will, they unquestionably exhibit conduct which betokens the exercise of powers in every sense the equivalent of will, maximated decision. ([UB 107:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p7_3))

> “Now to you, superiors far above me, I come as one placed in temporary authority over the experimental planetary series; and I come to express admiration and profound respect for this magnificent group of celestial ministers, the Mystery Monitors, who have volunteered to serve on this irregular sphere. No matter how trying the **crises**, you never falter. Not on the records of Nebadon nor before the commissions of Orvonton has there ever been offered an indictment of a divine Adjuster. You have been true to your trusts; you have been divinely faithful. You have helped to adjust the mistakes and to compensate for the shortcomings of all who labor on this confused planet. You are marvelous beings, guardians of the good in the souls of this backward realm. I pay you respect even while you are apparently under my jurisdiction as volunteer ministers. I bow before you in humble recognition of your exquisite unselfishness, your understanding ministry, and your impartial devotion. You deserve the name of the Godlike servers of the mortal inhabitants of this strife-torn, grief-stricken, and disease-afflicted world. I honor you! I all but worship you!” ([UB 108:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p3_6))

> Before the times of the pouring out of the Spirit of Truth upon the inhabitants of an evolutionary world, the Adjusters’ bestowal appears to be determined by many spirit influences and personality attitudes. We do not fully comprehend the laws governing such bestowals; we do not understand just what determines the release of the Adjusters who have volunteered to indwell such evolving minds. But we do observe numerous influences and conditions which appear to be associated with the arrival of the Adjusters in such minds prior to the bestowal of the Spirit of Truth, and they are: ([UB 108:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p2_5))

> 3. Upon the making of a supreme decision of unusual spiritual import. Such human behavior in a **personal planetary crisis** usually is attended by the immediate arrival of the waiting Adjuster. ([UB 108:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p2_8))

> 4. The spirit of brotherhood. Regardless of the attainment of the psychic circles and the assignment of personal guardians—in the absence of anything resembling a **crisis decision**—when an evolving mortal becomes dominated by the love of his fellows and consecrated to unselfish ministry to his brethren in the flesh, the waiting Adjuster unvaryingly descends to indwell the mind of such a mortal minister. ([UB 108:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p2_9))

> 6. Has served in a time of **crisis** in the experience of some human being who was the material complement of a spirit personality intrusted with the enactment of some cosmic achievement essential to the spiritual economy of the planet. ([UB 109:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p2_1))

> Undoubtedly these higher and more experienced types of Adjusters can communicate with those in other realms. But while self-acting Adjusters do thus intercommunicate, they do so only on the levels of their mutual work and for the purpose of preserving custodial data essential to the Adjuster ministry of the realms of their sojourn, though on occasions they have been known to function in interplanetary matters during times of **crisis**. ([UB 109:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p2_9))

> In the life of the flesh the intelligence of angels is not directly available to mortal men. They are not overlords or directors; they are simply guardians. The seraphim _guard_ you; they do not seek directly to influence you; you must chart your own course, but these angels then act to make the best possible use of the course you have chosen. They do not (ordinarily) arbitrarily intervene in the routine affairs of human life. But when they receive instructions from their superiors to perform some unusual exploit, you may rest assured that these guardians will find some means of carrying out these mandates. **They do not, therefore, intrude into the picture of human drama except in emergencies** and then usually on the direct orders of their superiors. They are the beings who are going to follow you for many an age, and they are thus receiving an introduction to their future work and personality association. ([UB 113:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/113#p5_4))

## Personal Psychology and Cultural

> Modern man is perplexed by the thought of talking things over with God in a purely personal way. Many have abandoned regular praying; **they only pray when under unusual pressure—in emergencies**. Man should be unafraid to talk to God, but only a spiritual child would undertake to persuade, or presume to change, God. ([UB 91:8.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/91#p8_8))

> The Master well knew that many of his followers were slowly but surely preparing their minds finally to reject him. He likewise knew that many of his disciples were slowly but certainly passing through that training of mind and that discipline of soul which would enable them to triumph over doubt and courageously to assert their full-fledged faith in the gospel of the kingdom. Jesus fully understood how **men prepare themselves for the decisions of a crisis** and the performance of sudden deeds of courageous choosing by the slow process of the reiterated choosing between the recurring situations of good and evil. He subjected his chosen messengers to repeated rehearsals in disappointment and provided them with frequent and testing opportunities for choosing between the right and the wrong way of meeting spiritual trials. He knew he could depend on his followers, when they met the final test, to make their vital decisions in accordance with prior and habitual mental attitudes and spirit reactions. ([UB 153:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/153#p1_3))

> Before Jesus was put on his cross, the two brigands had already been placed on their crosses, all the while cursing and spitting upon their executioners. Jesus’ only words, as they nailed him to the crossbeam, were, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.” He could not have so mercifully and lovingly interceded for his executioners if such thoughts of affectionate devotion had not been the mainspring of all his life of unselfish service. **The ideas, motives, and longings of a lifetime are openly revealed in a crisis.** ([UB 187:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/187#p2_4))

> But man was no more to blame for his low opinion of woman during past ages than was woman herself. She failed to get social recognition during primitive times because **she did not function in an emergency**; she was not a spectacular or crisis hero. Maternity was a distinct disability in the existence struggle; mother love handicapped women in the tribal defense. ([UB 84:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/84#p3_3))

> The savage felt the need of insurance, and he therefore willingly paid his burdensome premiums of fear, superstition, dread, and priest gifts toward his policy of magic insurance against ill luck. Primitive religion was simply the payment of premiums on insurance against the perils of the forests; civilized man pays material premiums against the accidents of industry and the **exigencies** of modern modes of living. ([UB 86:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/86#p7_1))

> The evolutionary soil in the mind of man in which the seed of revealed religion germinates is the moral nature that so early gives origin to a social consciousness. The first promptings of a child’s moral nature have not to do with sex, guilt, or personal pride, but rather with impulses of justice, fairness, and urges to kindness—helpful ministry to one’s fellows. And when such early moral awakenings are nurtured, there occurs a gradual development of the religious life which is comparatively free from conflicts, upheavals, and **crises**. ([UB 103:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/103#p2_3))

> Prayer is an antidote for harmful introspection. At least, prayer as the Master taught it is such a beneficent ministry to the soul. Jesus consistently employed the beneficial influence of praying for one’s fellows. The Master usually prayed in the plural, not in the singular. **Only in the great crises of his earth life did Jesus ever pray for himself.** ([UB 144:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p4_6))

> After such spiritual attainment, whether secured by gradual growth or specific **crisis**, there occurs a new orientation of personality as well as the development of a new standard of values. Such spirit-born individuals are so remotivated in life that they can calmly stand by while their fondest ambitions perish and their keenest hopes crash; they positively know that such catastrophes are but the redirecting cataclysms which wreck one’s temporal creations preliminary to the rearing of the more noble and enduring realities of a new and more sublime level of universe attainment. ([UB 100:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/100#p2_8))

> But five hundred years of the overlordship of alien rulers was too much for even the patient and long-suffering Jews. The prophets and priests began to cry: “How long, O Lord, how long?” As the honest Jew searched the Scriptures, his confusion became worse confounded. An olden seer promised that God would protect and deliver his “chosen people.” Amos had threatened that God would abandon Israel unless they re-established their standards of national righteousness. The scribe of Deuteronomy had portrayed the Great Choice—as between the good and the evil, the blessing and the curse. Isaiah the first had preached a beneficent king-deliverer. Jeremiah had proclaimed an era of inner righteousness—the covenant written on the tablets of the heart. The second Isaiah talked about salvation by sacrifice and redemption. Ezekiel proclaimed deliverance through the service of devotion, and Ezra promised prosperity by adherence to the law. But in spite of all this they lingered on in bondage, and deliverance was deferred. Then Daniel presented the drama of the **impending “crisis”**—the smiting of the great image and the immediate establishment of the everlasting reign of righteousness, the Messianic kingdom. ([UB 97:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/97#p8_3))

> It should be made clear that professions of loyalty to the supreme ideals—the psychic, emotional, and spiritual awareness of God-consciousness—may be a natural and gradual growth or may sometimes be experienced at certain junctures, as in a **crisis**. The Apostle Paul experienced just such a sudden and spectacular conversion that eventful day on the Damascus road. Gautama Siddhartha had a similar experience the night he sat alone and sought to penetrate the mystery of final truth. Many others have had like experiences, and many true believers have progressed in the spirit without sudden conversion. ([UB 100:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/100#p5_3))

> But those persons who were so reared by their parents that they grew up in the consciousness of being children of a loving heavenly Father, should not look askance at their fellow mortals who could only attain such consciousness of fellowship with God through a **psychological crisis**, an emotional upheaval. ([UB 103:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/103#p2_2))

> Every decision you make either impedes or facilitates the function of the Adjuster; likewise do these very decisions determine your advancement in the circles of human achievement. It is true that the supremacy of a decision, **its crisis relationship, has a great deal to do with its circle-making influence**; nevertheless, numbers of decisions, frequent repetitions, persistent repetitions, are also essential to the habit-forming certainty of such reactions. ([UB 110:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_6))

> While such spiritual influences as the Holy Spirit and the Spirit of Truth are local universe ministrations, their guidance is not wholly confined to the geographic limitations of a given local creation. As the ascending mortal passes beyond the boundaries of his local universe of origin, he is not entirely deprived of the ministry of the Spirit of Truth which has so constantly taught and guided him through the philosophic mazes of the material and morontial worlds, **in every crisis of ascension** unfailingly directing the Paradise pilgrim, ever saying: “This is the way.” When you leave the domains of the local universe, through the ministry of the spirit of the emerging Supreme Being and through the provisions of superuniverse reflectivity, you will still be guided in your Paradise ascent by the comforting directive spirit of the Paradise bestowal Sons of God. ([UB 117:5.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/117#p5_9))

> Stephen, the leader of the Greek colony of Jesus’ believers in Jerusalem, thus became the first martyr to the new faith and the specific cause for the formal organization of the early Christian church. **This new crisis** was met by the recognition that believers could not longer go on as a sect within the Jewish faith. They all agreed that they must separate themselves from unbelievers; and within one month from the death of Stephen the church at Jerusalem had been organized under the leadership of Peter, and James the brother of Jesus had been installed as its titular head. ([UB 194:4.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p4_12))

> The religious initiation of Roman youths was the occasion of their solemn consecration to the service of the state. Oaths and admissions to citizenship were in reality religious ceremonies. The Latin peoples maintained temples, altars, and shrines and, **in a crisis**, would consult the oracles. They preserved the bones of heroes and later on those of the Christian saints. ([UB 98:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/98#p3_4))

> These aborigines of Urantia were not tree dwellers, though **in emergencies they still betook themselves to the treetops**. They regularly dwelt under the shelter of overhanging cliffs along the rivers and in hillside grottoes which afforded a good view of the approaches and sheltered them from the elements. They could thus enjoy the comfort of their fires without being too much inconvenienced by the smoke. They were not really cave dwellers either, though in subsequent times the later ice sheets came farther south and drove their descendants to the caves. They preferred to camp near the edge of a forest and beside a stream. ([UB 63:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/63#p5_4))

## Michael Bestowals Prior to Urantia

> All the inhabitants of Salvington and those dwelling on the constellation and system headquarters worlds assembled about their respective receiving stations for universe intelligence, hoping to get some word of the mission and whereabouts of the Creator Son. Not until the third day after Michael’s departure was any message of possible significance received. On this day a communication was registered on Salvington from the Melchizedek sphere, the headquarters of that order in Nebadon, which simply recorded this extraordinary and never-before-heard-of transaction: “At noon today there appeared on the receiving field of this world a strange Melchizedek Son, not of our number but wholly like our order. He was accompanied by a solitary omniaphim who bore credentials from Uversa and presented orders addressed to our chief, derived from the Ancients of Days and concurred in by Immanuel of Salvington, directing that this new Melchizedek Son be received into our order and **assigned to the emergency service of the Melchizedeks of Nebadon**. And it has been so ordered; it has been done.”
> 
> And this is about all that appears on the records of Salvington regarding the first Michael bestowal. Nothing more appears until after one hundred years of Urantia time, when there was recorded the fact of Michael’s return and unannounced resumption of the direction of universe affairs. But a strange record is to be found on the Melchizedek world, a recital of the service of this unique Melchizedek Son of the emergency corps of that age. This record is preserved in a simple temple which now occupies the foreground of the home of the Father Melchizedek, and it comprises the narration of the service of this transitory Melchizedek Son in connection with **his assignment to twenty-four missions of universe emergency**. And this record, which I have so recently reviewed, ends thus: ([UB 119:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/119#p1_4))
> 
> “And at noon on this day, without previous announcement and witnessed by only three of our brotherhood, this visiting Son of our order disappeared from our world as he came, accompanied only by a solitary omniaphim; and this record is now closed with the certification that this visitor lived as a Melchizedek, in the likeness of a Melchizedek he worked as a Melchizedek, and he faithfully performed all of **his assignments as an emergency Son** of our order. By universal consent he has become chief of Melchizedeks, having earned our love and adoration by his matchless wisdom, supreme love, and superb devotion to duty. He loved us, understood us, and served with us, and forever we are his loyal and devoted fellow Melchizedeks, for this stranger on our world has now eternally become a universe minister of Melchizedek nature.” ([UB 119:1.3-5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/119#p1_3))

> Thus did this unique Material Son begin his difficult career on a quarantined world of secession and rebellion, located in a beleaguered system without any direct communication with the outside universe, working alone for one whole generation of planetary time. This **emergency Material Son** effected the repentance and reclamation of the defaulting Planetary Prince and his entire staff and witnessed the restoration of the planet to the loyal service of the Paradise rule as established in the local universes. In due time a Material Son and Daughter arrived on this rejuvenated and redeemed world, and when they had been duly installed as visible planetary rulers, the transitory or emergency Planetary Prince took formal leave, disappearing at noon one day. On the third day thereafter, Michael appeared in his accustomed place on Salvington, and very soon the superuniverse broadcasts carried the fourth proclamation of the Ancients of Days announcing the further advancement of the sovereignty of Michael in Nebadon. ([UB 119:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/119#p3_4))

## External links

* [This report in UBTheNews webpage](https://ubannotated.com/main-menu/animated/topical-studies/cross-references/crises-emergencies-exigencies/)
* [Other reports in UBTheNews webpage](https://ubannotated.com/ubthenews/reports_list/)
* [Topical Studies in UBTheNews webpage]([UBTheNews](https://ubannotated.com/main-menu/animated/Topical%20Studies/))

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
	<tbody>
	  <tr>
		<td></td>
		<td>
		<a href="/en/index/articles_ubannotated">
		  <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">UB Annotated — Index</span>
		</a>
		</td>
		<td></td>
	  </tr>
	</tbody>
  </table>
</figure>