---
title: "Religions of the Mind and the Religion of the Spirit—the Differences"
description:
published: true
date: 2023-01-21T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Psychology, Religion, Spirituality
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-01-21T14:02:03.086Z
---

Religions of the Mind | Religion of the Spirit
--- | ---
Are upheld by ecclesiastical authority.<br><br>Have as their base the intellectual theology<br>and authority of established religious<br>traditions.<br><br>Require only intellectual assent thus affording<br>ready refuge for souls harassed by fear and<br>uncertainty, the price paid being conformity.<br><br>Compromise the sovereignty of personality;<br>debase the dignity of self-respect.<br><br>Require little or no self-exertion, offering a<br>safe refuge and easy pathway to those who<br>shun the spirit struggles associated with the<br>daring adventure of the struggle for truth.<br><br>Are systems of established intellectual and<br>theological beliefs upheld through<br>ecclesiastical authority such that the appeal<br>of this type of religion is virtually solely to the<br>mind.<br><br><br><br>May provide a feeling of settled security but<br>at the price of a loss of religious freedom and<br>liberty.<br><br>The religions of authority can only divide<br>mankind, hence have the inherent potential to<br>bring people into conflict with one another.<br><br>Require uniformity of belief among their<br>adherents—an impossibility of realization in<br>the present state of the world.<br><br>Naturally crystallize into lifeless systems of<br>creeds.<br> | Leaves you free to follow the truth, wherever<br>the indwelling spirit of the Father takes you.<br><br>Is wholly based on human experience—the<br>revelation of supernatural values, partial<br>insight into eternal realities, a glimpse of the<br>goodness and beauty of the infinite character<br>of the Father.<br><br>Requires active participation of the mind and<br>soul in the faith adventure of grappling with<br>the rigorous realities of progressive human<br>experience.<br><br>Accepts the most thrilling and inspiring of all<br>possible human experience—the personal<br>quest for truth.<br><br>Its means are effoft, conflict, faith, loyalty to<br>purpose, determination, love, and dedication<br>in the struggle for spiritual progress.<br><br><br>Is not a religion in the present-day meaning of<br>the word, making its chief appeal to the divine<br>spirit of the Father which resides in the mind<br>of man. It derives its authenticity from the<br>fruits of the spirit that will so certainly appear<br>in the personal experience of all who became<br>believers in the truths of this higher form of<br>spiritual communion of the individual and his/<br>her Father-God.<br><br>Brings to the individual the supreme<br>experience of human existence: finding God<br>for yourself and knowing him in your own<br>soul.<br><br>The religion of the Spirit progressively draws<br>mankind together, causing them to became<br>understandingly sympathetic with one<br>another.<br><br>Requires only uniformity of experience—<br>uniformity of destiny—making full allowance<br>for diversity of belief.<br><br>Naturally grows into the increasing joy and<br>liberty of ennobling deeds of loving servite<br>and merciful ministry.
At its best the religion of the spirit is an intimate partnership involving actively sharing every moment of our existence with the indwelling spirit of God while voluntarily seeking to make all of life's decisions in full accord with the will of the Father. At the present level of development of mortal beings on Urantia, the Will of God under various circumstances is ofen best discovered with reference to the life and teaching of Jesus of Nazareth who always functioned in accord with God's will. Hence if we are thoroughly familiar with Jesus life, at any moment of time and in any circumstance, we can always ask ourselves, "What would Jesus have done?"—while at the same time striving to be in accord with the spirit within. Experience will teach us to recognize the state of mental peace, assurance, and confidence that accompanies sincerity in our decision making. ||

## External links

* Article in Innerface International: https://urantia-book.org/archive/newsletters/innerface/vol3_6/page6.html