---
title: "Workbook V — Theology of The Urantia Book — 16. Permanent Citizens"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/15">15. Local Universe Sons</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/17">17. Man</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1961 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

## I. The Planets—Midwayers

1. **Proposition**. The midwayers provide for a continuity of planetary administration in the face of short-lived mortal sojourn and ever-changing celestial ministers.
	> “. . . On Urantia the midway ministers are in reality the actual custodians of the planet; they are, practically speaking, the citizens of Urantia. Mortals are indeed the physical and material inhabitants of an evolutionary world, but you are all so short-lived; you tarry on your nativity planet such a short time. You are born, live, die and pass on to other worlds of evolutionary progression. Even the superhuman beings who serve on the planets as celestial ministers are of transient assignment; few of them are long attached to a given sphere. The midway creatures, however, provide continuity of planetary administration in the face of ever-changing celestial ministries and constantly shifting mortal inhabitants. Throughout all of this never-ceasing changing and shifting, the midway creatures remain on the planet uninterruptedly carrying on their work.” [UB 37:9.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p9_11)

2. **Proposition**. Midwayers have a threefold classification:
	1. Ascending Sons.
	2. Permanent Citizens.
	3. Ministering Spirits.
	> “The midway creatures have a threefold classification: They are properly classified with the ascending Sons of God; they are factually grouped with the orders of permanent citizenship, while they are functionally reckoned with the ministering spirits of time because of their intimate and effective association with the angelic hosts in the work of serving mortal man on the individual worlds of space.” [UB 38:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/38#p9_1)

3. **Proposition**. Midwayers appear on the majority of worlds—always on decimal planets.
	> “These unique creatures appear on the majority of the inhabited worlds and are always found on the decimal or life-experiment planets, such as Urantia. Midwayers are of two types—primary and secondary—and they appear by the following techniques:
	> “1. _Primary Midwayers_, the more spiritual group, are a somewhat standardized order of beings who are uniformly derived from the modified ascendant-mortal staffs of the Planetary Princes. The number of primary midway creatures is always fifty thousand, and no planet enjoying their ministry has a larger group.
	> “2. _Secondary Midwayers,_ the more material group of these creatures, vary greatly in numbers on the different worlds, though the average is around fifty thousand. They are variously derived from the planetary biologic uplifters, the Adams and Eves, or from their immediate progeny. There are no less than twenty-four diverse techniquee involved in the production of these secondary midway creatures on the evolutionary worlds of space. The mode of origin for this group on Urantia was unusual and extraordinary.” [UB 38:9.2-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/38#p9_2)

4. **Proposition**. A couple of the Prince’s staff produced the first primary midwayers. The entire staff produced 50,000.
	> “In conformity to their instructions the staff did not engage in sexual reproduction, but they did painstakingly study their personal constitutions, and they carefully explored every imaginable phase of intellectual (mind) and morontia (soul) liaison. And it was during the thirty-third year of their sojourn in Dalamatia, long before the wall was completed, that number two and number seven of the Danite group accidentally discovered a phenomenon attendant upon the liaison of their morontia selves (supposedly nonsexual and nonmaterial); and the result of this adventure proved to be the first of the primary midway creatures. This new being was wholly visible to the planetary staff and to their celestial associates but was not visible to the men and women of the various human tribes. Upon authority of the Planetary Prince the entire corporeal staff undertook the production of similar beings, and all were successful, following the instructions of the pioneer Danite pair. Thus did the Prince’s staff eventually bring into being the original corps of 50,000 primary midwayers.” [UB 66:4.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/66#p4_10)

5. **Proposition**. The story of Adamson and Ratta—the origin of almost two thousand secondary midwayers.
	> “A company of twenty-seven followed Adamson northward in quest of these people of his childhood fantasies. In a little over three years Adamson’s party actually found the object of their adventure, and among these people he discovered a wonderful and beautiful woman, twenty years old, who claimed to be the last pure-line descendant of the Prince’s staff. This woman, Ratta, said that her ancestors were all descendants of two of the fallen staff of the Prince. She was the last of her race, having no living brothers or sisters. She had about decided not to mate, had about made up her mind to die without issue, but she lost her heart to the majestic Adamson. And when she heard the story of Eden, how the predictions of Van and Amadon had really come to pass, and as she listened to the recital of the Garden default, she was encompassed with but a single thought—to marry this son and heir of Adam. And quickly the idea grew upon Adamson. In a little more than three months they were married.
	> “Adamson and Ratta had a family of sixty-seven children. They gave origin to a great line of the world’s leadership, but they did something more. It should be remembered that both of these beings were really superhuman. Every fourth child born to them was of a unique order. It was often invisible. Never in the world’s history had such a thing occurred. Ratta was greatly perturbed—even superstitious—but Adamson well knew of the existence of the primary midwayers, and he concluded that something similar was transpiring before his eyes. When the second strangely behaving offspring arrived, he decided to mate them, since one was male and the other female, and this is the origin of the secondary order of midwayers. Within one hundred years, before this phenomenon ceased, almost two thousand were brought into being.” [UB 77:5.5-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p5_5)

6. **Proposition**. Adamson and Ratta had sixteen progenitors of the secondary midwayers—equally divided as to sex.
	> “Among the children of Adamson there were just sixteen of the peculiar progenitors of the secondary midwayers. These unique children were equally divided as regards sex, and each couple was capable of producing a secondary midwayer every seventy days by a combined technique of sex and nonsex liaison. And such a phenomenon was never possible on earth before that time, nor has it ever occurred since.” [UB 77:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p6_2)

7. **Proposition**. Each of these electrically energized couples produced 248 midwayers—a total of 1,984.
	> “These sixteen children lived and died (except for their peculiarities) as mortals of the realm, but their electrically energized offspring live on and on, not being subject to the limitations of mortal flesh.
	> “Each of the eight couples eventually produced 248 midwayers, and thus did the original secondary corps—1,984 in number—come into existence. There are eight subgroups of secondary midwayers. They are designated as A-B-C the first, second, third, and so on. And then there are D-EF the first, second, and so on.” [UB 77:6.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p6_3)

8. **Proposition**. Of the 50,000 primary midwayers, 40,119 joined the Lucifer rebellion. Of the 1,984 secondary midwayers, 873 went wrong.
	> “The majority of the primary midwayers went into sin at the time of the Lucifer rebellion. When the devastation of the planetary rebellion was reckoned up, among other losses it was discovered that of the original 50,000, 40,119 had joined the Caligastia secession.
	> “The original number of secondary midwayers was 1,984, and of these 873 failed to align themselves with the rule of Michael and were duly interned in connection with the planetary adjudication of Urantia on the day of Pentecost. No one can forecast the future of these fallen creatures.” [UB 77:7.1-2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p7_1)

9. **Proposition**. The United Midwayers now number 10,992. They united shortly after Pentecost.
	> “At the last adjudication of this world, when Michael removed the slumbering survivors of time, the midway creatures were left behind, left to assist in the spiritual and semispiritual work on the planet. They now function as a single corps, embracing both orders and numbering 10,992. The _United Midwayers of Urantia_ are at present governed alternately by the senior member of each order. This regime has obtained since their amalgamation into one group shortly after Pentecost.” [UB 77:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p8_1)

10. **Proposition**. The checkered history of the secondary midwayers down to their union with the primary group.
	> “After the death of Adamson the remainder of the secondary midwayers became a strange, unorganized, and unattached influence on Urantia. From that time to the days of Machiventa Melchizedek they led an irregular and unorganized existence. They were partially brought under control by this Melchizedek but were still productive of much mischief up to the days of Christ Michael. And during his sojourn on earth they all made final decisions as to their future destiny, the loyal majority then enlisting under the leadership of the primary midwayers.” [UB 77:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p6_6)

11. **Proposition**. Secondary midwayers engage in numerous missions—even contact with the material world.
	> “The 1,111 loyal secondary midwayers are engaged in important missions on earth. As compared with their primary associates, they are decidedly material. They exist just outside the range of mortal vision and possess sufficient latitude of adaptation to make, at will, physical contact with what humans call ‘material things.’ These unique creatures have certain definite powers over the things of time and space, not excepting the beasts of the realm.” [UB 77:8.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p8_11)

12. **Proposition**. On Urantia, many phenomena ascribed to angels have been performed by midwayers.
	> “Many of the more literal phenomena ascribed to angels have been performed by the secondary midway creatures. When the early teachers of the gospel of Jesus were thrown into prison by the ignorant religious leaders of that day, an actual ‘angel of the Lord’ ‘by night opened the prison doors and brought them forth.’ But in the case of Peter’s deliverance after the killing of James by Herod’s order, it was a secondary midwayer who performed the work ascribed to an angel.” [UB 77:8.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p8_12)

13. **Proposition**. Today midwayers are associated with the reserve corps of destiny and they initiated the Urantia Revelation.
	> “Their chief work today is that of unperceived personal-liaison associates of those men and women who constitute the planetary reserve corps of destiny. It was the work of this secondary group, ably seconded by certain of the primary corps, that brought about the coordination of personalities and circumstances on Urantia which finally induced the planetary celestial supervisors to initiate those petitions that resulted in the granting of the mandates making possible the series of revelations of which this presentation is a part. . . .” [UB 77:8.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p8_13)

## II. The Local Systems—Material Sons

1. **Proposition**. Upon completion of the joint creation, the Creator Son personalizes the Material sex Sons and Daughters—the Adams and Eves of the local systems.
	> “_The Material Sons of God._ When a creative liaison between the Creator Son and the universe representative of the Infinite Spirit, the Universe Mother Spirit, has completed its cycle, when novmore offspring of the combined nature are forthcoming, then does the Creator Son personalize in dual form his last concept of being, thus finally confirming his own and original dual origin. In and of himself he then creates the beautiful and superb Sons and Daughters of the material order of universe sonship. This is the origin of the original Adam and Eve of each local system of Nebadon. They are a reproducing order of sonship, being created male and female. Their progeny function as the relatively permanent citizens of a system capital, though some are commissioned as Planetary Adams.” [UB 37:9.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p9_9)

2. **Proposition**. Material Sons and Daughters are the permanent citizens of the local system capitals.
	> “At the last millennial registration on Salvington there were of record in Nebadon 161,432,840 Material Sons and Daughters of citizenship status on the local system capitals. The number of Material Sons varies in the different systems, and their number is being constantly increased by natural reproduction. In the exercise of their reproductive functions they are not guided wholly by the personal desires of the contacting personalities but also by the higher governing bodies and advisory councils.
	> “These Material Sons and Daughters are the permanent inhabitants of Jerusem and its associated worlds. They occupy vast estates on Jerusem and participate liberally in the local management of the capital sphere, administering practically all routine affairs with the assistance of the midwayers and the ascenders.” [UB 45:5.4-5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/45#p5_4)

## III. The Constellations—Univitatia

1. **Proposition**. The univitatia, the permanent citizens of the constellation worlds, are midway between the Material Sons and the spirit sustia.
	> “Univitatia are the permanent citizens of Edentia and its associated worlds, all seven hundred seventy worlds surrounding the constellation headquarters being under their supervision. These children of the Creator Son and the Creative Spirit are projected on a plane of existence in between the material and the spiritual, but they are not morontia creatures. The natives of each of the seventy major spheres of Edentia possess different visible forms, and the morontia mortals have their morontia forms attuned to correspond with the ascending scale of the univitatia each time they change residence from one Edentia sphere to another as they pass successively from world number one to world number seventy.” [UB 43:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p7_1)

## IV. The Local Universe—Susatia And Spirit-Fused Mortals

1. **Proposition**. Susatia are the natives of Salvington. They are closely associated with the Spirit-fused mortals.
	> “_The Susatia_. These marvelous beings reside and function as permanent citizens on Salvington, the headquarters of this local universe. They are the brilliant offspring of the Creator Son and Creative Spirit and are closely associated. with the ascendant citizens of the local universe, the Spirit-fused mortals of the Nebadon Corps of Perfection.” [UB 37:9.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p9_7)

2. **Proposition**. Spirit-fused mortals also are permanent citizens of the local universes.
	> “. . . Spirit-fused mortals are the permanent citizens of the local universes; they may aspire to Paradise destiny, but they cannot be sure of it. In Nebadon their universe home is the eighth group of worlds encircling Salvington,. . .” [UB 40:9.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/40#p9_9)

3. **Proposition**. The destiny of permanent citizens—like Spirit-fused mortals —is unknown They may play a part in manning the superuniverses when the pilgrims of outer space stream through Orvonton on their way to Paradise.
	> “What the ultimate destiny of these stationary orders of local and of superuniverse citizenship will be we do not know, but it is quite possible that, when the Paradise finaliters are pioneering the expanding frontiers of divinity in the planetary systems of the first outer space level, their Son- and Spirit-fused brethren of the ascendant evolutionary struggle will be acceptably contributing to the maintenance of the experiential equilibrium of the perfected superuniverses while they stand ready to welcome the incoming stream of Paradise pilgrims who may, at that distant day, pour in through Orvonton and its sister creations as a vast spirit-questing torrent from these now uncharted and uninhabited galaxies of outer space.” [UB 40:10.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/40#p10_8)

## V. The Superuniverse—Abandonters And Son-Fused Mortals

1. **Proposition**. Abandonters are a type of permanent resident of the superuniverses.
	> “. . . But the Uversa headquarters spheres are continuously fostered by an amazing group of beings known as the _abandonters_, the creation, of the unrevealed agents of the Ancients of Days and the seven Reflective Spirits resident on the capital of Orvonton. . . .” [UB 37:9.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p9_12)

2. **Proposition**. Son-fused mortals are residents of the superuniverse. There are less than one million in Orvonton.
	> “. . . They frequently journey to Paradise on superuniverse assignment but seldom permanently reside there, being, as a class, confined to the superuniverse of their nativity.” [UB 40:8.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/40#p8_5)

## VI. Havona—Havona Natives

1. **Proposition**. Havona natives are the creatures of the Paradise Trinity. Their endowments are beyond human imagination.
	> “The Havona natives are the direct creation of the Paradise Trinity, and their number is beyond the concept of your circumscribed minds. Neither is it possible for Urantians to conceive of the inherent endowments of such divinely perfect creatures as these Trinity-origin races of the eternal universe. You can never truly envisage these glorious creatures; you must await your arrival in Havona, when you can greet them as spirit comrades.” [UB 19:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p6_1)

2. **Proposition**. Haveners may evolve in status—may have an unrevealed destiny. They fuse with non-Adjuster Father fragments and even enter the Corps of the Finality.
	> “Havona natives, like all other Trinity-origin personalities, are projected in divine perfection, and as with other Trinity-origin personalities, the passing of time may add to their stores of experiential endowments. But unlike the Stationary Sons of the Trinity, Haveners may evolve in status, may have an unrevealed future eternity-destiny. This is illustrated by those Haveners who service-factualize capacity for fusion with a non-Adjuster Father fragment and so qualify for membership in the Mortal Corps of the Finality. And there are other finaliter corps open to these natives of the central universe.” [UB 19:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p6_3)

## VII. Paradise—Paradise Citizens (Probationary Nursery Children)

1. **Proposition**. There are more than three thousand orders of Paradise Citizens.
	> “There are resident on Paradise numerous groups of superb beings, the Paradise Citizens. They are not directly concerned with the scheme of perfecting ascending will creatures and are not, therefore, fully revealed to Urantia mortals. There are more than three thousand orders of these supernal intelligences, the last group having been personalized simultaneously with the mandate of the Trinity which promulgated the creative plan of the seven superuniverses of time and space.
	> “Paradise Citizens and Havona natives are sometimes designated collectively as Paradise-Havona personalities.” [UB 19:7.1-2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p7_1)

2. **Proposition**. There are on Paradise more than one thousand groups of supercitizens—transcendentalers of absonite attributes.
	> “Part of the perfected mortal’s experience on Paradise as a finaliter consists in the effort to achieve comprehension of the nature and function of more than one thousand groups of the transcendental supercitizens of Paradise, eventuated beings of absonite attributes. In their association with these superpersonalities, the ascendant finaliters receive great assistance from the helpful guidance of numerous orders of transcendental ministers who are assigned to the task of introducing the evolved finaliters to their new Paradise brethren. The entire order of the Tranacendentalers live in the west of Paradise in a vast area which they exclusively occupy.” [UB 31:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p8_1)

3. **Proposition**. Salvaged probation nursery children who ascend to Paradise become permanent citizens of the eternal Isle.
	> “But if they choose the Paradise path of perfection, they are immediately made ready for translation to the first mansion world, where many of them arrive in time to Join their parents in the Havona ascent. After passing through Havona and attaining the Deities, these salvaged souls of mortal origin constitute the permanent ascendant citizenship of Paradise. These children who have been deprived of the valuable and essential evolutionary experience on the worlds of mortal nativity are not mustered into the Corps of the Finality.” [UB 47:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p2_8)

Note: The worlds of the Father’s circuit around Paradise harbor “a distinct type of permanent citizenship.” See [UB 13:0.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p0_6)

Each world in the circuit of the Father and the circuit of the Spirit has a distinct type of permanent citizenship.


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/15">15. Local Universe Sons</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/17">17. Man</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>