---
title: "Workbook V — Theology of The Urantia Book — 17. Man"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: theology, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1959 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/16">16. Permanent Citizens</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/18">18. Education</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

## I. Introduction

1. **Proposition**. The evolutionary worlds harbor seven varieties of mortal creatures.
	> “There is a standard and basic pattern of vegetable and animal life in each system. But the Life Carriers are oftentimes confronted with the necessity of modifying these basic patterns to conform to the varying physical conditions which confront them on numerous worlds of space. They foster a generalized system type of mortal creature, but there are seven distinct physical types as well as thousands upon thousands of minor variants of these seven outstanding differentiations:
	> 1. Atmospheric types.
	> 2. Elemental types.
	> 3. Gravity types.
	> 4. Temperature types.
	> 5. Electric types.
	> 6. Energizing types.
	> 7. Unnamed types.” [UB 49:2.1-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p2_1)

2. **Proposition**. Planetary types of mortals may be viewed from seven different angles.
	> “It will be somewhat difficult to make an adequate portrayal of the planetary series of mortals because you know so little about them, and because there are so many variations. Mortal creatures may, however, be studied from numerous viewpoints, among which are the following:
	> 1. Adjustment to planetary environment.
	> 2. Brain-type series.
	> 3. Spirit-reception series.
	> 4. Planetary-mortal epochs.
	> 5. Creature-kinship serials.
	> 6. Adjuster-fusion series.
	> 7. Techniques of terrestrial escape.” [UB 49:5.1-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p5_1)

3. **Proposition**. Evolutionary mind is only fully stabilized when functioning on the extremes of cosmic intelligence—the wholly mechanized or the wholly spiritualised.
	> “Evolutionary mind is only fully stable and dependable when manifesting itself upon the two extremes of cosmic intellectuality—the wholly mechanized and the entirely spiritualized. Between the intellectual extremes of pure mechanical control and true spirit nature there intervenes that enormous group of evolving and ascending minds whose stability and tranquillity are dependent upon personality choice and spirit identification.” [UB 111:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p1_7)

## II. Andon And Fonta

1. **Proposition**. Man is not an evolutionary accident.
	> “The early stages of life evolution are not altogether in conformity with your present-day views. _Mortal man is not an evolutionary accident_. There is a precise system, a universal law, which determines the unfolding of the planetary life plan on the spheres of space. Time and the production of large numbers of a species are not the controlling influences. Mice reproduce much more rapidly than elephants, yet elephants evolve more rapidly than mice.” [UB 49:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p1_6)

2. **Proposition**. In many respects, Andon and Fonta were the most remarkable pair of human beings that have ever lived on Urantia.
	> “In many respects, Andon and Fonta were the most remarkable pair of human beings that have every lived on the face of the earth. This wonderful pair, the actual parents of all mankind, were in every way superior to many of their immediate descendants, and they were radically different from all of their ancestors, both immediate and remote.” [UB 63:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/63#p1_1)

3. **Proposition**. On discovering fire, they sat up all night—did not leave it for three days.
	> “This was one of the most joyous moments in their short but eventful lives. All night long they sat up watching their fire burn, vaguely realizing that they had made a discovery which would make it possible for them to defy climate and thus forever to be independent of their animal relatives of the southern lands. After three days’ rest and enjoyment of the fire, they journeyed on.” [UB 63:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/63#p2_6)

4. **Proposition**. Andon and Fonta had a sizable family of children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
	> “Andon and Fonta had nineteen children in all, and they lived to enjoy the association of almost half a hundred grandchildren and half a dozen great-grandchildren. The family was domiciled in four adjoining rock shelters, or semicaves, three of which were interconnected by hallways which had been excavated in the soft limestone with flint tools devised by Andon’s children.” [UB 63:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/63#p3_2)

5. **Proposition**. Upon the death of Andon and Fonta, Sontad assumed leadership of the clan.
	> “Upon the death of his parents, Sontad, despite a seriously injured foot, immediately assumed the leadership of the clan and was ably assisted by his wife, his eldest sister. Their first task was to roll up stones to effectively entomb their dead parents, brothers, sisters, and children. Undue significance should not attach to this act of burial. Their ideas of survival after death were very vague and indefinite, being largely derived from their fantastic and variegated dream life.” [UB 63:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/63#p3_5)

6. **Proposition**. Before the dispersion of the Andonic clans they had a welldeveloped language which became the word of Urantia.
	> “Before the extensive dispersion of the Andonic clans a well-developed language had evolved from their early efforts to intercommunicate. This language continued to grow, and almost daily additions were made to it because of the new inventions and adaptations to environment which were developed by these active, restless, and curious people. And this language became the word of Urantia, the tongue of the early human family, until the later appearance of the colored races.” [UB 63:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/63#p4_6)

7. **Proposition**. The descendants of Andon and Fonta overspread Europe and established more than one thousand settlements along the rivers leading to the North Sea.
	> “Before this extensive ice sheet reached France and the British Isles, the descendants of Andon and Fonta had pushed on westward over Europe and had established more than one thousand separate settlements along the great rivers leading to the then warm waters of the North Sea.” [UB 63:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/63#p5_2)

8. **Proposition**. Shortly after Andon and Fonta arrived on Jerusem, they received permission to return to the first mansion world to welcome Urantia pilgrims.
	> “Andon and Fonta, shortly after their arrival on Jerusem, received permission from the System Sovereign to return to the first mansion world to serve with the morontia personalities who welcome the pilgrims of time from Urantia to the heavenly spheres. And they have been assigned indefinitely to this service. They sought to send greetings to Urantia in connection with these revelations, but this request was wisely denied them.” [UB 63:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/63#p7_3)

## III.The Prince’S Corporeal Staff

1. **Proposition**. Planetary Princes take with them one hundred volunteer, unfused, ascending mortals.
	> “On going to a young world, a Planetary Prince usually takes with him a group of volunteer ascending beings from the local system headquarters. These ascenders accompany the prince as advisers and helpers in the work of early race improvement. This corps of material helpers constitutes the connecting link between the prince and the world races. The Urantia Prince, Caligastia, had a corps of one hundred such helpers.” [UB 50:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/50#p3_1)

2. **Proposition**. When the prince’s assistants mate among themselves, two types of beings are produced:
	1. Primary midwayers.
	2. High types of material creatures.
	> “These assistants to the Planetary Prince seldom mate with the world races, but they do always mate among themselves. Two classes of beings result from these unions: the primary type of midway creatures and certain high types of material beings who remain attached to the prince’s staff after their parents have been removed from the planet at the time of the arrival of Adam and Eve. These children do not mate with the mortal races except in certain emergencies and then only by direction of the Planetary Prince. In such an event, their children—the grandchildren of the corporeal staff—are in status as of the superior races of their day and generation. All of the offspring of these semimaterial assistants of the Planetary Prince are Adjuster indwelt.” [UB 50:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/50#p3_5)

3. **Proposition**. The Prince’s staff of one hundred functioned in ten divisions:
	> 1. The council on food and material welfare.
	> 2. The board of animal domestication and utilization.
	> 3. The advisers regarding the conquest of predatory animals.
	> 4. The faculty on dissemination and conservation of knowledge.
	> 5. The commission on industry and trade.
	> 6. The college of revealed religion.
	> 7. The guardians of health and life.
	> 8. The planetary council on art and science.
	> 9. The governors of advanced tribal relations.
	> 10. The supreme court of tribal co-ordination and racial co-operation. See: [UB 66:5.2,4,7,9,11,13,17,23,28,31](/en/The_Urantia_Book/66#p5_2)

## IV. The Colored Races

1. **Proposition**. Among the highland Badonites there appeared the Sangik family—parents of the six colored races.
	> “And now, among these highland Badonites there was a new and strange occurrence. A man and woman living in the northeastern part of the then inhabited highland region began _suddenly_ to produce a family of unusually intelligent children. This was the _Sangik family_, the ancestors of all of the six colored races of Urantia.
	> “These Sangik children, nineteen in number, were not only intelligent above their fellows, but their skins manifested a unique tendency to turn various colors upon exposure to sunlight. Among these nineteen children were five red, two orange, four yellow, two green, four blue, and two indigo. These colors became more pronounced as the children grew older, and when these youths later mated with their fellow tribesmen, all of their offspring tended toward the skin color of the Sangik parent.” [UB 64:5.2-3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/64#p5_2)

2. **Proposition**. There are six basic evolutionary races:
	1. Three primary—red, yellow, blue.
	2. Three secondary—orange, green, indigo.
	> “There are six basic evolutionary races: three primary—red, yellow, and blue; and three secondary—orange, green, and indigo. Most inhabited worlds have all of these races, but many of the three-brained planets harbor only the three primary types. Some local systems also have only these three races.” [UB 49:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p4_2)

## V. Adam And Eve

1. **Proposition**. Students of the Prince’s school were agriculturists and horticulturists. They divided their time in five ways.
	> “In the headquarters settlement on your world every human habitation was provided with abundance of land. Although the remote tribes continued in hunting and food foraging, the students and teachers in the Prince’s schools were all agriculturists and horticulturists. The time was about equally divided between the following pursuits:
	> “1. _Physical labor._ Cultivation of the soil, associated with home building and embellishment.
	> “2. _Social activities_. Play performances and cultural social groupings.
	> “3. _Educational application_. Individual instruction in connection with family-group teaching, supplemented by specialized class training.
	> “4. _Vocational training_. Schools of marriage and homemaking, the schools of art and craft training, and the classes for the training of teachers—secular, cultural, and religious.
	> “5. _Spiritual culture_. The teacher brotherhood, the enlightenment of childhood and youth groups, and the training of adopted native children as missionaries to their people.” [UB 50:4.3-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/50#p4_3)

2. **Proposition**. The second Eden was the cradle of civilization for almost thirty thousand years. The Adamic peoples sent their progeny to the ends of the earth.
	> “The second Eden was the cradle of civilization for almost thirty thousand years. Here in Mesopotamia the Adamic peoples held forth, sending out their progeny to the ends of the earth, and latterly, as amalgamated with the Nodite and Sangik tribes, were known as the Andites. From this region went those men and women who initiated the doings of historic times, and who have so enormously accelerated cultural progress on Urantia.” [UB 78:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/78#p0_1)

3. **Proposition**. The leadership of the second garden was heroic—an inspiring epic of Urantia’s history. The sons and daughters of Adam and Eve went forth as uplifters of all races.
	> “The heroism displayed in the leadership of the second garden constitutes one of the amazing and inspiring epics of Urantia’s history. These splendid souls never wholly lost sight of the purpose of the Adamic mission, and therefore did they valiantly fight off the influences of the surrounding and inferior tribes while they willingly sent forth their choicest sons and daughters in a steady stream as emissaries to the races of earth. Sometimes this expansion was depleting to the home culture, but always these superior peoples would rehabilitate themselves.” [UB 78:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/78#p2_2)

4. **Proposition**. The culture of the Adamites was far above that of the evolutionary races, but it was artificial. Not having been evolved, it was doomed to gravitate down to the evolutionary level.
	> “The civilization, society, and cultural status of the Adamites were far above the general level of the evolutionary races of Urantia. Only among the old settlements of Van and Amadon and the Adamsonites was there a civilization in anyway comparable. But the civilization of the second Eden was an artificial structure—_it had not been evolved_—and was therefore doomed to deteriorate until it reached a natural evolutionary level.” [UB 78:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/78#p2_3)

## VI. The Violet Race

1. **Proposition**. After the times of Adam the superior races were widely distributed.
	> “1. _The voilet race—Adamites and Adamsonites_. The chief center of Adamite culture was in the second garden, located in the triangle of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers; this was indeed the cradle of Occidental and Indian civilizations. The secondary or northern center of the violet race was the Adamsonite headquarters, situated east of the southern shore of the Caspian Sea near the Kopet mountains. From these two centers there went forth to the surrounding lands the culture and life plasm which so immediately quickened all the races.“
	> “2. _Pre-Sumerians and other Nodites_. There were also present in Mesopotamia, near the mouth of the rivers, remnants of the ancient culture of the days of Dalamatia. With the passing millenniums, this group became thoroughly admixed with the Adamites to the north, but they never entirely lost their Nodite traditions. Various other Nodite groups that had settled in the Levant were, in general, “
	> “3. _The Andonites_ maintained five or six fairly representative settlements to the north and east of the Adamson headquarters. They were also scattered throughout Turkestan, while isolated islands of them persisted throughout Eurasia, especially in mountainous regions. These aborigines still held the northlands of the Eurasian continent, together with Iceland and Greenland, but they had long since been driven from the plains of Europe by the blue man and from the river valleys of farther Asia by the expanding yellow race.” [UB 78:1.3-5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/78#p1_3)

2. **Proposition**. There were seven major invasions of Europe by the Andites, the last coming on horseback in three great waves.
	> “While the Andites poured into Europe in a steady stream, there were seven major invasions, the last arrivals coming on horseback in three great waves. Some entered Europe by way of the islands of the Aegean and up the Danube valley, but the majority of the earlier and purer strains migrated to northwestern Europe by the northern route across the grazing lands of the Volga and the Don.
	> “Between the third and fourth invasions a horde of Andonites entered Europe from the north, having come from Siberia by way of the Russian rivers and the Baltic. They were immediately assimilated by the northern Andite tribes.” [UB 80:4.1-2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p4_1)

3. **Proposition**. The Adamites were pacific; the Nodites belligerent. Their union, plus the Sangiks, produced the able, aggressive Andites.
	> “The earlier expansions of the purer violet race were far more pacific than were those of their later semimilitary and conquest-loving Andite descendants. The Adamites were pacific; the Nodites were belligerent. The union of these stocks, as later mingled with the Sangik races, produced the able, aggressive Andites who made actual military conquests.” [UB 80:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p4_3)

4. **Proposition**. The horse determined the dominance of the Andites in the Occident. Moving rapidly, they reached Europe as coherent groups—retaining much of their culture.
	> “But the horse was the evolutionary factor which determined the dominance of the Andites in the Occident. The horse gave the dispersing Andites the hitherto nonexistent advantage of mobility, enabling the last groups of Andite cavalrymen to progress quickly around the Caspian Sea to overrun all of Europe. All previous waves of Andites had moved so slowly that they tended to disintegrate at any great distance from Mesopotamia. But these later waves moved so rapidly that they reached Europe as coherent groups, still retaining some measure of higher culture.” [UB 80:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p4_4)

5. **Proposition**. Around 19,000 B.C., the Adamites were a nation numbering four and a half million.
	> “But the Adamites were a real nation around 19,000 B.C., numbering four and a half million, and already they had poured forth millions of their progeny into the surrounding peoples.” [UB 78:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/78#p2_5)

6. **Proposition**. The Andites were a blend of violet, Nodite, and Sangik peoples. Their racial inheritance was from one-eighth to one-sixth violet.
	> “The Andite races were the primary blends of the pure-line violet race and the Nodites plus the evolutionary peoples. In general, Andites should be thought of as having a far greater percentage of Adamic blood than the modern races. In the main, the term Andite is used to designate those peoples whose racial inheritance was from one-eighth to one-sixth violet. Modern Urantians, even the northern white races, contain much less than this percentage of the blood of Adam.” [UB 78:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/78#p4_1)

7. **Proposition**. The Aryan race was formed in the highlands of Turkestan. The dialect was a mixture of the language of the Adamsonites and the Andites.
	> “The civilization of Turkestan was constantly being revived and refreshed by the newcomers from Mesopotamia, especially by the later Andite cavalrymen. The so-called Aryan mother tongue was in process of formation in the highlands of Turkestan; it was a blend of the Andonic dialect of that region with the language of the Adamsonites and later Andites. Many modern languages are derived from this early speech of these central Asian tribes who conquered Europe, India, and the upper stretches of the Mesopotamian plains. This ancient language gave the Occidental tongues all of that similarity which is called Aryan.” [UB 78:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/78#p5_3)

8. **Proposition**. The last three waves of Andites left Mesopotamia between 8000 and 6000 B.C. They conquered and blended with the newly appearing white race.
	> “The last three waves of Andites poured out of Mesopotamia between 8000 and 6000 B.C. These three great waves of culture were forced out of Mesopotamia by the pressure of the hill tribes to the east and the harassment of the plainsmen of the west. The inhabitants of the Euphrates valley and adjacent territory went forth in their final exodus in several directions:
	> “Sixty-five per cent entered Europe by the Caspian Sea route to conquer and amalgamate with the newly appearing white races—the blend of the blue men and the earlier Andites.” [UB 78:6.1-2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/78#p6_1)

9. **Proposition**. After the last Andite dispersion from Mesopotamia, there remained near the mouths of the rivers the Sumerians with their largely Nodite culture.
	> “When the last Andite dispersion broke the biologic backbone of Mesopotamian civilization, a small minority of this superior race remained in their homeland near the mouths of the rivers. These were the Sumerians, and by 6000 B.C. they had become largely Andite in extraction, though their culture was more exclusively Nodite in character, and they clung to the ancient traditions of Dalamatia. Nonetheless, these Sumerians of the coastal regions were the last of the Andites in Mesopotamia. But the races of Mesopotamia were already thoroughly blended by this late date, as is evidenced by the skull types found in the graves of this era.” [UB 78:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/78#p8_1)

## VII. The Sumerians And Aryans

1. **Proposition**. Hap’s moral law was the law of Dalamatia for three hundred thousand years.
	> “Hap presented the early races with a moral law. This code was known as ‘The Father’s Way’ and consisted of the following seven commands:
	> “1. You shall not fear nor serve any God but the Father of all.
	> “2. You shall not disobey the Father’s Son, the world’s ruler, nor show disrespect to his superhuman associates.
	> “3. You shall not speak a lie when called before the judges of the people.
	> “4. You shall not kill men, women, or children.
	> “5. You shall not steal your neighbor’s goods or cattle.
	> “6. You shall not touch your friend’s wife.
	> “7. You shall not show disrespect to your parents or to the elders of the tribe.
	> “This was the law of Dalamatia for almost three hundred thousand years. And many of the stones on which this law was inscribed now lie beneath the waters off the shores of Mesopotamia and Persia. It became the custom to hold one of these commands in mind for each day of the week, using it for salutations and mealtime thanksgiving.” [UB 66:7.8-16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/66#p7_8)

2. **Proposition**. The last exodus of the Andites from Turkestan was the Aryan invasion of India.
	> “The second Andite penetration of India was the Aryan invasion during a period of almost five hundred years in the middle of the third millennium before Christ. This migration marked the terminal exodus of the Andites from their homelands in Turkestan.
	> “The early Aryan centers were scattered over the northern half of India, notably in the northwest. These invaders never completed the conquest of the country and subsequently met their undoing in this neglect since their lesser numbers made them vulnerable to absorption by the Dravidians of the south, who subsequently overran the entire peninsula except the Himalayan provinces.” [UB 79:4.1-2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/79#p4_1)

## VIII. Racial Types

1. **Proposition**. Human remains of the last twenty thousand years do not disclose the original five types, but they do reveal the three modern groups.
	> “In general, therefore, as the human remains of the last twenty thousand years are unearthed, it will be impossible clearly to distinguish the five original types. Study of such skeletal structures will disclose that mankind is now divided into approximately three classes:
	> “1. _The Caucasoid_—the Andite blend of the Nodite and Adamic stocks, further modified by primary and (some) secondary Sangik admixture and by considerable Andonic crossing. The Occidental white races, together with some Indian and Turanian peoples, are included in this group. The unifying factor in this division is the greater or lesser proportion of Andite inheritance.
	> “2. _The Mongoloid_—the primary Sangik type, including the original red, yellow, and blue races. The Chinese and Amerinds belong to this group. In Europe the Mongoloid type has been modified by secondary Sangik and Andonic mixture; still more by Andite infusion. The Malayan and other Indonesian peoples are included in this classification, though they contain a high percentage of secondary Sangik blood.
	> “3. _The Negroid_—the secondary Sangik type which originally included the orange, green, and indigo races. This is the type best illustrated by the Negro, and it will be found through Africa, India, and Indonesia wherever the secondary Sangik races located.” [UB 81:4.10-13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/81#p4_10)

2. **Proposition**. At the end of the Andite migrations, there existed in Europe three white races.
	> “The racial blends in Europe toward the close of the Andite migrations became generalized into the three white races as follows:
	> “1. _The northern white race_. This so-called Nordic race consisted primarily of the blue man plus the Andite but also contained a considerable amount of Andonite blood, together with smaller amounts of the red and yellow Sangik. The northern white race thus encompassed these four most desirable human stocks. But the largest inheritance was from the blue man. The typical early Nordic was long-headed, tall, and blond. But long ago this race became thoroughly mixed with all of the branches of the white peoples.
	> “The primitive culture of Europe, which was encountered by the invading Nordics, was that of the retrograding Danubians blended with the blue man. The Nordic-Danish and the Danubian-Andonite cultures met and mingled on the Rhine as is witnessed by the existence of two racial groups in Germany today.
	> “The Nordics continued the trade in amber from the Baltic coast, building up a great commerce with the broadheads of the Danube valley via the Brenner Pass. This extended contact with the Danubians led these northerners into mother worship, and for several thousands of years cremation of the dead was almost universal throughout Scandinavia. This explains why remains of the earlier white races, although buried all over Europe, are not to be found—only their ashes in stone and clay urns. These white men also built dwellings; they never lived in caves. And again this explains why there are so few evidences of the white man’s early culture, although the preceding Cro-Magnon type is well preserved where it has been securely sealed up in caves and grottoes. As it were, one day in northern Europe there is a primitive culture of the retrogressing Danubians and the blue man and the next that of a suddenly appearing and vastly superior white man.
	> “2. _The central white race_. While this group includes strains of blue, yellow, and Andite, it is predominantly Andonite. These people are broad-headed, swarthy, and stocky. They are driven like a wedge between the Nordic and Mediterranean races, with the broad base resting in Asia and the apex penetrating eastern France.
	> “3. _The southern white race_. This brunet Mediterranean race consisted of a blend of the Andite and the blue man, with a smaller Andonite strain than in the north. This group also absorbed a considerable amount of secondary Sangik blood through the Saharans. In later times this southern division of the white race was infused by strong Andite elements from the eastern Mediterranean.” [UB 80:9.1-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p9_1)

## IX. The Blue Man

1. **Proposition**. The blue man did not achieve a great culture, but he was the foundation of the most potent and aggressive civilization since the times of Adam.
	> “Although the European blue man did not of himself achieve a great cultural civilization, he did supply the biologic foundation which, when its Adamized strains were blended with the later Andite invaders, produced one of the most potent stocks for the attainment of aggressive civilization ever to appear on Urantia since the times of the violet race and their Andite successors.” [UB 80:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p0_2)

2. **Proposition**. Modern white peoples are derived from the Adamic stock admixed with Sangik strains—mostly the blue man.
	> “The modern white peoples incorporate the surviving strains of the Adamic stock which became admixed with the Sangik races, some red and yellow but more especially the blue. There is a considerable percentage of the original Andonite stock in all the white races and still more of the early Nodite strains.” [UB 80:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p0_2)

1. **Proposition**. Adam’s blood was shared by many peoples, but all races were not equally attractive to the Adamites.
	> “Adam’s blood has been shared with most of the human races, but some secured more than others. The mixed races of India and the darker peoples of Africa were not attractive to the Adamites. They would have mixed freely with the red man had he not been far removed in the Americas, and they were kindly disposed toward the yellow man, but he was likewise difficult of access in faraway Asia. Therefore, when actuated by either adventure or altruism, or when driven out of the Euphrates valley, they very naturally chose union with the blue races of Europe.” [UB 80:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p1_5)

2. **Proposition**. There was great sex attraction between the blue man and the Adamites and their religions were not antagonistic.
	> “The blue men, then dominant in Europe, had no religious practices which were repulsive to the earlier migrating Adamites, and there was great sex attraction between the violet and the blue races. The best of the blue men deemed it a high honor to be permitted to mate with the Adamites. Every blue man entertained the ambition of becoming so skillful and artistic as to win the affection of some Adamite woman, and it was the highest aspiration of a superior blue woman to receive the attentions of an Adamite.” [UB 80:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p1_6)

3. **Proposition**. The Europeans were a blend of the art and vigor of the blue man and the creative imagination of the Adamites. The Cro-Magnoids resisted the religion of the Adamites because of the dishonesty and immorality of the mixed Adamites.
	> “The European civilization of this early post-Adamic period was a unique blend of the vigor and art of the blue men with the creative imagination of the Adamites. The blue men were a race of great vigor, but they greatly deteriorated the cultural and spiritual status of the Adamites. It was very difficult for the latter to impress their religion upon the Cro-Magnoids because of the tendency of so many to cheat and to debauch the maidens. For ten thousand years religion in Europe was at a low ebb as compared with the developments in India and Egypt.
	> “The blue men were perfectly honest in all their dealings and were wholly free from the sexual vices of the mixed Adamites. They respected maidenhood, only practicing polygamy when war produced a shortage of males.” [UB 80:3.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p3_3)

4. **Proposition**. The Cro-Magnons were brave and farseeing. They were efficient in child culture and industry.
	> “These Cro-Magnon peoples were a brave and farseeing race. They maintained an efficient system of child culture. Both parents participated in these labors, and the services of the older children were fully utilized. Each child was carefully trained in the care of the caves, in art, and in flint making. At an early age the women were well versed in the domestic arts and in crude agriculture, while the men were skilled hunters and courageous warriors.” [UB 80:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p3_5)

5. **Proposition**. For three thousand years the military headquarters of the Andites was in Denmark.
	> “For three thousand years the military headquarters of the northern Andites was in Denmark. From this central point there went forth the successive waves of conquest, which grew decreasingly Andite and increasingly white as the passing centuries witnessed the final blending of the Mesopotamian conquerors with the conquered peoples.” [UB 80:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p5_2)

6. **Proposition**. The white cavalry raiders absorbed the blue man and were resisted by the Cro-Magnons, but finally wiped out the older peoples.
	> “While the blue man had been absorbed in the north and eventually succumbed to the white cavalry raiders who penetrated the south, the advancing tribes of the mixed white race met with stubborn and protracted resistance from the Cro-Magnons, but superior intelligence and ever-augmenting biologic reserves enabled them to wipe the older race out of existence.” [UB 80:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p5_3)

## X. The Red And Yellow Races

1. **Proposition**. Eighty-five thousand years ago, the last of the red men left Asia, coming over the Bering isthmus to North America.
	> “One hundred thousand years ago the decimated tribes of the red race were fighting with their backs to the retreating ice of the last glacier, and when the land passage to the west, over the Bering isthmus, became passable, these tribes were not slow in forsaking the inhospitable shores of the Asiatic continent. It is eighty-five thousand years since the last of the pure red men departed from Asia, but the long struggle left its genetic imprint upon the victorious yellow race. The northern Chinese peoples, together with the Andonite Siberians, assimilated much of the red stock and were in considerable measure benefited thereby.” [UB 79:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/79#p5_6)

2. **Proposition**. The red man never contacted the Andites. American Indians were hunters who practiced agriculture on the side.
	> “The North American Indians never came in contact with even the Andite offspring of Adam and Eve, having been dispossessed of their Asiatic homelands some fifty thousand years before the coming of Adam. During the age of Andite migrations the pure red strains were spreading out over North America as nomadic tribes, hunters who practiced agriculture to a small extent. These races and cultural groups remained almost completely isolated from the remainder of the world from their arrival in the Americas down to the end of the first millennium of the Christian era, when they were discovered by the white races of Europe. Up to that time the Eskimos were the nearest to white men the northern tribes of red men had ever seen.” [UB 79:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/79#p5_7)

3. **Proposition**. After driving the red man to North America, the Chinese drove the Andites to Siberia and Turkestan.
	> “Sometime after driving the red man across to North America, the expanding Chinese cleared the Andonites from the river valleys of eastern Asia, pushing them north into Siberia and west into Turkestan, where they were soon to come in contact with the superior culture of the Andites.” [UB 79:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/79#p6_1)

4. **Proposition**. In Burma and Indo-China the cultures of India and China blended.
	> “In Burma and the peninsula of Indo-China the cultures of India and China mixed and blended to produce the successive civilizations of those regions. Here the vanished green race has persisted in larger proportion than anywhere else in the world.” [UB 79:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/79#p6_2)

5. **Proposition**. The superiority of the yellow race was derived from four factors.
	> “The superiority of the ancient yellow race was due to four great factors:
	> “1. _Genetic_. Unlike their blue cousins in Europe, both the red and yellow races had largely escaped mixture with debased human stocks. The northern Chinese, already strengthened by small amounts of the superior red and Andonic strains, were soon to benefit by a considerable influx of Andite blood. The southern Chinese did not fare so well in this regard, and they had long suffered from absorption of the green race, while later on they were to be further weakened by the infiltration of the swarms of inferior peoples crowded out of India by the Dravidian-Andite invasion. And today in China there is a definite difference between the northern and southern races.
	> “2. _Social._ The yellow race early learned the value of peace among themselves. Their internal peaceableness so contributed to population increase as to insure the spread of their civilization among many millions. From 25,000 to 5000 B.C. the highest mass civilization on Urantia was in central and northern China. The yellow man was first to achieve a racial solidarity—the first to attain a large-scale cultural, social, and political civilization.“
	> "3. _Spiritual_. During the age of Andite migrations the Chinese were among the more spiritual peoples of earth. Long adherence to the worship of the One Truth proclaimed by Singlangton kept them ahead of most of the other races. The stimulus of a progressive and advanced religion is often a decisive factor in cultural development; as India languished, so China forged ahead under the invigorating stimulus of a religion in which truth was enshrined as the supreme Deity.
	> “4. _Geographic_. China is protected by the mountains to the west and the Pacific to the east. Only in the north is the way open to attack, and from the days of the red man to the coming of the later descendants of the Andites, the north was not occupied by any aggressive race.” [UB 79:6.6-8,10,12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/79#p6_6)

## XI. Civilization

1. **Proposition**. There are three general classes of human institutions.
	> “All human institutions minister to some social need, past or present, notwithstanding that their overdevelopment unfailingly detracts from the worthwhileness of the individual in that personality is overshadowed and initiative is diminished. Man should control his institutions rather than permit himself to be dominated by these creations of advancing civilization.
	> “Human institutions are of three general classes:
	> “1. _The institutions of self-maintenance_. These institutions embrace those practices growing out of food hunger and its associated instincts of self-preservation. They include industry, property, war for gain, and all, the regulative machinery of society. Sooner or later the fear instinct fosters the establishment of these institutions of survival by means of taboo, convention, and religious sanction. But fear, ignorance, and superstition have played a prominent part in the early origin and subsequent development of all human institutions.
	> “2. _The institutions of self-perpetuation_. These are the establishments of society growing out of sex hunger, maternal instinct, and the higher tender emotions of the races. They embrace the social safeguards of the home and the school, of family life, education, ethics, and religion. They include marriage customs, war for defense, and home building.“
	> “3. _The institutions of self-gratification_. These are the practices growing out of vanity proclivities and pride emotions; and they embrace customs in dress and personal adornment, social usages, war for glory, dancing, amusement, games, and other phases of sensual gratification. But civilization has never evolved distinctive institutions of self-gratification.” [UB 69:1.1-5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/69#p1_1)

2. **Proposition**. After the last Andite migration culture declined in the Euphrates valley—the center of civilization shifted to the Nile.
	> “From the times of the terminal Andite migrations, culture declined in the Euphrates valley, and the immediate center of civilization shifted to the valley of the Nile. Egypt became the successor of Mesopotamia as the headquarters of the most advanced group on earth.” [UB 80:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p6_1)

3. **Proposition**. About 12,000 B.C. a brilliant tribe of Andites—Vanite-Nodite —settled on Crete. They were skillful workers.
	> “About 12,000 B.C. a brilliant tribe of Andites migrated to Crete. This was the only island settled so early by such a superior group, and it was almost two thousand years before the descendants of these mariners spread to the neighboring isles. This group were the narrowheaded, smaller-statured Andites who had intermarried with the Vanite division of the northern Nodites. They were all under six feet in height and had been literally driven off the mainland by their larger and inferior fellows. These emigrants to Crete were highly skilled in textiles, metals, pottery, plumbing, and the use of stone for building material. They engaged in writing and carried on as herders and agriculturists.” [UB 80:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p7_2)

4. **Proposition**. Two thousand years after the settlement of Crete, a group of tall Adamsonites settled in Greece. This group of 375 was led by Sato.
	> “Almost two thousand years after the settlement of Crete a group of the tall descendants of Adamson made their way over the northern islands to Greece, coming almost directly from their highland home north of Mesopotamia.These progenitors of the Greeks were led west-ward by Sato, a direct descendant of Adamson and Ratta.
	> “The group which finally settled in Greece consisted of three hundred and seventy-five of the selected and superior people comprising the end of the second civilization of the Adamsonites. These later sons of Adamson carried the then most valuable strains of the emerging white races. They were of a high intellectual order and, physically regarded, the most beautiful of men since the days of the first Eden.” [UB 80:7.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/80#p7_3)

5. **Proposition**. The civilization of Urantia is predicated on fifteen factors:
	> 1. Natural circumstances.
	> 2. Capital goods.
	> 3. Scientific knowledge.
	> 4. Human resources.
	> 5. Effectiveness of material resources.
	> 6. Effectiveness of language.
	> 7. Effectiveness of mechanical devices.
	> 8. Character of torchbearers.
	> 9. The racial ideals.
	> 10. Co-ordination of specialists.
	> 11. Place-finding devices.
	> 12. The willingness to co-operate.
	> 13. Effectiveness of wise leadership.
	> 14. Social changes.
	> 15. The prevention of transitional breakdowns. See: [UB 81:6.3-44](/en/The_Urantia_Book/81#p6_3)

6. **Proposition**. The economics of a world settled in light and life is conducted on a definite plan.
	> “Human government in the conduct of material affairs continues to function throughout this age of relative progress and perfection. The public activities of a world in the first stage of light and life which I recently visited were financed by the tithing technique. Every adult worker—and all able-bodied citizens worked at something—paid ten per cent of his income or increase to the public treasury, and it was disbursed as follows:
	> “1. Three per cent was expended in the promotion of truth—science, education, and philosophy.
	> “2. Three per cent was devoted to beauty—play, social leisure, and art.
	> “3. Three per cent was dedicated to goodness—social service, altruism, and religion.
	> “4. One per cent was assigned to the insurance reserves against the risk of incapacity for labor resultant from accident, disease, old age, or unpreventable disasters.” [UB 55:3.2-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p3_2)

## XII. Human Free Will

1. **Proposition**. In the matter of the choice of eternal survival, the human will is absolutely sovereign.
	> “. . . No other being, force, creator, or agency in all the wide universe of universes can interfere to any degree with the absolute sovereignty of the mortal free will, as it operates within the realms of choice, regarding the eternal destiny of the personality of the choosing mortal. As pertains to eternal survival, God has decreed the sovereignty of the material and mortal will, and that decree is absolute.” [UB 5:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p6_8)

2. **Proposition**. Morality is never advanced by law or force. It depends on the personal free will and is spread by the contagion of personal contact with morally fragrant. persons.
	> “Morality can never be advanced by law or by force. It is a personal and freewill matter and must be disseminated by the contagion of the contact of morally fragrant persons with those who are less morally responsive, but who are also in some measure desirous of doing the Father’s will.” [UB 16:7.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p7_9)

## XIII. The Divine Monitor

1. **Proposition**. Many of man’s troubles grow out of the fact that he is a part of nature—yet he transcends nature, since a spark of infinity resides within him.
	> “Many of the temporal troubles of mortal man grow out of his twofold relation to the cosmos. Man is a part of nature—he exists in nature —and yet he is able to transcend nature. Man is finite, but he is indwelt by a spark of infinity. Such a dual situation not only provides the potential for evil but also engenders many social and moral situations fraught with much uncertainty and not a little anxiety.” [UB 111:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p6_1)

2. **Proposition**. Man’s spiritual endowment is uniform and unique—no matter how much persons may differ intellectually, socially, economically, and even morally.
	> “However Urantia mortals may differ in their intellectual, social, economic, and even moral opportunities and endowments, forget not that their spiritual endowment is uniform and unique. They all enjoy the same divine presence of the gift from the Father, and they are all equally privileged to seek intimate personal communion with this indwelling spirit of divine origin, while they may all equally choose to accept the uniform spiritual leading of these Mystery Monitors.” [UB 5:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p1_5)

3. **Proposition**. Man’s mind-energy system surrounds a spirit nucleus, and such a relationship constitutes the potential of eternal personality.
	> “Mortal man has a spirit nucleus. The mind is a personal-energy system existing around a divine spirit nucleus and functioning in a material environment. Such a living relationship of personal mind and spirit constitutes the universe potential of eternal personality. Real trouble, lasting disappointment, serious defeat, or inescapable death can come only after self-concepts presume fully to displace the governing power of the central spirit nucleus, thereby disrupting the cosmic scheme of personality identity.” [UB 12:9.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p9_6)

4. **Proposition**. Evolutionary mortals can realize the faith-fact of sonship with God because of:
	1. The Holy Spirit of the local universe.
	2. The Spirit of Truth.
	3. The Adjuster presence.
	> “The presence of the Holy Spirit of the Universe Daughter of the Infinite Spirit, of the Spirit of Truth of the Universe Son of the Eternal Son, and of the Adjuster-spirit of the Paradise Father in or with an evolutionary mortal, denotes symmetry of spiritual endowment and ministry and qualifies such a mortal consciously to realize the faith-fact of sonship with God.” [UB 34:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p5_7)

5. **Proposition**. After your morontia resurrection, the Thought Adjuster will recall all of your memories of spiritual value.
	> “The Thought Adjuster will recall and rehearse for you only those memories and experiences which are a part of, and essential to, your universe career. If the Adjuster has been a partner in the evolution of aught in the human mind, then will these worth-while experiences survive in the eternal consciousness of the Adjuster. But much of your past life and its memories, having neither spiritual meaning nor morontia value, will perish with the material brain; much of material experience will pass away as one time scaffolding which, having bridged you over to the morontia level, no longer serves a purpose in the universe. . . .” [UB 112:5.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_22)

6. **Proposition**. Personality relationships have cosmic value and will always persist. On the mansion worlds you will know and be known.
	> “. . . But personality and the relationships between personalities are never scaffolding; mortal memory of personality relationships has cosmic value and will persist. On the mansion worlds you will know and be known, and more, you will remember, and be remembered by your onetime associates in the short but intriguing life on Urantia.” [UB 112:5.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_22)

## XIV. God-Consciousness

1. **Proposition**. The relative free will of human self-consciousness is manifested in seven directions.
	> “The relative free will which characterizes the self-consciousness of human personality is involved in:
	> 1. Moral decision, highest wisdom.
	> 2. Spiritual choice, truth discernment.
	> 3. Unselfish love, brotherhood service.
	> 4. Purposeful co-operation, group loyalty.
	> 5. Cosmic insight, the grasp of universe meanings.
	> 6. Personality dedication, wholehearted devotion to doing the Father’s will.
	> 7. Worship, the sincere pursuit of divine values and the wholehearted love of the divine Value-Giver.” [UB 16:8.7-14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p8_7)

2. **Proposition**. The cosmic-minded, Adjuster-indwelt mortal possesses innate realization of physical, mental, and spiritual reality. Will creatures are thus equipped to discern the fact, the law, and the love of God.
	> “The cosmic—mind-endowed, Adjuster-indwelt, personal creature possesses innate recognition-realization of energy reality, mind reality, and spirit reality. The will creature is thus equipped to discern the fact, the law, and the love of God. Aside from these three inalienables of human consciousness, all human experience is really subjective except that intuitive realization of validity attaches to the **unification** of these three universe reality responses of cosmic recognition.” [UB 16:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p9_1)

3. **Proposition**. Self-consciousness is in reality a communal experience— God and man. In the human mind four realities are inherent.
	> “Self-consciousness is in essence a communal consciousness: God and man, Father and Son, Creator and creature. In human self-consciousness four universe-reality realizations are latent and inherent:
	> 1. The quest for knowledge, the logic of science.
	> 2. The quest for moral values, the sense of duty.
	> 3. The quest for spiritual values, the religious experience.
	> 4. The quest for personality values, the ability to recognize the reality of God as a personality and the concurrent realization of our fraternal relationship with fellow personalities.” [UB 16:9.9-13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p9_9)

4. **Proposition**. When the human mind attempts to approach the higher from the lower—whether in biology or theology—it encounters.four dangers.
	> “When the human mind undertakes to follow the philosophic technique of starting from the lower to approach the higher, whether in biology or theology, it is always in danger of committing four errors of reasoning:
	> “1. It may utterly fail to perceive the final and completed evolutionary goal of either personal attainment or cosmic destiny.
	> “2. It may commit the supreme philosophical blunder by oversimplifying cosmic evolutionary (experiential) reality, thus leading to the distortion of facts, to the perversion of truth, and to the misconception of destinies.
	> “3. The study of causation is the perusal of history. But the knowledge of _how_ a being becomes does not necessarily provide an intelligent understanding of the present status and true character of such a being.
	> “4. History alone fails adequately to reveal future development— destiny. Finite origins are helpful, but only divine causes reveal final effects. Eternal ends are not shown in time beginnings. The present can be truly interpreted only in the light of the correlated past and future.” [UB 19:1.7-11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_7)

5. **Proposition**. We employ the method of approaching man by staining with the Paradise source and center of all personality and. cosmic reality.
	> “Therefore, because of these and for still other reasons, do we employ the technique of approaching man and his planetary problems by embarkation on the time-space journey from the infinite, eternal, and divine Paradise Source and Center of all personality reality and all cosmic existence.” [UB 19:1.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_12)

## XV. Urantia Personality

1. **Proposition**. We know many things about personality, but they do not provide a definition.
	> “While it would be presumptuous to attempt the definition of personality, it may prove helpful to recount some of the things which are known about personality:
	> “1. Personality is that quality in reality which is bestowed by the Universal Father himself or by the Conjoint Actor, acting for the Father.
	> “2. It may be bestowed upon any living energy system which includes mind or spirit.
	> “3. It is not wholly subject to the fetters of antecedent causation. It is relatively creative or cocreative.
	> “4. When bestowed upon evolutionary material creatures, it causes spirit to strive for the mastery of energy-matter through the mediation of mind.
	> “5. Personality, while devoid of identity, can unify the identity of any living energy system.
	> “6. It discloses only qualitative response to the personality circuit in contradistinction to the three energies which show both qualitative and quantitative response to gravity.
	> “7. Personality is changeless in the presence of change.
	> “8. It can make a gift to God—dedication of the free will to the doing of the will of God.
	> “9. It is characterized by morality—awareness of relativity of relationship with other persons. It discerns conduct levels and choosingly discriminates between them.
	> “10. Personality is unique, absolutely unique: It is unique in time and space; it is unique in eternity and on Paradise; it is unique when bestowed—there are no duplicates; it is unique during every moment of existence; it is unique in relation to God—he is no respector of persons, but neither does he add them together, for they are nonaddable—they are associable but nontotalable.
	> “11. Personality responds directly to other-personality presence.
	> “12. It is one thing which can be added to spirit, thus illustrating the primacy of the Father in relation to the Son. (Mind does not have to be added to spirit.)
	> “13. Personality may survive mortal death with identity in the surviving soul. The Adjuster and the personality are changeless; the relationship between them (in the soul) is nothing but change, continuing evolution; and if this change (growth) ceased, the soul would cease.
	> “14. Personality is uniquely conscious of time, and this is something other than the time perception of mind or spirit.” [UB 112:0.2-16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p0_2)

2. **Proposition**. All phases of personality are potentially cocreational. Identity can be associated with pattern, but personality is associated with living energy systems.
	> “All subinfinite orders and phases of personality are associative attainables and are potentially cocreational. The prepersonal, the personal, and the superpersonal are all linked together by mutual potential or co-ordinate attainment, progressive achievement, and cooreational capacity. But never does the impersonal directly transmute to the personal. Personality is never spontaneous; it is the gift of the Paradise Father. Personality is superimposed upon energy, and it is associated only with living energy systems; identity can be associated with nonliving energy patterns.” [UB 0:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p5_4)

3. **Proposition**. Personality is not body, mind, spirit, or soul. It is the changeless reality of an otherwise ever-changing creature experience.
	> “_Personality_. The personality of mortal man is neither body, mind, nor spirit; neither is it the soul. Personality is the one changeless reality in an otherwise ever-changing creature experience; and it unifies all other associated factors of individuality. The personality is the unique bestowal which the Universal Father makes upon the living and associated energies of matter, mind, and spirit, and which survives with the survival of the morontial soul.” [UB 0:5.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p5_11)

4. **Proposition**. Human personality is the time—space image-shadow cast by the Creator personality, and should be interpreted in terms of the substance.
	> “Human personality is the time-space image-shadow cast by the divine Creator personality, And no actuality can ever be adequately comprehended by an examination of its shadow. Shadows should be interpreted in terms of the true substance.” [UB 1:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p6_1)

5. **Proposition**. Urantia mortals are endowed with personality of the finitemortal type functioning on the level of the ascending sons of God.
	> “The Universal Father bestows personality upon numerous orders of beings as they function on diverse levels of universe actuality. Urantia human beings are endowed with personality of the finite-mortal type, functioning on the level of the ascending sons of God.” [UB 16:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p8_1)

6. **Proposition**. The bestowal of personality is antecedent to the bestowal of Thought Adjusters.
	> “Personality is a unique endowment of original nature whose existence is independent of, and antecedent to, the bestowal of the Thought Adjuster. Nevertheless, the presence of the Adjuster does augment the qualitative manifestation of personality. . . .” [UB 16:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p8_3)

7. **Proposition**. Personality is that feature of an individual which we know.
	> “. . . Personality is that feature of an individual which we _know_, and which enables us to identify such a being at some future time regardless of the nature and extent of changes in form, mind, or spirit status. Personality is that part of any individual which enables us to recognize and positively identify that person as the one we have previously known, no matter how much he may have changed because of the modification of the vehicle of expression and manifestation of his personality.” [UB 16:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p8_4)

8. **Proposition**. Creature personality is distinguished by self-consciousness and relative free will.
	> “Creature personality is distinguished by two self-manifesting and characteristic phenomena of mortal reactive behavior: self-consciousness and associated relative free will.” [UB 16:8.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p8_5)

9. **Proposition**. Self—consciousness is intellectual awareness of personality actuality and includes ability to recognize other personalities.
	> “Self-consciousness consists in intellectual awareness of personality actuality; it includes the ability to recognize the reality of other personalities. It indicates capacity for individualized experience in and with cosmic realities, equivalating to the attainment of identity status in the personality relationships of the universe. . . .” [UB 16:8.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p8_6)

10. **Proposition**. Personality confers cosmic citizenship and ability to react to cosmic realities.
	> “. . . The bestowal of the divine gift of personality upon such a mind-endowed mortal mechanism confers the dignity of cosmic citizenship and enables such a mortal creature forthwith to become reactive to the constitutive recognition of the three basic mind realities of the cosmos:
	> “1. The mathematical or logical recognition of the uniformity of physical causation.
	> “2. The reasoned recognition of the obligation of moral conduct.
	> “3. The faith—grasp of the fellowship worship of Deity, associated with the loving service of humanity.” [UB 16:8.15-18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p8_15)

11. **Proposition**. The full recognition of personality endowment is realization of Deity kinship—sonship with God.
	> “The full function of such a personality endowment is the beginning realization of Deity kinship. Such a selfhood, indwelt by a prepersonal fragment of God the Father, is in truth and in fact a spiritual son of God. . . .” [UB 16:8.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p8_19)

12. **Proposition**. Throughout all your evolutionary ascension, there is one part of you which remains unchanged—your personality.
	> “. . . And throughout all of these successive ages and stages of evolutionary growth, there is one part of you that remains absolutely unaltered, and that is personality—permanence in the presence of change.” [UB 112:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p0_1)

13. **Proposition**. Personality functions on three cosmic planes—universe phases.
	> “Personality is bestowed by the Universal Father upon his creatures as a potentially eternal endowment. Such a divine gift is designed to function on numerous levels and in successive universe situations ranging from the lowly finite to the highest absonite, even to the borders of the absolute. Personality thus performs on three cosmic planes or in three universe phases:
	> “1. _Position status_. Personality functions equally efficiently in the local universe, in the superuniverse, and in the central universe.
	> “2. _Meaning status_. Personality performs effectively on the levels of the finite, the absonite, and even as impinging upon the absolute.
	> “3. _Value status_. Personality can be experientially realized in the progressive realms of the material, the morontial, and the spiritual.” [UB 112:1.1-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p1_1)

14. **Proposition**. Only three of the seven dimensions of personality are realizable on the finite level.
	> “The type of personality bestowed upon Urantia mortals has a potentiality of seven dimensions of self-expression or person-realization. These dimensional phenomena are realizable as three on the finite level, three on the absonite level, and one on the absolute level. On subabsolute levels this seventh or totality dimension is experiencible as the _fact_ of personality. This supreme dimension is an associable absolute and, while not infinite, is dimensionally potential for subinfinite penetration of the absolute.” [UB 112:1.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p1_9)

15. **Proposition**. Man is a social creature. Personality craves belongingness.
	> “Personality cannot very well perform in isolation. Man is innately a social creature; he is dominated by the craving of belongingness. It is literally true, ‘No man lives unto himself.’” [UB 112:1.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p1_16)

16. **Proposition**. Personality signifies the unification of all factors of reality.
	> “But the concept of the personality as the meaning of the whole of the living and functioning creature means much more than the integration of relationships; it signifies the _unification_ of all factors of reality as well as co-ordination of relationships. Relationships exist between two objects, but three or more objects eventuate a _system_, and such a system is much more than just an enlarged or complex relationship. This distinction is vital, for in a cosmic system the individual members are not connected with each other except in relation to the whole and through the individuality of the whole.” [UB 112:1.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p1_17)

17. **Proposition**. Coming from God, man’s personality is eternal, but as regards identity, it is conditioned on man’s choosing to survive.
	> “That which comes from the Father is like the Father eternal, and this is just as true of personality, which God gives by his own freewill choice, as it is of the divine Thought Adjuster, an actual fragment of God. Man’s personality is eternal but with regard to identity a conditioned eternal reality. Having appeared in response to the Father’s will, personality will attain Deity destiny, but man must choose whether or not he will be present at the attainment of such destiny. In default of such choice, personality attains experiential Deity directly, becoming a part of the Supreme Being. The cycle is foreordained, but man’s participation therein is optional, personal, and experiential.” [UB 112:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_2)

## XVI. Faith Sons Of God

1. **Proposition**. Faith sons live and work on levels far above the conflicts of unrestrained physical impulses.
	> “Those God—knowing men and women who have been born of the Spirit experience no more conflict with their mortal natures than do the inhabitants of the most normal of worlds, planets which have never been tainted with sin nor touched by rebellion. Faith sons work on intellectual levels and live on spiritual planes far above the conflicts produced by unrestrained or unnatural physical desires. . . .” [UB 34:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p7_7)

2. **Proposition**. Normal urges of animal beings are not in serious conflict with high spiritual attainment.
	> “. . . The normal urges of animal beings and the natural appetites and impulses of the physical nature are not in conflict with even the highest spiritual attainment except in the minds of ignorant, mistaught, or unfortunately overconscientious persons.” [UB 34:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p7_7)

3. **Proposition**. Man’s feelings of insecurity grow out of the differences between his physical and spiritual natures. Only faith can sustain him in these perplexities.
	> “It is only natural that mortal man should be harassed by feelings of insecurity as he views himself inextricably bound to nature while he possesses spiritual powers wholly transcendent to all things temporal and finite. Only religious confidence—living faith—can sustain man amid such difficult and perplexing problems.” [UB 111:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p6_8)

## XVII. The Seven Stages Of Light And Life

1. **Proposition**. As worlds pass from the first to the seventh stage of light and life, they successively grasp the realization of the reality of God the Sevenfold.
	> “As the worlds settled in life and light progress from the initial stage to the seventh epoch, they successively grasp for the realization of the reality of God the Sevenfold, ranging from the adoration of the Creator Son to the worship of his Paradise Father. Throughout the continuing seventh stage of such a world’s history the ever—progressing mortals grow in the knowledge of God the Supreme, while they vaguely discern the reality of the overshadowing ministry of God the Ultimate.” [UB 56:10.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/56#p10_1)

2. **Proposition**. All of this attainment is achieved before mortals even enter upon the morontia career.
	> “This is the story of the magnificent goal of mortal striving on the evolutionary worlds; and it all takes place even before human beings enter upon their morontia careers; all of this splendid development is attainable by material mortals on the inhabited worlds, the very first stage of that endless and incomprehensible career of Paradise ascension and divinity attainment.” [UB 55:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p6_7)

3. **Proposition**. The chief pursuit of these mortals is the realization of truth, beauty, and goodness—philosophy, cosmology, and divinity.
	> “Throughout this glorious age the chief pursuit of the ever-advancing mortals is the quest for a better understanding and a fuller realization of the comprehensible elements of Deity—truth, beauty and goodness. This represents man’s effort to discern God in mind, matter, and spirit. And as the mortal pursues this quest, he finds himself increasingly absorbed in the experiential study of philosophy, cosmology, and divinity.” [UB 56:10.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/56#p10_2)

4. **Proposition**. The era of light and life is inaugurated by the Trinity Teacher Sons.
	> “This era of light and life, inaugurated by the Teacher Sons at the conclusion of their final planetary mission, continues indefinitely on the inhabited worlds. Each advancing stage of settled status may be segregated by the judicial actions of the Magisterial Sons into a succession of dispensations; but all such judicial actions are purely technical, in no way modifying the course of planetary events.” [UB 55:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p0_2)

5. **Proposition**. When finally settled in light and life a world receives the morontia temple and the Planetary Prince is elevated to Planetary Sovereign.
	> “The presence of a morontia temple at the capital of an inhabited world is the certificate of the admission of such a sphere to the settled ages of light and life. Before the Teacher Sons leave a world at the conclusion of their terminal mission, they inaugurate this final epoch of evolutionary attainment; they preside on that day when the ‘holy temple comes down upon earth.’ This event, signalizing the dawn of the era of light and life, is always honored by the personal presence of the Paradise bestowal Son of that planet, who comes to witness this great day. There in this temple of unparalleled beauty, this bestowal Son of Paradise proclaims the long-time Planetary Prince as the new Planetary Sovereign and invests such a faithful Lanonandek Son with new powers and extended authority over planetary affairs. The System Sovereign is also present and speaks in confirmation of these pronouncements.” [UB 55:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p1_1)

6. **Proposition**. The translation of living mortals is by the consuming fire of Adjuster fusion.
	> “Such a morontia temple also serves as the place of assembly for witnessing the translation of living mortals to the morontia existence. It is because the translation temple is composed of morontia material that it is not destroyed by the blazing glory of the consuming fire which so completely obliterates the physical bodies of those mortals who therein experience final fusion with their divine Adjusters. On a large world these departure flares are almost continuous, and as the number of translations increases, subsidiary morontia life shrines are provided in different areas of the planet. Not long since I sojourned on a world in the far north whereon twenty-five morontia shrines were functioning.” [UB 55:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p1_5)

7. **Proposition**. Frequency of translation from the mortal to the morontia state increases as the evolutionary status of a world progresses.
	> “This experience of translation from the material life to the morontia state—fusion of the immortal soul with the indwelling Adjuster—increases in frequency commensurate with the evolutionary progress of the planet. . . .” [UB 55:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p2_2)

8. **Proposition**. The family and friends of a fusion candidate assemble in the morontia temple to await the “life flash” delivering the ascender from the bonds of the flesh.
	> “When the family, friends, and working group of such a fusion candidate have forgathered in the morontia temple, they are distributed around the central stage whereon the fusion candidates are resting, meantime freely conversing with their assembled friends. A circle of intervening celestial personalities is arranged to protect the material mortals from the action of the energies manifest at the instant of the ‘life flash’ which delivers the ascension candidate from the bonds of material flesh, thereby doing for such an evolutionary mortal every thing that natural death does for those who are thereby delivered from the flesh.” [UB 55:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p2_4)

9. **Proposition**. Advanced notice of Adjuster fusion may be given so that the candidate may prepare for planetary departure.
	> “Farther along in the era of light and life the midway creatures or their associates sense the approaching status of probable soul-Adjuster union and signify this to the destiny guardians, who in turn communicate these matters to the finaliter group under whose jurisdiction this mortal may be functioning; then there is issued the summons of the Planetary Sovereign for such a mortal to resign all planetary duties, bid farewell to the world of his origin, and repair to the inner temple of the Planetary Sovereign, there to await morontia transit, the translation flash, from the material domain of evolution to the morontia level of prespirit progression.” [UB 55:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p2_3)

10. **Proposition**. The translated mortal proceeds by Adjuster transit to the proper morontia world.
	> “Mortal observers can see nothing of their translated associates subsequent to the fusion flash. Such translated souls proceed by Adjuster transit direct to the resurrection hall of the appropriate morontia-training world. These transactions concerned with the translation of living human beings to the morontia world are supervised by an archangel who was assigned to such a world on the day when it was first settled in light and life.” [UB 55:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p2_7)

11. **Proposition**. From the worlds in the flowering ages of light and life, the Son-seized mortals bypass most of the morontia life, beginning their semispirit ascension on the worlds of the universe headquarters.
	> “The translated souls of the flowering ages of the settled spheres do not pass through the mansion worlds. Neither do they sojourn, as students, on the morontia worlds of the system or constellation. They do not pass through any of the earlier phases of morontia life. They are the only ascending mortals who so nearly escape the morontia transition from material existence to semispirit status. The initial experience of such _Son-seized_ mortals in the ascension career is in the services of the progression worlds of the universe headquarters. And from these study worlds of Salvington they go back as teachers to the very worlds they passed by, subsequently going on inward to Paradise by the established route of mortal ascension.” [UB 55:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p2_9)

12. **Proposition**. The handicaps of Urantia in attaining the status of light and life are many and varied.
	> “The great handicap confronting Urantia in the matter of attaining the high planetary destiny of light and life is embraced in the problems of disease, degeneracy, war, multicolored races, and multilingualism.” [UB 55:3.21](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p3_21)

13. **Proposition**. To progress beyond the first stage of light and life a world must have one language, one philosophy, and one religion.
	> “No evolutionary world can hope to progress beyond the first stage of settledness in light until it has achieved one language, one religion, and one philosophy. Being of one race greatly facilitates such achievement, but the many peoples of Urantia do not preclude the attainment of higher stages.” [UB 55:3.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p3_22)

14. **Proposition**. There are seven stages of the unfoldment of the era of light and life.
	> “There are seven stages in the unfoldment of the era of light and life on an evolutionary world, and in this connection it should be noted that the worlds of the Spirit-fused mortals evolve along lines identical with those of the Adjuster-fusion series. These seven stages of light and life are:
	> 1. The first or planetary stage.
	> 2. The second or system stage.
	> 3. The third or constellation stage.
	> 4. The fourth or local universe stage.
	> 5. The fifth or minor sector stage.
	> 6. The sixth or major sector stage.
	> 7. The seventh or superuniverse stage.” [UB 55:0.4-11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p0_4)

15. **Proposition**. A brief description of the seven stages of light and life. See: [UB 55:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p4_4)

## XVIII. Personality Survival

1. **Proposition**. Mortal choosing determines the survival potential of the human soul. When the mind believes God, and with the Adjuster desires God, survival is assured.
	> “Eternal survival of personality is wholly dependent on the choosing of the mortal mind, whose decisions determine the survival potential of the immortal soul. When the mind believes God and the soul knows God, and when, with the fostering Adjuster, they all _desire_ God, then is survival assured. . . .” [UB 5:5.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p5_13)

2. **Proposition**. Survival of the God-choosing soul cannot be prevented by any and all of the limitations of human nature.
	> “. . . Limitations of intellect, curtailment of education, deprivation of culture, impoverishment of social status, even inferiority of the human standards of morality resulting from the unfortunate lack of educational, cultural, and social advantages, cannot invalidate the presence of the divine spirit in such unfortunate and humanly handicapped but believing individuals. . . .” [UB 5:5.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p5_13)

3. **Proposition**. Evolutionary mortals-from the worlds of space ascend to Paradise to await mustering into the Corps of the Finality.
	> “Evolutionary mortals are born on the planets of space, pass through the morontia worlds, ascend the spirit universes, traverse the Havona spheres, find God, attain Paradise, and are mustered into the primary Corps of the Finality, therein to await the next assignment of universe service. There are six other assembling finality corps, but Graridfanda, the first mortal ascender, presides as Paradise chief of all orders of finaliters. And as we view this sublime spectacle we all exclaim: What a glorious destiny for the animal-origin children of time, the material sons of space!” [UB 31:10.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p10_20)

4. **Proposition**. Mortal survival depends on the spiritualizing ministry of the Adjuster in evolving the immortal soul.
	> “But mortal mind without immortal spirit cannot survive. The mind of man is mortal; only the bestowed spirit is immortal. Survival is dependent on spiritualization by the ministry of the Adjuster—on the birth and evolution of the immortal soul; at least, there must not have developed an antagonism towards the Adjuster’s mission of effecting the spiritual transformation of the material mind.” [UB 49:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p4_9)

5. **Proposition**. Special resurrections are conducted from time to time and always every one thousand years.
	> “From time to time, on motion of the planetary authorities or the system rulers, special resurrections of the sleeping survivors are conducted. Such resurrections occur at least every millennium of planetary time, when not all but ‘many of those who sleep in the dust awake.’ These special resurrections are the occasion for mobilizing special groups of ascenders for specific service in the local universe plan of mortal ascension. There are both practical reasons and sentimental associations connected with these special resurrections.” [UB 49:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p6_2)

6. **Proposition**. The evolving soul—the child of mortal mind and the Divine Adjuster—survives death as the morontia self.
	> “There is something real, something of human evolution, something additional to the Mystery Monitor, which survives death. This newly appearing entity is the soul, and it survives the death of both your physical body and your material mind. This entity is the conjoint child of the combined life and efforts of the human you in liaison with the divine you, the Adjuster. This child of human and divine parentage constitutes the surviving element of terrestrial origin; it is the morontia self, the immortal soul.” [UB 112:5.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_12)

7. **Proposition**. During death, the soul is unconscious and is in the keeping of the destiny guardian.
	> “This child of persisting meaning and surviving value is wholly unconscious during the period from death to repersonalization and is in the keeping of the seraphic destiny guardian throughout this season of waiting. You will not function as a conscious being, following death, until you attain the new consciousness of morontia on the mansion worlds of Satania.” [UB 112:5.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_13)

8. **Proposition**. If there is doubt about an individual’s having had opportunity to choose survival, if the accidents and handicaps of material existence prevent sufficient progress, then such souls will be granted transitional status—they will have a chance to choose survival.
	> “Though the cosmic circles of personality growth must eventually be attained, if, through no fault of your own, the accidents of time and the handicaps of material existence prevent your mastering these levels on your native planet, if your intentions and desires are of survival value, there are issued the decrees of probation extension. You will be afforded additional time in which to prove yourself.
	> “If ever there is doubt as to the advisability of advancing a human identity to the mansion worlds, the universe governments invariably rule in the personal interests of that individual; they unhesitatingly advance such a soul to the status of a transitional being, while they continue their observations of the emerging morontia intent and spiritual purpose. Thus divine justice is certain of achievement, and divine mercy is accorded further opportunity for extending its ministry. [UB 112:5.6-7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_6)

9. **Proposition**. The reassembly of the constituent parts of a onetime material personality involves a number of transactions.
	> “The situation which makes repersonalization possible is brought about in the resurrection halls of the morontia receiving planets of a local universe. Here in these life-assembly chambers the supervising authorities provide that relationship of universe energy—morontial, mindal, and spiritual—which makes possible the reconsciousizing of the sleeping survivor. The reassembly of the constituent parts of a onetime material personality involves:
	> “1. The fabrication of a suitable form, a morontia energy pattern, in which the new survivor can make contact with nonspiritual reality, and within which the morontia variant of the cosmic mind can be encircuited.
	> “2. The return of the Adjuster to the waiting morontia creature. The Adjuster is the eternal custodian of your ascending identity; your Monitor is the absolute assurance that you yourself and not another will occupy the morontia form created for your personality awakening. And the Adjuster will be present at your personality reassembly to take up once more the role of Paradise guide to your surviving self.
	> “3. When these prerequisites of repersonalization have been assembled, the seraphic custodian of the potentialities of the slumbering immortal soul, with the assistance of numerous cosmic personalities, bestows this morontia entity upon and in the awaiting morontia mind-body form while committing this evolutionary child of the Supreme to eternal association with the waiting Adjuster. And this completes the repersonalization, reassembly of memory, insight, and consciousness— identity.” [UB 112:5.16-19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_16)

10. **Proposition**. Children dying before getting Thought Adjusters are repersonalized on the finaliter worlds concomitant with the arrival of either parent on the mansion world.
	> “Children who die when too young to have Thought Adjusters are repersonalized on the finaliter world of the local systems concomitant with the arrival of either parent on the mansion worlds. A child acquires physical entity at mortal birth, but in the matter of survival all Adjusterless children are reckoned as still attached to their parents.” [UB 49:6.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p6_12)

11. **Proposition**. And then Thought Adjusters come to indwell these little ones, together with seraphic ministry.
	> “In due course Thought Adjusters come to indwell these little ones, while the seraphic ministry to both groups of the probationary-dependent orders of survival is in general similar to that of the more advanced parent or is equivalent to that of the parent in case only one survives. Those attaining the third circle, regardless of the status of their parents, are accorded personal guardians.” [UB 49:6.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p6_13)

12. **Proposition**. Probation nurseries are maintained on finaliter worlds of the constellation and at universe headquarters for the Adjusterless children of those who skip the lower mansion worlds.
	> “Similar probation nurseries are maintained on the finaliter spheres of the constellation and the universe headquarters for the Adjusterless children of the primary and secondary modified orders of ascenders.” [UB 49:6.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p6_14)

13. **Proposition**. When mortal man fails to survive, spiritual values of human experience survive in the Thought Adjuster—personality values persist in the Supreme Being.
	> “If mortal man fails to survive natural death, the real spiritual values of his human experience survive as a part of the continuing experience of the Thought Adjuster. The personality values of such a nonsurvivor persist as a factor in the personality of the actualizing Supreme Being. Such persisting qualities of personality are deprived of identity but not of experiential values accumulated during the mortal life in the flesh. The survival of identity is dependent on the survival of the immortal soul of morontia status and increasingly divine value. Personality identity survives in and by the survival of the soul.” [UB 16:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p9_3)

14. **Proposition**. These merciful provisions do not mean that humans are to have a second probation, but they do mean that every mortal will have one undoubted opportunity to make a true and final choice.
	> “This does not mean that human beings are to enjoy a second opportunity in the face of the rejection of a first, not at all. But it does signify that all will creatures are to experience one true opportunity to make one undoubted, self-conscious, and final choice. The sovereign Judges of the universes will not deprive any being of personality status who has not finally and fully made the eternal choice; the soul of man must and will be given full and ample opportunity to reveal its true intent and real purpose.” [UB 112:5.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_9)


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/16">16. Permanent Citizens</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/18">18. Education</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>