---
title: "Workbook V — Theology of The Urantia Book — Mind and Spirit"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Mercy">Mercy</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Ministry">Ministry</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

Author: **William S. Sadler**


I. THE CONCEPT OF SIN

1. **Proposition**. Philosophically speaking, God loves the sinner but hates the sin. Persons can only love and hate other persons. Toward sin, God has no personal attitude—sin is not a spiritual reality. The love of God saves the sinners the law of God destroys the sin.

> “God loves the sinner and _hates_ the sin: such a statement is true philosophically, but God is a transcendent personality, and persons can only love and hate other persons. Sin is not a person. God loves the sinner because he is a personality reality (potentially eternal), while towards sin God strikes no personal attitude, for sin is not a spiritual reality; it is not personal; therefore does only the justice of God take cognizance of its existence. The love of God saves the sinner; the law of God destroys the sin.” [UB 2:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/2#p6_8)

2. **Proposition**. Mistaken judgment (evil) becomes sin only when the human will consciously endorses and knowingly embraces a deliberate immoral judgment.

> “The possibility of mistaken judgment (evil) becomes sin only when the human will consciously endorses and knowingly embraces a deliberate immoral judgment” [UB 3:5.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p5_15)

3. **Proposition**. The Gods neither create evil nor permit sin. Potential evil is existent in finite differential levels of perfection. Sin is potential when imperfect beings are endowed with free will.

> “The Gods neither create evil nor permit sin and rebellion. Potential evil is time-existent in a universe embracing differential levels of perfection meanings and values. Sin is potential in all realms where imperfect beings are endowed with the ability to choose between good and evil.” [UB 54:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p0_2)

4. **Proposition**. The conflicting presence of the true and the false constitutes the potentiality of error. The deliberate choice of evil is sin; the persistent pursuit of sin is iniquity.

> “The very conflicting presence of truth and untruth, fact and falsehood, constitutes the potentiality of error. The deliberate choice of evil constitutes sin; the willful rejection of truth is error; the persistent pursuit of sin and error is iniquity.” [UB 54:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p0_2)

5. **Proposition**. Free will constitutes the potential of sin. Free will is not a symbolic ideal or a mere philosophic concept—it is a universe reality.

> “The moral will creatures of the evolutionary worlds are always bothered with the unthinking question as to why the all-wise Creators permit evil and sin. They fail to comprehend that both are inevitable if the creature is to be truly free. The free will of evolving man or exquisite angel is not a mere philosophic concept, a symbolic ideal. Man’s ability to choose good or evil is a universe reality. This liberty to choose for oneself is an endowment of the Supreme Balers, and they will not permit any being or group of beings to deprive a single personality in the wide universe of this divinely bestowed liberty—not even to satisfy such misguided and ignorant beings in the enjoyment of this misnamed personal liberty.” [UB 54:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p3_1)

6. **Proposition**. If you suffer as a result of the wrongdoing of others, rest assured that none of these things can ever Jeopardize your eternal prospects.

> “But one thing should be made clear: If you are made to suffer the evil consequences of the sin of some member of your fellow citizen or fellow mortal, even rebellion in the system or elsewhere—no matter what you may have to endure because of the wrongdoing of your associates, fellows, or superiors—you may rest secure in the eternal assurance that such tribulations are transient afflictions. None of these fraternal consequences of misbehavior in the group can ever jeopardize your eternal prospects or in the least degree deprive you of your divine right of Paradise ascension and God attainment.” [UB 54:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p6_4)

7. **Proposition**. Sin may be regarded as the attitude of a personality who is knowingly resisting cosmic reality. Error would be misconception or distortion of reality. Evil is a partial realization of, or a maladjustment to, universe reality.

> “There are many ways of looking at sin, but from the universe philosophic viewpoint sin is the attitude of a personality who is knowingly resisting cosmic reality. Error might be regarded as a misconception or distortion of reality. Evil is a partial realization of, or maladjustment to, universe realities.” [UB 67:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p1_4)

8. **Proposition**. Sin is a purposeful resistance to reality—iniquity, open defiance.

> “But sin is a purposeful resistance to divine reality—a con-scious choosing to oppose spiritual progress—while iniquity consists in an open and persistent defiance of recognized reality and signifies such a degree of personality disintegration as to border on cosmic insanity.” [UB 67:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p1_4)

9. **Proposition**. When sin becomes habitual it easily becomes iniquitous. All manner of sin may be forgiven, but the iniquiter experiences no sorrow for wrongdoing and does not accept forgiveness.

> “And when sin has so many times been chosen and so often been repeated, it may become habitual. Habitual sinners can easily become iniquitous, become wholehearted rebels against the universe and all of its divine realities. While all manner of sins may be forgiven, we doubt whether the established iniquiter would ever sincerely experience sorrow for his misdeeds or accept forgiveness for his sins.” [UB 67:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p1_6)

10. **Proposition**. Primitive man considered that he was in debt to the spirits— that he needed redemption. This concept developed into the doctrine of sin and salvation.

> “Primitive man regarded himself as being in debt to the spirits, as standing in need of redemption. As the savages looked at it, in justice the spirits might have visited much more bad luck upon them. As time passed, this concept developed into the doctrine of sin and salvation. The soul was looked upon as coming into the world under forfeit—original sin.” [UB 89:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p0_1)

11. **Proposition**. The savage thought the spirits derived satisfaction from human suffering. Man became concerned over sins of both commission and omission. The sacrificial system grew up around these ideas.

> “The savage was early possessed with the notion that spirits derive supreme satisfaction from the sight of human misery, suffering, and humiliation. At first, man was only concerned with sins of commission, but later he became exercised over sins of omission. And the whole subsequent sacrifical system grew up around these two ideas. This new ritual had to do with the observance of the propitiation ceremonies of sacrifice.” [UB 89:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p0_2)

12. **Proposition**. The savage envisioned both good and bad spirits, and when taboos received the sanction of religion, the stage was set for the conception of sin, and such a concept made material death seem logical.

> “As the savage mind evolved to that point where it envisaged both good and bad spirits, and when the taboo received the solemn sanction of evolving religion, the stage was all set for the appearance of the new conception of _sin_. The idea of sin was universally established in the world before revealed religion ever made its entry. It was only by the concept of sin that natural death became logical to the primitive mind. Sin was the transgression of taboo, and death was the penalty of sin.” [UB 89:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p2_2)

13. **Proposition**. At first sin was ritual, not rational; an act, not a thought. Traditions of Adam fostered the idea of a onetime “golden age”— and that sin brought man down to his later sorry plight.

> “Sin was ritual, not rational; an act, not a thought. And this entire concept of sin was fostered by the lingering traditions of Dilmun and the days of a little paradise on earth. The tradition of Adam and the Garden of Eden also lent substance to the dream of a onetime ‘golden age’ of the dawn of the races. And all this confirmed the ideas later expressed in the belief that man had his origin in a special creation, that he started his career in perfection, and that transgression of the taboos—sin—brought him down to his later sorry plight.” [UB 89:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p2_3)

14. **Proposition**. The habitual violation of a taboo became a vice. Primitive law made vice a crime—religion made it a sin.

> “The habitual violation of a taboo became a vice; primitive law made vice a crime; religion made it a sin. Among the early tribes the violation of a taboo was a combined crime and sin.” [UB 89:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p2_4)

15. **Proposition**. Sin is deliberate disloyalty to Deity. There are degrees of disloyalty.

> “_Sin must be redefined as deliberate disloyalty to Deity_. There are degrees of disloyalty: the partial loyalty of indecision; the divided loyalty of confliction; the dying loyalty of indifference; and the death of loyalty exhibited in devotion to godless ideals.” [UB 89:10.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p10_2)

16. **Proposition**. The feeling of guilt is the consciousness of the violation of the mores—it is not necessarily sin.

> “The sense or feeling of guilt is the consciousness of the violation of the mores; it is not necessarily sin. There is no real sin in the absence of conscious disloyalty to Deity.” [UB 89:10.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p10_3)

17. **Proposition**. Even in recent times, sickness was regarded as punishment for sin. It has been attributed to demons and to the stars.

> “In comparatively recent times it has been believed that sickness is a punishment for sin, personal or racial. Among peoples traversing this level of evolution the prevailing theory is that one cannot be afflicted unless one has violated a taboo. To regard sickness and suffering as ‘arrows of the Almighty within them’ is typical of such beliefs. The Chinese and Mesopotamians long regarded disease as the result of the action of evil demons, although the Chaldeans also looked upon the stars as the cause of suffering. This theory of disease as a consequence of divine wrath is still prevalent among many reputedly civilized groups of Urantians.” [UB 90:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/90#p3_8)

18. **Proposition**. The sense of guilt may come from interrupted spiritual communion. Man may fall short of his ideals but he can be true to the purpose of finding God.

> “The sense of guilt (not the consciousness of sin) comes either from interrupted spiritual communion or from the lowering of one’s moral ideals. Deliverance from such a predicament can only come through the realization that one’s highest moral ideals are not necessarily synonymous with the will of God. Man cannot hope to live up to his highest ideals, but he can be true to his purpose of finding God and becoming more and more like him.” [UB 103:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/103#p4_3)

19. **Proposition**. The fact of finiteness is not evil or sinful. The finite world is good; it is the distortion or perversion of the finite that gives origin to evil and sin.

> “The problem of sin is not self-existent in the finite world. The fact of finiteness is not evil or sinful. The finite world was made by an infinite Creator—it is the handiwork of his divine Sons—and therefore it must be _good_. It is the misuse, distortion, and perversion of the finite that gives origin to evil and sin.” [UB 111:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p6_3)

20. **Proposition**. The existence of sin proves the reality of finite free will. Sin depicts immaturity dazzled by freedom of will which fails to perceive the supreme obligations of cosmic citizenship.

> “Sin in time-conditioned space clearly proves the temporal liberty— even license—of the finite will. Sin depicts immaturity dazzled by the freedom of the relatively sovereign will of personality while failing to perceive the supreme obligations and duties of cosmic citizenship.” [UB 118:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p7_4)

21. **Proposition**. Iniquity reveals the transient reality of that which is not God identified.

> “Iniquity in the finite domains reveals the transient reality of all God unidentified selfhood. Only as a creature becomes God identified, does he become truly real in the universes. Finite personality is not self-created, but in the superuniverse arena of choice it does selfdetermine destiny.” [UB 118:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p7_5)

22. **Proposition**. Jesus, by the power of his personal love of men, could break the hold of sin. The beauty of divine love destroys the charm of evil and sin. Forgiveness provides salvation.

> “Jesus, by the power of his personal love for men, could break the hold of sin and evil. He thereby set men free to choose better ways of living. Jesus portrayed a deliverance from the past which in itself promised a triumph for the future. Forgiveness thus provided salvation. The beauty of divine love, once fully admitted to the human heart, forever destroys the charm of sin and the power of evil.” [UB 188:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p5_3)

II. THE LUCIFER REBELLION

A. **Leader of Rebellion**

1. **Proposition**. Lucifer was a brilliant administrator. Through evil and error he embraced sin. He surrendered to the urge of self and the sophistry of spurious personal liberty.

> “Lucifer was a brilliant primary Lanonandek Son of Nebadon. He had experienced service in many systems, had been a high counselor of his group, and was distinguished for wisdom, sagacity, and efficiency. Lucifer was number 37 of his order, and when commissioned by the Melchizedeks, he was designated as one of the one hundred most able and brilliant personalities in more than seven hundred thousand of his kind. From such a magnificent beginning, through evil and error, he embraced sin and now is numbered as one of three System Sovereigns in Nebadon who have succumbed to the urge of self and surrendered to the sophistry of spurious personal liberty—rejection of universe allegiance and disregard of fraternal obligations, blindness to cosmic relationships.” [UB 53:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p0_1)

2. **Proposition**. Lucifer was a created Son of the local universe. He was System Sovereign of Satania—607 inhabited worlds.

> “Lucifer was not an ascendant being; he was a created Son of the local universe, and of him it was said: ‘You were perfect in all your ways from the day you were created till unrighteousness was found in you.’ Many times had he been in counsel with the Most Highs of Edentia. And Lucifer reigned ‘upon the holy mountain of God,’ the administrative mount of Jerusem, for he was the chief executive of a great system of 607 inhabited worlds.” [UB 53:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p1_1)

3. **Proposition**. Notwithstanding Lucifer’s sin, subordinates refrained from showing him disrespect, prior to Michael’s bestowal on Urantia.

> “Lucifer was a magnificent being, a brilliant personality; he stood next to the Most High Fathers of the constellations in the direct line of universe authority. Notwithstanding Lucifer’s transgression, subordinate intelligences refrained from showing him disrespect and disdain prior to Michael’s bestowal on Urantia. Even the archangel of Michael, at the time of Moses’ resurrection, ‘did not bring against him an accusing judgment but simply said, “the Judge rebuke you.”’ Judgment in such matters belongs to the Ancients of Days, the rulers of the superuniverse.” [UB 53:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p1_2)

4. **Proposition**. Self-contemplation is disastrous—pride, fatal.

> “Lucifer is now the fallen and deposed Sovereign of Satania. Selfcontemplation is most disastrous even to the exalted personalities of the celestial world. Of Lucifer it was said: ‘Your heart was lifted up because of your beauty; you corrupted your wisdom because of your brightness.’ Your olden prophet saw his sad estate when he wrote: ‘How are you fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning: How are you cast down, you who dared to confuse the worlds:’”   
> [UB 53:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p1_3)

5. **Proposition**. Lucifer became critical of universe administration. Gabriel detected disloyalty in Lucifer before the outbreak of rebellion.

> “Throughout this period Lucifer became increasingly critical of the entire plan of universe administration, but always professed wholehearted loyalty to the Supreme Rulers. His first outspoken disloyalty was manifested on the occasion of a visit of Gabriel to Jerusem just a few days before the open proclamation of the Lucifer Declaration of Liberty. Gabriel was so profoundly impressed with the certainty of the impending outbreak that he went direct to Edentia to confer with the Constellation Fathers regarding the measures to be employed in case of open rebellion.” [UB 53:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p2_4)

6. **Proposition**. Lucifer first became insincere—thus evil evolved into deliberate and willful sin. He rejected all offers of salvation.

> “At some point in this experience he became insincere, and evil evolved into deliberate and willful sin. That this happened is proved by the subsequent conduct of this brilliant executive. He was long offered opportunity for repentance, but only some of his subordinates ever accepted the proffered mercy. The Faithful of Days of Edentia, on the request of the Constellation Fathers, in person presented the plan of Michael for the saving of these flagrant rebels, but always was the mercy of the Creator Son rejected and rejected with increasing contempt and disdain.” [UB 53:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p2_5)

B. **Outbreak of Rebellion**

1. **Proposition**. Lucifer was permitted to establish his rebel government. The Constellation Fathers quarantined the system.

> “Lucifer was permitted fully to establish and thoroughly to organize his rebel government before Gabriel made any effort to contest the right of secession or to counterwork the rebel propaganda. But the Constellation Fathers immediately confined the action of these disloyal personalities to the system of Satania. Nevertheless, this period of delay was a time of great trial and testing to the loyal beings of all Satania. All was chaotic for a few years, and there was great confusion on the mansion worlds.” [UB 53:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p4_7)

2. **Proposition**. Gabriel assumed command of the loyal forces, proceeded to Jerusem, and took up headquarters on the Father’s world—displaying the banner of Michael.

> “Since Michael elected to remain aloof from the actual warfare of the Lucifer rebellions Gabriel called his personal staff together on Edentia and, in counsel with the Most Highs, elected to assume command of the loyal hosts of Satania. Michael remained on Salvington while Gabriel proceeded to Jerusem, and establishing himself on the sphere dedicated to the Father—the same Universal Father whose personality Lucifer and Satan had questioned—in the presence of the forgathered hosts of loyal personalities, he displayed the banner of Michael, the material emblem of the Trinity govern-ment of all creation, the three azure blue concentric circles on a white background.

> “The Lucifer emblem was a banner of white with one red-circle, in the center of which a black solid circle appeared.” [UB 53:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p5_4)

3. **Proposition**. “There was war in heaven.” Lucifer and Gabriel contested for the support of all personalities.

> “‘There was war in heaven; Michael’s commander and his angels fought against the dragon (Lucifer, Satan, and the apostate princes); and the dragon and his rebellious angels fought but prevailed not.’ This ‘war in heaven’ was not a physical battle as such a conflict might be conceived on Urantia. In the early days of the struggle Lucifer held forth continuously in the planetary amphitheater. Gabriel conducted an unceasing exposure of the rebel sophistries from his headquarters taken up near at hand. The various personalities present on the sphere who were in doubt as to their attitude would journey back and forth between these discussions until they arrived at a final decision.” [UB 53:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p5_6)

4. **Proposition**. The rebellion was system wide—37 Planetary Princes Joined. On Panoptia, the mortals refused to follow their Prince—they responded to the appeal of Ellanora.

> “The Lucifer rebellion was system wide. Thirty-seven seceding Planetary Princes swung their world administrations largely to the side of the archrebel. Only on Panoptia did the Planetary Prince fail to carry his people with him. On this world, under the guidance of the Melchizedeks, the people rallied to the support of Michael. Ellanora, a young woman of that mortal realm, grasped the leadership of the human races, and not a single soul on that strife-torn world enlisted under the Lucifer banner.” [UB 53:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p7_1)

C. **Nature of the Conflict**

1. **Proposition**. The final outbreak was launched by the Lucifer threefold Declaration of Liberty.

> “Whatever the early origins of trouble in the hearts of Lucifer and Satan, the final outbreak took form as the Lucifer Declaration of Liberty. The cause of the rebels was stated under three heads:

> > “1. _The reality of the Universal Father._ Lucifer charged that the Universal Father did not really exist, that physical gravity and space-energy were inherent in the universe, and that the Father was a myth invented by the Paradise Sons to enable them to maintain the rule of the universes in the Father’s name. He denied that personality was a gift of the Universal Father. ...
> > 
> > “2. _The universe government of the Creator Son—Michael._ Lucifer contended that the local systems should be autonomous. He protested against the right of Michael, the Creator Son, to assume sovereignty of Nebadon in the name of a hypothetical Paradise Father and require all personalities to acknowledge allegiance to this unseen Father. ...
> > 
> > “3. _The attack upon the universal plan of ascendant mortal training._ Lucifer maintained that far too much time and energy were expended upon the scheme of so thoroughly training ascending mortals in the principles of universe administrations, principles which he alleged were unethical and unsound. He protested against the agelong program for preparing the mortals of space for some unknown destiny and pointed to the presence of the finaliter corps on Jerusem as proof that these mortals had spent ages of preparation for some destiny of pure fiction. ... [UB 53:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p3_1)

2. **Proposition**. Self-assertion was the battle cry of the Lucifer rebellion —”equality of mind,” “the brotherhood of intelligence.”

> “Self-assertion was the battle cry of the Lucifer rebellion. One of his chief arguments was that, if self-government was good and right for the Melchizedeks and other groups, it was equally good for all orders of intelligence. He was bold and persistent in the advocacy of the ‘equality of mind’ and ‘the brotherhood of intelligence.’” [UB 53:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p4_2)

3. **Proposition**. The greatest losses occurred among the angelic ranks, the Material Sons, and the midwayers.

> “The greatest loss occurred in the angelic ranks, but most of the lower orders of intelligence were involved in disloyalty. Of the 681,227 Material Sons lost in Satania, ninety-five per cent were casualties of the Lucifer rebellion. Large numbers of midway creatures were lost on those individual planets whose Planetary Princes Joined the Lucifer cause.” [UB 53:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p7_8)

4. **Proposition**. Lucifer’s folly was the attempt to do the nondoable—to short-circuit time. His crime consisted in the attempted abridgment of the creature’s participation in the evolutionary struggle to attain finite perfection.

> “Lucifer’s folly was the attempt to do the nondoable, to short-circuit time in an experiential universe. Lucifer’s crime was the attempted creative disenfranchisement of every personality in Satania, the unrecognized abridgment of the creature’s personal participation—freewill participation—in the long evolutionary struggle to attain the status of light and life both individually and collectively. In so doing this onetime Sovereign of your system set the temporal purpose of his own will directly athwart the eternal purpose of God’s will as it is revealed in the bestowal of free will upon all personal creatures.” [UB 54:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p2_3)

D. **A Loyal Seraphic Commander**

1. **Proposition**. The story of Manotia—a loyal seraphic commander who acted in place of a defaulting superior.

> See: [UB 53:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p6_1)

E. **Son of Man on Urantia**

1. **Proposition**. Lucifer and Satan roamed the Satania system until the bestowal of Michael.

> “Lucifer and Satan freely roamed the Satania system until the completion of the bestowal mission of Michael on Urantia. They were last on your world together during the time of their combined assault upon the Son of Man.

> “Formerly, when the Planetary Princes, the ‘Sons of God,’ were periodically assembled, ‘Satan came also,’ claiming that he represented all of the isolated worlds of the fallen Planetary Princes. But he has not been accorded such liberty on Jerusem since Michael’s terminal bestowal. Subsequent to their effort to corrupt Michael when in the bestowal flesh, all sympathy for Lucifer and Satan has perished throughout all Satania, that is, outside the isolated worlds of sin.”   
> [UB 53:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p8_1)

2. **Proposition**. Since Michael’s triumph on Urantia, all Norlatiadek has been cleansed of rebels.

> “Since the triumph of Christ, all Norlatiadek is being cleansed of sin and rebels. Sometime before Michael’s death in the flesh the fallen Lucifer’s associate, Satan, sought to attend such an Edentia conclave, but the solidification of sentiment against the archrebels had reached the point where the doors of sympathy were so well-nigh universally closed that there could be found no standing ground for the Satania adversaries. When there exists no open door for the reception of evil, there exists no opportunity for the entertainment of sin. The doors of the hearts of all Edentia closed against Satan; he was unanimously rejected by the assembled System Sovereigns, and it was at this time that the Son of Man ‘beheld Satan fall as lightning from heaven.’” [UB 43:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p4_9)

3. **Proposition**. The bestowal of Michael terminated the Lucifer rebellion in Satania aside from the planets of the apostate Planetary Princes.

> “The bestowal of Michael terminated the Lucifer rebellion in all Satania aside from the planets of the apostate Planetary Princes. And this was the significance of Jesus’ personal experience, Just before his death in the flesh, when he one day exclaimed to his disciples, ‘And I beheld Satan fall as lightning from heaven.’ He had come with Lucifer to Urantia for the last crucial struggle.” [UB 53:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p8_3)

4. **Proposition**. The last act of Michael before leaving Urantia was to offer mercy to Caligastia and Daligastia—they spurned the mercy.

> “The last act of Michael before leaving Urantia was to offer mercy to Caligastia and Daligastia, but they spurned his tender proffer. Caligastia, your apostate Planetary Prince, is still free on Urantia to prosecute his nefarious designs, but he has absolutely no power to enter the minds of men, neither can he draw near to their souls to tempt or corrupt them unless they really desire to be cursed with his wicked presence.” [UB 53:8.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p8_6)

5. **Proposition**. The case of Gabriel vs. Lucifer is now pending. The archrebels are now detained on the Jerusem prison worlds.

> “Satan could come to Urantia because you had no Son of standing in residence—neither Planetary Prince nor Material Son. Machiventa Melchizedek has since been proclaimed vicegerent Planetary Prince of Urantia, and the opening of the case of Gabriel vs. Lucifer has signalized the inauguration of temporary planetary regimes on all the isolated worlds. It is true that Satan did periodically visit Caligastia and others of the fallen princes right up to the time of the presentation of these revelations, when there occurred the first hearing of Gabriel’s plea for the annihilation of the archrebels. Satan is now unqualifiedly detained on the Jerusem prison worlds.” [UB 53:9.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p9_4)

6. **Proposition**. Urantia is just as lovingly cherished and watched over as if the sphere had never been betrayed by a faithless Planetary Prince.

> “Your isolated world is not forgotten in the counsels of the universe. Urantia is not a cosmic orphan stigmatized by sin and shut away from divine watchcare by rebellion. From Uversa to Salvington and on down to Jerusem, even in Havona and on Paradise, they all know we are here; and you mortals now dwelling on Urantia are just as lovingly cherished and just as faithfully watched over as if the sphere had never been betrayed by a faithless Planetary Prince, even more so. It is eternally true, ‘the Father himself loves you.’” [UB 114:7.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p7_17)

F. **True and False Liberty**

1. **Proposition**. Liberty is self-destroying when unconditioned and uncontrolled. True liberty is regardful of social equity, cosmic fairness, universe fraternity, and divine obligations.

> “Liberty is a self-destroying technique of cosmic existence when its motivation is unintelligent, unconditioned, and uncontrolled. True liberty is progressively related to reality and is ever regardful of social equity, cosmic fairness, universe fraternity, and divine obligations.” [UB 54:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p1_3)

2. **Proposition**. Liberty is suicidal when divorced from its reality obligations.

> “Liberty is suicidal when divorced from material justice, intellectual fairness, social forbearance, moral duty, and spiritual values. Liberty is nonexistent apart from cosmic reality, and all personality reality is proportional to its divinity relationships.” [UB 54:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p1_4)

3. **Proposition**. True liberty is the associate of self-respect; false liberty is the consort of self-admiration. True liberty is the fruit of self-control; false liberty, the assumption of self-assertion.

> “True liberty is the associate of genuine self-respect; false liberty is the consort of self-admiration. True liberty is the fruit of self-control; false liberty, the assumption of self-assertion Self-control leads to altruistic service; self-admiration tends towards the exploitation of others for the selfish aggrandizement of such a mistaken individual as is willing to sacrifice righteous attainment for the sake of possessing unjust power over his fellow beings.” [UB 54:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p1_6)

4. **Proposition**. The Lucifer manifesto, masquerading as a charter of freedom, was a monumental theft of personal liberty.

> “Thus does the Lucifer manifesto, masquerading in the habiliments of liberty, stand forth in the clear light of reason as a monumental threat to consummate the theft of personal liberty and to do it on a scale that has been approached only twice in all the history of Nebadon.” [UB 54:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p2_3)

5. **Proposition**. Most of the liberties Lucifer sought he already had; others he would have received in the future. The desire to possess one’s future liberties _now_ was the sin of Lucifer.

> “Most of the liberties which Lucifer sought he already had; others he was to receive in the future. All these precious endowments were lost by giving way to impatience and yielding to a desire to possess what one craves now and to possess it in defiance of all obligation to respect the rights and liberties of all other beings composing the universe of universes. Ethical obligations are innate, divine, and universal.” [UB 54:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p4_4)

6. **Proposition**. Man should learn how to enjoy liberty without license and pleasure without debauchery.

> “Someday man should learn how to enjoy liberty without license, nourishment without gluttony, and pleasure without debauchery. Self-control is a better human policy of behavior regulation than is extreme selfdenial. Nor did Jesus ever teach these unreasonable views to his followers.” [UB 89:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p3_7)

7. **Proposition**. Lucifer sought to disrupt the time governor acting to restrain the premature attainment of certain liberties.

> “Lucifer similarly sought to disrupt the time governor operating in restraint of the premature attainment of certain liberties in the local system. A local system settled in light and life has experientially achieved those viewpoints and insights which make feasible the operation of many techniques that would be disruptive and destructive in the preset tied eras of that very realm.” [UB 118:8.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p8_9)

G. **Mercy Time Lag**

1. **Proposition**. Lucifer pointed to the merciful delays of justice as proof that the universe government was powerless to stop the rebellion.

> “All the merciful delays of justice Lucifer pointed to as evidence of the inability of the government of the Paradise Sons to stop the rebellion. He would openly defy and arrogantly challenge Michael, Immanuel, and the Ancients of Days and then point to the fact that no action ensued as postive evidence of the impotency of the universe and the superuniverse governments.” [UB 53:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p4_5)

2. **Proposition**. Salvation was offered the rebels, but none of the leaders accepted. Thousands of the angels and others did and were later granted rehabilitation.

> “Early in the days of the Lucifer rebellion, salvation was offered all rebels by Michael. To all who would show proof of sincere repentance, he offered, upon his attainment of complete universe sovereignty, forgiveness and reinstatement in some form of universe service. None of the leaders accepted this merciful proffer. But thousands of the angels and the lower orders of celestial beings, including hundreds of the Material Sons and Daughters, accepted the mercy proclaimed by the Panoptians and were given rehabilitation at the time of Jesus’ resurrection nineteen hundred years ago. These beings have since been transferred to the Father’s world of Jerusem, where they must be held, technically, until the Uversa courts hand down a decision in the matter of Gabriel _vs_.Lucifer. But no one doubts that, when the annihilation verdict is issued, these repentant and salvaged personalities will be exempted from the decree of extinction. These probationary souls now labor with the Panoptians in the work of caring for the Father’s world.” [UB 53:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p9_1)

3. **Proposition**. Justice can act instantly when not restrained by mercy. But mercy always provides a time lag—the saving interval between seedtime and harvest.

> “Supreme justice can act instantly when not restrained by divine mercy. But the ministry of mercy to the children of time and space always provides for this time lag, this saving interval between seedtime and harvest. If the seed sowing is good, this interval provides for the testing and upbuilding of character; if the seed sowing is evil, this merciful delay provides time for repentance and rectification. This time delay in the adjudication and execution of evildoers is inherent in the mercy ministry of the seven super-universes. This restraint of justice by mercy proves that God is love, and that such, a God of love dominates the universes and in mercy controls the fate and judgment of all his creatures.” [UB 54:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p4_6)

4. **Proposition**. A Mighty Messenger recounts twelve reasons why Lucifer and his associates were not sooner interned or adjudicated.

> See: [UB 54:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p5_1)

H. **Planetary Prince’s Rebellion**

1. **Proposition**. Caligastia resisted authority and resented supervision. He was inclined to join any party of protest.

> “In looking back over the long career of Caligastia, we find only one outstanding feature of his conduct that might have challenged attentions he was ultraindividualistic. He was inclined to take sides with almost every party of protest, and he was usually sympathetic with those who gave mild expression to implied criticism. We detect the early appearance of this tendency to be restless under authority, to mildly resent all forms of supervision. While slightly resentful of senior counsel and somewhat restive under superior authority, nonetheless, whenever a test had come, he had always proved loyal to the universe rulers and obedient to the mandates of the Constellation Fathers, No real fault was ever found in him up to the time of his shameful betrayal of Urantia.” [UB 66:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/66#p8_1)

2. **Proposition**. When Satan informed Caligastia of Lucifer’s “Declaration of Liberty,” the Prince agreed to betray the planet.

> “In the course of this inspection Satan informed Caligastia of Lucifer’s then proposed ‘Declaration of Liberty,’ and as we now know, the Prince agreed to betray the planet upon the announcement of the rebellion. The loyal universe personalities look with peculiar disdain upon Prince Caligastia because of this premeditated betrayal of trust. The Creator Son voiced this contempt when he said: ‘You are like your leader, Lucifer, and you have sinfully perpetuated his iniquity. He was a falsifier from the beginning of his self-exaltation because he abode not in the truth.’” [UB 67:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p1_2)

3. **Proposition**. Caligastia was proclaimed “God of Urantia and supreme over all.” All intelligent beings on the planet were compelled to choose between sin and righteousness.

> “Daligastia formally proclaimed Caligastia ‘God of Urantia and supreme over all.’ With this proclamation before them, the issues were clearly drawn; and each group drew off by itself and began deliberations, discussions destined eventually to determine the fate of every superhuman personality on the planet.

> “Seraphim and cherubim and other celestial beings were involved in the decisions of this bitter struggle, this long and sinful conflict. Many superhuman groups that chanced to be on Urantia at the time of its isolation were detained here and, like the seraphim and their associates, were compelled to choose between sin and righteousness— between the ways of Lucifer and the will of the unseen Father.” [UB 67:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p2_4)

4. **Proposition**. Under the Caligastia delusions of quick human improvement, society rapidly reverted to its old biologic level.

> “The Caligastia scheme for the immediate reconstruction of human society in accordance with his ideas of individual freedom and group liberties, proved a swift and more or less complete failure. Society quickly sank back to its old biologic level, and the forward struggle began all over, starting not very far in advance of where it was at the beginning of the Caligastia regime, this upheaval having left the world in confusion worse confounded.

> “One hundred and sixty-two years after the rebellion a tidal wave swept up over Dalamatia, and the planetary headquarters sank beneath the waters of the sea, and this land did not again emerge until almost every vestige of the noble culture of those splendid ages had been obliterated.” [UB 67:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p5_3)

5. **Proposition**. The most shocking of all Caligastia’s callous perfidy was his perversion of the teaching in the Urantia schools.

> “It was one of the most profoundly shocking episodes of this rebellion for me to learn of the callous perfidy of one of my own order of sonship, Caligastia, who, in deliberation and with malice aforethought, systematically perverted the instruction and poisoned the teaching provided in all the Urantia planetary schools in operation at that time. The wreck of these schools was speedy and complete.” [UB 50:4.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/50#p4_12)

6. **Proposition**. The Adjusters of the rebel members of the Prince’s staff still tarry on Jerusem—probably will so continue until the Lucifer rebellion is finally adjudicated.

> “When the staff of one hundred came to Urantia, they were temporarily detached from their Thought Adjusters. Immediately upon the arrival of the Melchizedek receivers the loyal personalities (except Van) were returned to Jerusem and were reunited with their waiting Adjusters. We know not the fate of the sixty staff rebels; their Adjusters still tarry on Jerusem. Matters will undoubtedly rest as they now are until the entire Lucifer rebellion is finally adjudicated and the fate of all participants decreed.” [UB 67:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p4_5)

7. **Proposition**. The Melchizedek receivers, with the aid of Van, performed heroic work for Urantia. In a thousand years they had 350 outposts of civilization.

> “The twelve Melchizedek receivers of Urantia did heroic work. They preserved the remnants of civilization, and their planetary policies were faithfully executed by Van. Within one thousand years after the rebellion he had more than three hundred and fifty advanced groups scattered abroad in the world. These outposts of civilization consisted largely of the descendants of the loyal Andonites slightly admixed with the Sangik races, particularly the blue men, and with the Nodites.” [UB 67:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p6_6)

8. **Proposition**. Every person born on Urantia has been time-penalized by the Caligastia rebellion and the Adamic default. But no person has suffered in his personal religious experience because of these blunders.

> “Caligastia rebelled, Adam and Eve did default, but no mortal subsequently born on Urantia has suffered in his personal spiritual experience because of these blunders. Every mortal born on Urantia since Caligastia’s rebellion has been in some manner time-penalized, but the future welfare of such souls has never been in the least eternity-jeopardized. No person is ever made to suffer vital spiritual deprivation because of the sin of another. Sin is wholly personal as to moral guilt or spiritual consequences, notwithstanding its farflung repercussions in administrative, intellectual, and social domains.” [UB 67:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p7_7)

I. **Van—The Steadfast**

1. **Proposition**. Van and his associates retired to the highlands west of India. They placed human affairs in the hands of ten commissions of four members each.

> “The followers of Van early withdrew to the highlands west of India, where they were exempt from attacks by the confused races of the lowlands, and from which place of retirement they planned for the rehabilitation of the world as their early Badonite predecessors had once _all_ unwittingly worked for the welfare of mankind just before the days of the birth of the Sangik tribes.

> “Before the arrival of the Melchizedek receivers, Van placed the administration of human affairs in the hands of ten commissions of four each, groups identical with those of the Prince’s regime. The senior resident Life Carriers assumed temporary leadership of this council of forty, which functioned throughout the seven years of waiting. Similar groups of Amadonites assumed these responsibilities when the thirty-nine loyal staff members returned to Jerusem.” [UB 67:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p6_1)

2. **Proposition**. Van was left on Urantia until the time of Adam. He and Amadon were sustained by the tree of life and the Melchizedek ministry for over one hundred fifty thousand years.

> “Van was left on Urantia until the time of Adam, remaining as titular head of all superhuman personalities functioning on the planet. He and Amadon were sustained by the technique of the tree of life in conjunction with the specialized life ministry of the Melchizedeks for over one hundred and fifty thousand years.” [UB 67:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p6_4)

J. **The Mortal Heroes**

1. **Proposition**. While ascending mortals were vulnerable, not a single member of the ascender group on Jerusem participated in the Lucifer rebellion.

> “The ascending mortals were vulnerable, but they withstood the sophistries of rebellion better than the lower spirits. While many on the lower mansion worlds, those who had not attained final fusion with their Adjusters, fell, it is recorded to the glory of the wisdom of the ascension scheme that not a single member of the ascendant citizenship resident on Jerusem participated in the Lucifer rebellion.” [UB 53:7.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p7_10)

2. **Proposition**. Evolutionary survival experience is the greatest security against rebellion. This Jerusem band of faithful ascenders numbered 187,432,811.

> “And on to Salvington, Uversa, and Paradise went this message of assurance that the survival experience of mortal ascension is the greatest security against rebellion and the surest safeguard against sin. This noble Jerusem band of faithful mortals numbered just 187,432,811.” [UB 53:7.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p7_12)

3. **Proposition**. Forty members of the Prince’s staff on Urantia remained loyal. There was a terrible loss of angels and midwayers.

> “On Urantia forty members of the corporeal staff of one hundred (including Van) refused to join the insurrection. Many of the staff’s human assistants (modified and otherwise) were also brave and noble defenders of Michael and his universe government. There was a terrible loss of personalities among seraphim and cherubim. Almost one half of tie administrator and transition seraphim assigned to the planet joined their leader and Daligastia in support of the cause of Lucifer. Forty thousand one hundred and nineteen of the primary midway creatures joined hands with Caligastia, but the remainder of these beings regained true to their trust.” [UB 67:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p3_2)

4. **Proposition**. Amadon is the outstanding hero of the Lucifer rebellion. This descendant of Andon and Fonta was associated with Van of the Prince’s staff.

> “Amadon is the outstanding human hero of the Lucifer rebellion. This male descendant of Andon and Fonta was one of the one hundred who contributed life plasm to the Prince’s staff, and ever since that event he had been attached to Van as his associate and human assistant. Amadon elected to stand with his chief throughout the long and trying struggle. And it was an inspiring sight to behold this child of the evolutionary races standing unmoved by the sophistries of Daligastia while throughout the seven-year struggle he and his loyal associates resisted with unyielding fortitude all of the deceptive teachings of the brilliant Caligastia.” [UB 67:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p3_8)

5. **Proposition**. Amadon was outstanding in his rejection of the flood tides of sedition. With Van, he was immovable in his loyalty to Michael.

> “The Lucifer rebellion was withstood by many courageous beings on the various worlds of Satania; but the records of Salvington portray Amadon as the outstanding character of the entire system in his glorious rejection of the flood tides of sedition and in his unswerving devotion to Van—they stood together unmoved in their loyalty to the supremacy of the invisible Father and his Son Michael.” [UB 67:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p8_1)

6. **Proposition**. The steadfastness of Amadon in the seven years of testing was of universe concern. The loyalty of Amadon and his 143 comrades has done more good than can be outweighed by the evil of the rebellion.

> “At the time of these momentous transactions I was stationed on Edentia, and I am still conscious of the exhilaration I experienced as I perused the Salvington broadcasts which told from day to day of the unbelievable steadfastness, the transcendent devotion, and the exquisite loyalty of this onetime semisavage springing from the experimental and original stock of the Andonic race.

> “From Edentia up through Salvington and even on to Uversa, for seven long years the first inquiry of all subordinate celestial life regarding the Satania rebellion, ever and always, was: ‘What of Amadon of Urantia, does he still stand unmoved?’

> “If the Lucifer rebellion has handicapped the local system and its fallen worlds, if the loss of this Son and his misled associates has temporarily hampered the progress of the constellation of Norlatiadek, then weigh the effect of the far-flung presentation of the inspiring performance of this one child of nature and his determined band of 143 comrades in standing steadfast for the higher concepts of universe management and administration in the face of such tremendous and adverse pressure exerted by his disloyal superiors. And let me assure you, this has already done more good in the universe of Nebadon and the superuniverse of Orvonton than can ever be outweighed by the sum total of all the evil and sorrow of the Lucifer rebellion.” [UB 67:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p8_2)

III. REPERCUSSIONS OF SIN

1. **Proposition**. Urantia peoples are suffering the consequences of a double deprivation—the Caligastia rebellion and the Adamic default.

> “The Urantia peoples are suffering the consequences of a double deprivation of help in this task of progressive planetary spiritual attainment. The Caligastia upheaval precipitated world-wide confusion and robbed _all_ subsequent generations of the moral assistance which a well-ordered society would have provided. But even more disastrous was the Adamic default in that it deprived the races of that superior type of physical nature which would have been more consonant with spiritual aspirations.” [UB 34:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p7_4)

2. **Proposition**. Ever since the Lucifer rebellion the Edentia Fathers have exercised a special care over Urantia and the other isolated worlds.

> “Ever since the Lucifer rebellion the Edentia Fathers have exercised a special care over Urantia and the other isolated worlds of Satania. Long ago the prophet recognized the controlling hand of the Constellation Fathers in the affairs of nations. ‘When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people.’” [UB 43:5.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p5_16)

3. **Proposition**. At first the Lucifer upheaval appeared as an unmitigated calamity. After twenty-five thousand years the good had come to equal the evil. Now the good resulting from the rebellion is more than a thousand times the sum of the evil.

> “At first the Lucifer upheaval appeared to be an unmitigated calamity to the system and to the universe. Gradually benefits began to accrue. With the passing of twenty-five thousand years of system time (twenty thousand years of Urantia time), the Melchizedeks began to teach that the good resulting from Lucifer’s folly had come to equal the evil incurred. The sum of evil had by that time become almost stationary, continuing to increase only on certain isolated worlds, while the beneficial repercussions continued to multiply and extend out through the universe and superuniverse, even to Havona. The Melchizedeks now teach that the good resulting from the Satania rebellion is more than a thousand times the sum of all the evil.” [UB 54:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p6_6)

4. **Proposition**. Sin is fraught with fatal consequences to personality survival only when it is the attitude of the whole being—the choice of mind and the will of the soul.

> “But the full consequences of erroneous thinking, evil-doing, or sinful planning are experienced only on the level of actual performance. The transgression of universe law may be fatal in the physical realm without seriously involving the mind or impairing the spiritual experience. Sin is fraught with fatal consequences to personality survival only when it is the attitude of the whole being, when it stands for the choosing of the mind and the willing of the soul.” [UB 67:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p7_4)

IV. SACRIFICES—ATONEMENT

1. **Proposition**. Primitive man was so surrounded by grasping gods—creditor deities—that it required priests, rituals, and sacrifices to get him out of debt. Original sin started every person out in debt to spirit powers.

> “Surrounded by so many sensitive spirits and grasping gods, primitive man was face to face with such a host of creditor deities that it required all the priests, ritual, and sacrifices throughout an entire lifetime to get him out of spiritual debt. The doctrine of original sin, or racial guilt, started every person out in serious debt to the spirit powers.” [UB 89:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p4_6)

2. **Proposition**. Moses undertook to end human sacrifice by offering a ransom as a substitute. Many backward tribes were greatly weakened by the loss of their first-born sons.

> “Moses attempted to end human sacrifices by inaugurating the ransom as a substitute. He established a systematic schedule which enabled his people to escape the worst results of their rash and foolish vows. Lands, properties, and children could be redeemed according to the established fees, which were payable to the priests. Those groups which ceased to sacrifice their first-born soon possessed great advantages over less advanced neighbors who continued these atrocious acts. Many such backward tribes were not only greatly weakened by this loss of sons, but even the succession of leadership was often broken.” [UB 89:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p7_1)

3. **Proposition**. Sacrifice became associated with the idea of covenant. This was a major step in the stabilization of religion. A covenant takes the place of luck, fear, and superstition.

> “The custom of sacrifice eventually became associated, as a result of advancing teachings, with the idea of the covenant. At last, the gods were conceived of as entering into real agreements with man; and this was a major step in the stabilization of religion. Law, a covenant, takes the place of luck, fear, and superstition.” [UB 89:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p8_4)

4. **Proposition**. Evolutionary man eventually acquired such moral dignity that he dared to bargain with his gods—to enter into covenant relations with Deity.

> “But the idea of making a covenant with the gods did finally arrive. _Evolutionary man eventually acquired such moral dignity that he dared to bargain with his gods_. And so the business of offering sacrifices gradually developed into the game of man’s philosophic bargaining with God.” [UB 89:8.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p8_6)

V. FORGIVENESS OF SIN

1. **Proposition**. Primitive man would ask forgiveness for sins he intended to commit the following week. Sin was largely ritual.

> “The idea of confession and forgiveness early appeared in primitive religion. Men would ask forgiveness at a public meeting for sins they intended to commit the following week.

Confession was merely a rite of remission, also a public notification of defilement, a ritual of crying ‘unclean, unclean:’ Then followed all the ritualistic schemes of purification. All ancient peoples practiced these meaningless ceremonies. Many apparently hygienic customs of the early tribes were largely ceremonial.” [UB 89:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p2_5)

2. **Proposition**. The majority of the victims of the Lucifer rebellion have long since repented of their folly. All such penitents will be restored to some phase of universe service following the final adjudication of the rebellion.

> “The vast majority of all human and superhuman beings who were victims of the Lucifer rebellion on Jerusem and the various misled planets have long since heartily repented of their folly; and we truly believe that all such sincere penitents will in some manner be rehabilitated and restored to some phase of universe service when the Ancients of Days finally complete the adjudication of the affairs of the Satania rebellion, which they have so recently begun.” [UB 67:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p4_7)

3. **Proposition**. While confession of sin is a manful repudiation of disloyalty, it in no wise mitigates the time-space consequences of such disloyalty.

> “The confession of sin is a manful repudiation of disloyalty, but it in no wise mitigates the time-space consequences of such disloyalty. But confession—sincere recognition of the nature of sin—is essential to religious growth and spiritual progress.” [UB 89:10.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p10_5)

4. **Proposition**. The forgiveness of sin marks the resumption of loyalty relations with Deity following a period of the human consciousness of the lapse of such relations. Forgiveness does not have to be sought—only received.

> “The forgiveness of sin by Deity is the renewal of loyalty relations following a period of the human consciousness of the lapse of such relations as the consequence of conscious rebellion. The forgiveness does not have to be sought, only received as the consciousness of re-establishment of loyalty relations between the creature and the Creator. And all the loyal sons of God are happy, service-loving and ever-progressive in the Paradise ascent.” [UB 89:10.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p10_6)

VI. NATURAL URGES

1. **Proposition**. On normal worlds, mortals do not experience constant warfare between their physical and spiritual natures. Their upward climb is more like educational training than an intense conflict.

> “The mortals of a normal world do not experience constant warfare between their physical and spiritual natures. They are confronted with the necessity of climbing up from the animal levels of existence to the higher planes of spiritual living, but this ascent is more like undergoing an educational training when compared with the intense conflicts of Urantia mortals in this realm of the divergent material and spiritual natures.” [UB 34:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p7_3)

2. **Proposition**. Poverty was a part of the ritual of mortification which became incorporated into the teachings of many religions. Penance was the negative form of this ritual.

> “Poverty was just a part of the ritual of the mortification of the flesh which, unfortunately, became incorporated into the writings and teachings of many religions, notably Christianity. Penance is the negative form of this oftimes foolish ritual of renunciation. But _all_ this taught the savage _self-control_, and that was a worthwhile advancement in social evolution.” [UB 89:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p3_3)

3. **Proposition**. Many of these early rituals were worthwhile because they taught self—control and self-denial.

> “Self-denial and self-control were two of the greatest social gains from early evolutionary religion. Self—control gave man a new philosophy of life; it taught him the art of augmenting life’s fraction by lowering the denominator of personal demands instead of always attempting to increase the numerator of selfish gratification.” [UB 89:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/89#p3_3)

4. **Proposition**. The animal nature may be hereditary, but sin is not transmitted from parent to child. Sin is a conscious rebellion against the Father’s will.

> “The animal nature—the tendency toward evildoing—may be hereditary, but sin is not transmitted from parent to child. Sin is the act of conscious and deliberate rebellion against the Father’s will and the Sons’ laws by an individual will creature.” [UB 188:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/188#p4_5)

5. **Proposition**. Judas met defeat in the battle of life because of many factors.

See: [UB 193:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/193#p4_1)

VII. PENALTY FOR SIN

1. **Proposition**. Wholehearted identification with sin is the equivalent of nonexistence—annihilation. Between the cause and the penalty there is always a delay to allow for repentance or adjudication.

> “Although conscious and wholehearted identification with evil (sin) is the equivalent of nonexistence (annihilation), there must always intervene between the time of such personal identification with sin and the execution of the penalty—the automatic, result of such a willful embrace of evil—a period of time of sufficient length to allow for such an adjudication of such an individual’s universe status as will prove entirely satisfactory to all related universe personalities, and which will be so fair and just as to win the approval of the sinner himself.” [UB 54:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/54#p3_2)

2. **Proposition**. The system circuits of Satania will not be restored as long as Lucifer lives.

> “We do not look for a removal of the present Satania restrictions until the Ancients of Days make final disposition of the archrebels. The system circuits will not be reinstated so long as Lucifer lives. Meantime, he is wholly inactive.” [UB 53:9.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p9_6)

VIII. THE DEVIL

1. **Proposition**. The doctrine of a personal devil—notwithstanding it had some foundation in the presence of Caligastia—was wholly fictitious. The freewill of man is supreme in all moral affairs.

> “The doctrine of a personal devil on Urantia, though it had some foundation in the planetary presence of the traitorous and iniquitous Caligastia, was nevertheless wholly fictitious in its teachings that such a ‘devil’ could influence the normal human mind against its free and natural choosing. Even before Michael’s bestowal on Urantia, neither Caligastia nor Daligastia was ever able to oppress mortals or to coerce any normal individual into doing anything against the human will. The free will of man is supreme in moral affairs; even the indwelling Thought Adjuster refuses to compel man to think a single thought or to perform a single act against the choosing of man’s own will.” [UB 66:8.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/66#p8_6)

2. **Proposition**. The separate destiny of good and bad spirits led to the concept of heaven and hell. Primitive peoples thought they existed after death as before, therefore they dreaded to grow old.

> “Early man entertained no ideas of hell or future punishment. The savage looked upon the future life as just like this one, minus all ill luck. Later on, a separate destiny for good ghosts and bad ghosts—heaven and hell—was conceived. But since many primitive races believed that man entered the next life just as he left this one, they did not relish the idea of becoming old and decrepit. The aged much preferred to be killed before becoming too infirm.” [UB 86:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/86#p4_7)


<br>

