---
title: "Workbook V — Theology of The Urantia Book — 31. Thought Adjusters"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/30">30. The Kingdom of Heaven</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/32">32. Prayer and Worship</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1961 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

## I. Origin And Classification Of Thought Adjusters  

1. **Proposition**. Thought Adjusters come direct from the Universal Father - they are fragmentized entities of the infinite God.  
	> “Though there are diverse opinions regarding the mode of the bestowal of Thought Adjusters, there exist no such differences concerning their origin; all are agreed that they proceed direct from the Universal Father, the First Source and Center. They are not created beings; they are fragmentized entities constituting the factual presence of the infinite God.” [UB 107:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p1_2)  

2. **Proposition**. Descending from God, the Adjuster embraces the mortal soul, and ascends to God.  
	> “From the heights of eternal glory the divine Spirit descends, by a long series of steps, to meet you as you are and where you are and then, in the partnership of faith, lovingly to embrace the soul of mortal origin and to embark on the sure and certain retracement of those steps of condescension, never stopping until the evolutionary soul is safely exalted to the very heights of bliss from which the divine Spirit originally sallied forth on this mission of mercy and ministry.” [UB 34:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p6_3)  

3. **Proposition**. Divine spirits, seeking their levels of origin, bring with them the faith sons of God.  
	> “Spiritual forces unerringly seek and attain their own original levels. Having gone out from the Eternal, they are certain to return thereto, bringing with them all those children of time and space who have espoused the leading and teaching of the indwelling Adjuster, those who have been truly 'born of the Spirit,' the faith sons of God.” [UB 34:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p6_4)  

4. **Proposition**. The transit time of an Adjuster from Divinington to Urantia is less than 118 hours.  
	> "When once the Adjusters are actually dispatched from Divinington, practically no time intervenes between that moment and the hour of their appearance in the minds of their chosen subjects. The average transit time of an Adjuster from Divinington to Urantia is 117 hours, 42 minutes, and 7 seconds. Virtually all of this time is occupied with registration on Uversa.“ [UB 108:1.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p1_9)  

5. **Proposition**. Seven grand divisions of Adjusters are recognized.  
	> "Adjusters are individuated as virgin entities, and all are destined to become either liberated, fused, or Personalized Monitors. We understand that there are seven orders of Thought Adjusters, although we do not altogether comprehend these divisions. We often refer to the different orders as follows:  
	> 1. _Virgin Adjusters..._  
	> 2. _Advanced Adjusters..._  
	> 3. _Supreme Adjusters..._  
	> 4. _Vanished Adjusters..._  
	> 5. _Liberated Adjusters..._  
	> 6. _Fused Adjusters..._  
	> 7. _Personalized Adjusters..._ [UB 107:2.1-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p2_1)  


## II. Nature Of Thought Adjusters  

1. **Proposition**. While limited in extensiveness, in intensiveness of meaning, value, and fact, they are absolute.  
	> “The actual source of the Adjuster must be infinite, and before fusion with the immortal soul of an evolving mortal, the reality of the Adjuster must border on absoluteness. Adjusters are not absolutes in the universal sense, in the Deity sense, but they are probably true absolutes within the potentialities of their fragmented nature. They are qualified as to universality but not as to nature; in extensiveness they are limited, but in intensiveness of meaning, value, and fact _they are absolute_. For this reason we sometimes denominate the divine gifts as the qualified absolute fragments of the Father.” [UB 107:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p4_2)  

2. **Proposition**. Adjusters are the divine presence - they are true realities.  
	> “Thought Adjusters are not personalities, but they are real entities; they are truly and perfectly individualized, although they are never, while indwelling mortals, actually personalized. Thought Adjusters are not true personalities; they are _true realities_, realities of the purest order known in the universe of universes — they are the divine presence. Though not personal, these marvelous fragments of the Father are commonly referred to as beings and sometimes, in view of the spiritual phases of their present ministry to mortals, as spirit entities.” [UB 107:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p7_1)  

3. **Proposition**. While Adjusters utilize gravity; they are not subject thereto.  
	> “And yet, while the Adjusters utilize the material-gravity circuits, they are not subject thereto as is material creation. The Adjusters are fragments of the ancestor of gravity, not the consequentials of gravity; they have segmentized on a universe level of existence which is hypothetically antecedent to gravity appearance.” [UB 107:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p6_6)  

4. **Proposition**. Adjusters are not personalities, but they have prerogatives of will, choice, and love.  
	> If Thought Adjusters are not personalities having prerogatives of will and powers of choice, how then can they select mortal subjects and volunteer to indwell these creatures of the evolutionary worlds? This is a question easy to ask, but probably no being in the universe of universes has ever found the exact answer. Even my order of personality, the Solitary Messengers, does not fully understand the endowment of will, choice, and love in entities that are not personal.“[UB 107:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p7_2)  

5. **Proposition**. A fragment of the living God resides within the mind of every morally conscious Urantian.  
	> “If the finite mind of man is unable to comprehend how so great and so majestic a God as the Universal Father can descend from his eternal abode in infinite perfection to fraternize with the individual human creature, then must such a finite intellect rest assurance of divine fellowship upon the truth of the fact that an actual fragment of the living God resides within the intellect of every normal-minded and morally conscious Urantia mortal. The indwelling Thought Adjusters are a part of the eternal Deity of the Paradise Father. Man does not have to go farther than his own inner experience of the soul's contemplation of this spiritual-reality presence to find God and attempt communion with him.“ [UB 5:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p0_1)  

6. **Proposition**. This fragment of God is designed to be one with all survivors.  
	> . . . There sojourns within each moral being of this planet a fragment of God, a part and parcel of divinity. It is not yet yours by right of possession, but it is designedly intended to be one with you if you survive the mortal existence. [UB 1:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p4_3)  


## III. Mystery Monitors - Pure Spirits  

1. **Proposition**. This divine presence in the minds of men is the mystery of mysteries.  
	> ”The infinity of the perfection of God is such that it eternally constitutes him mystery. And the greatest of all the unfathomable mysteries of God is the phenomenon of the divine indwelling of mortal minds. The manner in which the Universal Father sojourns with the creatures of time is the most profound of all universe mysteries; the divine presence in the mind of man is the mystery of mysteries." [UB 1:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p4_1)  

2. **Proposition**. The Mystery Monitors are the Father's presence.  
	> ”Although the Universal Father is personally resident on Paradise, at the very center of the universes, he is also actually present on the worlds of space in the minds of his countless children of time, for he indwells them as the Mystery Monitors. The eternal Father is at one and the same time farthest removed from, and most intimately associated with, his planetary mortal sons." [UB 107:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p0_1)  

3. **Proposition**. Adjusters are the Father's love incarnate in human souls, who thereby attain the divine presence on Paradise.  
	> “The Adjusters are the actuality of the Father's love incarnate in the souls of men; they are the veritable promise of man's eternal career imprisoned within the mortal mind; they are the essence of man's perfected finaliter personality, which he can foretaste in time as he progressively masters the divine technique of achieving the living of the Father's will, step by step, through the ascension of universe upon universe until he actually attains the divine presence of his Paradise Father.” [UB 107:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p0_2)  

4. **Proposition**. Nonpersonalized and nonfused Adjusters are visible only to Personalized Adjusters.  
	> "Nonpersonalized Adjusters are visible only to Personalized Adjusters. My order, the Solitary Messengers, together with Inspired Trinity Spirits, can detect the presence of Adjusters by means of spiritual reactive phenomena; and even seraphim can sometimes discern the spirit luminosity of supposed association with the presence of Monitors in the material minds of men; but none of us are able actually to discern the real presence of Adjusters, not unless they have been personalized, albeit their natures are perceivable in union with the fused personalities of the ascending mortals from the evolutionary worlds. The universal invisibility of the Adjusters is strongly suggestive of their high and exclusive divine origin and nature.“ [UB 107:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p4_4)  

5. **Proposition**. Adjusters are identified by the “pilot light“ - spirit luminosity.  
	> “There is a characteristic light, a spirit luminosity, which accompanies this divine presence, and which has become generally associated with Thought Adjusters. In the universe of Nebadon this Paradise luminosity is widespreadly known as the 'pilot light'; on Uversa it is called the 'light of life.' On Urantia this phenomenon has sometimes been referred to as that 'true light which lights every man who comes into the world.' ” [UB 107:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p4_5)  

6. **Proposition**. Adjusters are pure spirit and pure energy, and possess mindedness.  
	> “We know that Thought Adjusters are spirits, pure spirits, presumably absolute spirits. But the Adjuster must also be something more than exclusive spirit reality. In addition to conjectured mindedness, factors of pure energy are also present. If you will remember that God is the source of pure energy and of pure spirit, it will not be so difficult to perceive that his fragments would be both. It is a fact that the Adjusters traverse space over the instantaneous and universal gravity circuits of the Paradise Isle.” [UB 107:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p6_4)  


## IV. Adjuster Mindedness  

1. **Proposition**. Adjusters have a form of premind; they know as they are known.  
	> “. . . The mind of the Father and the Son, that intellect which is ancestral to the absolute mind of the Third Source and Center, is perhaps best illustrated in the premind of a Thought Adjuster, for, though these Father fragments are entirely outside of the mind circuits of the Conjoint Actor, they have some form of premind; they know as they are known; they enjoy the equivalent of human thinking.” [UB 6:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/6#p6_3)  

2. **Proposition**. Adjusters are fragmentations of God on the absolute level - prior to the divergence of spirit and energy.  
	> “Evolutionary mortals are prone to look upon mind as a cosmic mediation between spirit and matter, for that is indeed the principal ministry of mind as discernible by you. Hence it is quite difficult for humans to perceive that Thought Adjusters have minds, for Adjusters are fragmentations of God on an absolute level of reality which is not only prepersonal but also prior to all energy and spirit divergence. On a monistic level antecedent to energy and spirit differentiation there could be no mediating function of mind, for there are no divergencies to be mediated.” [UB 107:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p5_1)  

3. **Proposition**. Adjusters can plan, work, and love - they have powers of self-hood.  
	> "Since Adjusters can plan, work, and love, they must have powers of selfhood which are commensurate with mind. They are possessed of unlimited ability to communicate with each other, that is, all forms of Monitors above the first or virgin groups. As to the nature and purport of their intercommunications, we can reveal very little, for we do not know. And we further know that they must be minded in some manner else they could never be personalized.” [UB 107:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p5_2)  

4. **Proposition**. Adjuster mindedness is like the mindedness of the Universal Father and the Eternal Son.  
	> “The mindedness of the Thought Adjuster is like the _mindedness_ of the Universal Father and the Eternal Son — that which is ancestral to the _minds_ of the Conjoint Actor.” [UB 107:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p5_3)  

5. **Proposition**. Adjusters volunteer, plan, adapt, execute decisions - they are volitional.  
	> “We have often speculated that Thought Adjusters must have volition on all _prepersonal_ levels of choice. They volunteer to indwell human beings, they lay plans for man's eternal career, they adapt, modify, and substitute in accordance with circumstances, and these activities connote genuine volition. They have affection for mortals, they function in universe crises, they are always waiting to act decisively in accordance with human choice, and all these are highly volitional reactions. In all situations not concerned with the domain of the human will, they unquestionably exhibit conduct which betokens the exercise of powers in every sense the equivalent of will, maximated decision.” [UB 107:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p7_3)  

## V. Selection And Assignment  

1. **Proposition**. Adjusters and all other Father prepersonal entities live on Divinington.  
	> “All universe activities related to the dispatch, management, direction, and return of the Mystery Monitors from service in all of the seven superuniverses seem to be centered on the sacred sphere of Divinington. As far as I know, none but Adjusters and other entities of the Father have been on that sphere. It seems likely that numerous unrevealed prepersonal entities share Divinington as a home sphere with the Adjusters. We conjecture that these fellow entities may in some manner be associated with the present and future ministry of the Mystery Monitors. But we really do not know.” [UB 107:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p3_1)  

2. **Proposition**. Adjusters are bestowed in accordance with some wise policy of eternal fitness.  
	> "When Adjusters are dispatched for mortal service from Divinington, they are identical in the endowment of existential divinity, but they vary in experiential qualities proportional to previous contact in and with evolutionary creatures. We cannot explain the basis of Adjuster assignment, but we conjecture that these divine gifts are bestowed in accordance with some wise and efficient policy of eternal fitness of adaptation to the indwelt personality. We do observe that the more experienced Adjuster is often the indweller of the higher type of human mind; human inheritance must therefore be a considerable factor in determining selection and assignment.” [UB 108:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p1_1)  

3. **Proposition**. Volunteer Adjusters are in possession of the seraphic drafts of the life plans of their subjects.  
	> ”Although we do not definitely know, we firmly believe that all Thought Adjusters are volunteers. But before ever they volunteer, they are in possession of full data respecting the candidate for indwelling. The seraphic drafts of ancestry and projected patterns of life conduct are transmitted via Paradise to the reserve corps of Adjusters on Divinington by the reflectivity technique extending inward from the capitals of the local universes to the headquarters of the superuniverses. . . ." [UB 108:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p1_2)  

4. **Proposition**. The first moral decision of a child brings the Adjuster - the average on Urantia being on the 2,134th day.  
	> “Though the Adjusters volunteer for service as soon as the personality forecasts have been relayed to Divinington, they are not actually assigned until the human subjects make their first moral personality decision. The first moral choice of the human child is automatically indicated in the seventh mind-adjutant and registers instantly, by way of the local universe Creative Spirit, over the universal mind-gravity circuit of the Conjoint Actor in the presence of the Master Spirit of superuniverse jurisdiction, who forthwith dispatches this intelligence to Divinington. Adjusters reach their human subjects on Urantia, on the average, just prior to the sixth birthday. In the present generation it is running five years, ten months, and four days; that is, on the 2,134th day of terrestrial life.” [UB 108:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p2_1)  

5. **Proposition**. Prior to the bestowal of the Spirit of Truth, numerous influences determined the gift of Adjusters. See: [UB 108:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p2_5)  

6. **Proposition**. We have perfect guides, therefore is the goal of perfection certainly attainable.  
	> "If you have a personal guardian of destiny and should fail of survival, that guardian angel must be adjudicated in order to receive vindication as to the faithful execution of her trust. But Thought Adjusters are not thus subjected to examination when their subjects fail to survive. We all know that, while an angel might possibly fall short of the perfection of ministry, Thought Adjusters work in the manner of Paradise perfection; their ministry is characterized by a flawless technique which is beyond the possibility of criticism by any being outside of Divinington. You have perfect guides; therefore is the goal of perfection certainly attainable.” [UB 108:5.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p5_10)  

7. **Proposition**. The work of Mystery Monitors differs as to whether they are liaison or fusion Adjusters.  
	> “The character of the detailed work of Mystery Monitors varies in accordance with the nature of their assignments, as to whether or not they are _liaison_ or _fusion_ Adjusters. Some Adjusters are merely loaned for the temporal lifetimes of their subjects; others are bestowed as personality candidates with permission for everlasting fusion if their subjects survive. There is also a slight variation in their work among the different planetary types as well as in different systems and universes. But, on the whole, their labors are remarkably uniform, more so than are the duties of any of the created orders of celestial beings.” [UB 109:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p3_1)  

8. **Proposition**. Adjusters waiting between death and resurrection enter seven differing services.  
	> If the mortal associate belongs to a group that will be repersonalized at the end of a dispensation, the Adjuster will not immediately return to the mansion world of the former system of service but will, according to choice, enter upon one of the following temporary assignments:  
	> 1. Be mustered into the ranks of vanished Monitors for undisclosed service.  
	> 2. Be assigned for a period to the observation of the Paradise regime.  
	> 3. Be enrolled in one of the many training schools of Divinington.  
	> 4. Be stationed for a time as a student observer on one of the other six sacred spheres which constitute the Father's circuit of Paradise worlds.  
	> 5. Be assigned to the messenger service of the Personalized Adjusters.  
	> 6. Become an associate instructor in the Divinington schools devoted to the training of Monitors belonging to the virgin group.  
	> 7. Be assigned to select a group of possible worlds on which to serve in the event that there is reasonable cause for believing that the human partner may have rejected survival." [UB 112:4.4-11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p4_4)  

## VI. Organization And Administration  

1. **Proposition**. Adjusters communicate directly with God as well as over the spirit-gravity circuit of the Eternal Son.  
	> “. . . The Adjusters undoubtedly also utilize direct prepersonal channels of communication with God, and they are likewise able to utilize the spirit-gravity circuits of the Eternal Son.” [UB 5:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p3_2)  

2. **Proposition**. Evolutionary creatures traverse three general developmental stages of being.  
	> “On the evolutionary worlds, will creatures traverse three general developmental stages of being: From the arrival of the Adjuster to comparative full growth, about twenty years of age on Urantia, the Monitors are sometimes designated Thought Changers. From this time to the attainment of the age of discretion, about forty years, the Mystery Monitors are called Thought Adjusters. From the attainment of discretion to deliverance from the flesh, they are often referred to as Thought Controllers. These three phases of mortal life have no connection with the three stages of Adjuster progress in mind duplication and soul evolution.” [UB 107:0.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p0_7)  

3. **Proposition**. While little is known about Adjusters a triune destiny is observed.  
	> “As to the time of their beginning separate existences apart from the absoluteness of the First Source and Center, we do not know; neither do we know their number. We know very little concerning their careers until they arrive on the planets of time to indwell human minds, but from that time on we are more or less familiar with their cosmic progressions up to and including the consummation of their triune destinies: attainment of personality by fusion with some mortal ascender, attainment of personality by fiat of the Universal Father, or liberation from the known assignments of Thought Adjusters." [UB 107:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p1_3)  

4. **Proposition**. Spirit Monitors can traverse the material gravity circuits of the universes.  
	> “That the Mystery Monitors are thus associated with the material circuits of the universe of universes is indeed puzzling. But it remains a fact that they flash throughout the entire grand universe over the material-gravity circuits. It is entirely possible that they may even penetrate the outer space levels; they certainly could follow the gravity presence of Paradise into these regions, and though my order of personality can traverse the mind circuits of the Conjoint Actor also beyond the confines of the grand universe, we have never been sure of detecting the presence of Adjusters in the uncharted regions of outer space.” [UB 107:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p6_5)  

5. **Proposition**. Universe inspectors pay great respect to Adjusters. Said one such: “I honor you! I all but worship you.” See: [UB 108:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p3_6)  

## VII. Prerequisites Of Adjuster Indwelling  

1. **Proposition**. The human mind must be spiritually prepared for the reception of an Adjuster.  
	> "The Adjusters cannot invade the mortal mind until it has been duly prepared by the indwelling ministry of the adjutant mind-spirits and encircuited in the Holy Spirit. And it requires the co-ordinate function of all seven adjutants to thus qualify the human mind for the reception of an Adjuster. Creature mind must exhibit the worship outreach and indicate wisdom function by exhibiting the ability to choose between the emerging values of good and evil — moral choice.  
	> “Thus is the stage of the human mind set for the reception of Adjusters, but as a general rule they do not immediately appear to indwell such minds except on those worlds where the Spirit of Truth is functioning as a spiritual co-ordinator of these different spirit ministries. . . .” [UB 108:2.2-3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p2_2)  

2. **Proposition**. The prospective Adjuster is interested in three qualifications of the human subject.  
	> "The volunteering Adjuster is particularly interested in three qualifications of the human candidate:  
	> "1. _Intellectual capacity_. Is the mind normal? What is the intellectual potential, the intelligence capacity? Can the individual develop into a bona fide will creature? Will wisdom have an opportunity to function?  
	> "2. _Spiritual perception._ The prospects of reverential development, the birth and growth of the religious nature. What is the potential of soul, the probable spiritual capacity of receptivity?  
	> “3. _Combined intellectual and spiritual powers._ The degree to which these two endowments may possibly be associated, combined, so as to produce strength of human character and contribute to the certain evolution of an immortal soul of survival value.” [UB 108:1.3-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p1_3)  

3. **Proposition**. The Adjuster wants to spiritualize the mind so as to favor the evolution of the morontia soul.  
	> “The Thought Adjuster is engaged in a constant effort so to spiritualize your mind as to evolve your morontia soul; but you yourself are mostly unconscious of this inner ministry. You are quite incapable of distinguishing the product of your own material intellect from that of the conjoint activities of your soul and the Adjuster.” [UB 110:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p4_2)  

4. **Proposition**. It is the Adjuster who creates within man the longing to be Godlike.  
	> “It is the Adjuster who creates within man that unquenchable yearning and incessant longing to be like God, to attain Paradise, and there before the actual person of Deity to worship the infinite source of the divine gift. . . .” [UB 107:0.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p0_5)  

5. **Proposition**. Receptivity on our part would enable Adjusters to do much more for us.  
	> “Why do you not aid the Adjuster in the task of showing you the spiritual counterpart of all these strenuous material efforts? Why do you not allow the Adjuster to strengthen you with the spiritual truths of cosmic power while you wrestle with the temporal difficulties of creature existence? Why do you not encourage the heavenly helper to cheer you with the clear vision of the eternal outlook of universal life as you gaze in perplexity at the problems of the passing hour? Why do you refuse to be enlightened and inspired by the universe viewpoint while you toil amidst the handicaps of time and flounder in the maze of uncertainties which beset your mortal life journey? Why not allow the Adjuster to spiritualize your thinking, even though your feet must tread the material paths of earthly endeavor?” [UB 111:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p7_3)  

## VIII. Adjuster Mission  

1. **Proposition**. The Adjuster's mission is to be God to mortal creatures.  
	> “The mission of the Thought Adjusters to the human races is to represent, to be, the Universal Father to the mortal creatures of time and space; that is the fundamental work of the divine gifts. Their mission is also that of elevating the mortal minds and of translating the immortal souls of men up to the divine heights and spiritual levels of Paradise perfection. And in the experience of thus transforming the human nature of the temporal creature into the divine nature of the eternal finaliter, the Adjusters bring into existence a unique type of being, a being consisting in the eternal union of the perfect Adjuster and the perfected creature which it would be impossible to duplicate by any other universe technique.” [UB 108:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p0_1)  

2. **Proposition**. The Adjuster is your experiential partner in the achievement of eternal destiny.  
	> “God, having commanded man to be perfect, even as he is perfect, has descended as the Adjuster to become man's experiential partner in the achievement of the supernal destiny which has been thus ordained. The fragment of God which indwells the mind of man is the absolute and unqualified assurance that man can find the Universal Father in association with this divine Adjuster, which came forth from God to find man and sonship him even in the days of the flesh.” [UB 107:0.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p0_3)  

3. **Proposition**. The Adjuster is an infallible cosmic compass which unerringly points the soul Godward.  
	> “The Adjuster is an absolute essence of an infinite being imprisoned within the mind of a finite creature which, depending on the choosing of such a mortal, can eventually consummate this temporary union of God and man and veritably actualize a new order of being for unending universe service. The Adjuster is the divine universe reality which factualizes the truth that God is man's Father. The Adjuster is man's infallible cosmic compass, always and unerringly pointing the soul Godward.” [UB 107:0.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p0_6)  

4. **Proposition**. Adjusters are called heavenly helpers, not earthly helpers.  
	> “The Mystery Monitors are not thought helpers; they are thought adjusters. They labor with the material mind for the purpose of constructing, by adjustment and spiritualization, a new mind for the new worlds and the new name of your future career. Their mission chiefly concerns the future life, not this life. They are called heavenly helpers, not earthly helpers. They are not interested in making the mortal career easy; rather are they concerned in making your life reasonably difficult and rugged, so that decisions will be stimulated and multiplied. The presence of a great Thought Adjuster does not bestow ease of living and freedom from strenuous thinking, but such a divine gift should confer a sublime peace of mind and a superb tranquillity of spirit.” [UB 108:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p5_5)  

5. **Proposition**. The Adjuster is the potential of your new and next order of existence.  
	> “Your Adjuster is the potential of your new and next order of existence, the advance bestowal of your eternal sonship with God. By and with the consent of your will, the Adjuster has the power to subject the creature trends of the material mind to the transforming actions of the motivations and purposes of the emerging morontial soul.” [UB 108:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p5_4)  

6. **Proposition**. Do not look to the Adjusters for selfish consolation and mortal comfort. They are concerned with your soul.  
	> ”Your transient and ever-changing emotions of joy and sorrow are in the main purely human and material reactions to your internal psychic climate and to your external material environment. Do not, therefore, look to the Adjuster for selfish consolation and mortal comfort. It is the business of the Adjuster to prepare you for the eternal adventure, to assure your survival. It is not the mission of the Mystery Monitor to smooth your ruffled feelings or to minister to your injured pride; it is the preparation of your soul for the long ascending career that engages the attention and occupies the time of the Adjuster." [UB 108:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p5_6)  

7. **Proposition**. The love of an Adjuster is the most truly divine affection in all existence.  
	> “As far as I am conversant with the affairs of a universe, I regard the love and devotion of a Thought Adjuster as the most truly divine affection in all creation. . . .” [UB 110:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p0_2)  

## IX. God In Man  

1. **Proposition**. The Mystery Monitors are the reflection of the image of God abroad in the universe.  
	> "The Mystery Monitors are undoubtedly the bestowal of the Universal Father, the reflection of the image of God abroad in the universe. A great teacher once admonished men that they should be renewed in the spirit of their minds; that they become new men who, like God, are created in righteousness and in the completion of truth. The Adjuster is the mark of divinity, the presence of God. The 'image of God' does not refer to physical likeness nor to the circumscribed limitations of material creature endowment but rather to the gift of the spirit presence of the Universal Father in the supernal bestowal of the Thought Adjusters upon the humble creatures of the universes.” [UB 108:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p6_3)  

2. **Proposition**. The Adjuster is God's manifest presence to the creature.  
	> ”The indwelling Adjusters are one of God's separate but unified modes of contact with the creatures of his all but infinite creation. Thus does he who is invisible to mortal man manifest his presence, and could he do so, he would show himself to us in still other ways, but such further revelation is not divinely possible." [UB 32:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p4_7)  

3. **Proposition**. Unity of religious experience in a group derives from the identical nature of their indwelling Adjusters.  
	> “The unity of religious experience among a social or racial group derives from the identical nature of the God fragment indwelling the individual. It is this divine in man that gives origin to his unselfish interest in the welfare of other men. But since personality is unique — no two mortals being alike — it inevitably follows that no two human beings can similarly interpret the leadings and urges of the spirit of divinity which lives within their minds. . . .” [UB 103:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/103#p1_1)  


## X. Development - Self-Acting Adjusters  

1. **Proposition**. Planetary isolation in no way affects the work and ministry of Adjusters.  
	> “. . . No matter what happens on a world or in a universe, the Adjusters are never directly concerned. The isolation of a planet in no way affects the Adjusters and their ability to communicate with any part of the local universe, superuniverse, or the central universe. And this is the reason why contacts with the supreme and the self-acting Adjusters of the reserve corps of destiny are so frequently made on quarantined worlds. Recourse is had to such a technique as a means of circumventing the handicaps of planetary isolation. In recent years the archangels' circuit has functioned on Urantia, but that means of communication is largely limited to the transactions of the archangel corps itself.” [UB 108:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p4_4)  

2. **Proposition**. Just like all beings, Adjusters must secure experience by actual living.  
	> "Actual living experience has no cosmic substitute. The perfection of the divinity of a newly formed Thought Adjuster does not in any manner endow this Mystery Monitor with experienced ministrative ability. Experience is inseparable from a living existence; it is the one thing which no amount of divine endowment can absolve you from the necessity of securing by _actual living_. Therefore, in common with all beings living and functioning within the present sphere of the Supreme, Thought Adjusters must acquire experience; they must evolve from the lower, inexperienced, to the higher, more experienced, groups.“[UB 109:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p1_3)  

3. **Proposition**. Self-acting Adjusters can leave the human body to perform special tasks.  
	> "Supreme and self-acting Adjusters can leave the human body at will. The indwellers are not an organic or biologic part of mortal life; they are divine superimpositions thereon. In the original life plans they were provided for, but they are not indispensable to material existence. Nevertheless it should be recorded that they very rarely, even temporarily, leave their mortal tabernacles after they once take up their indwelling.” [UB 109:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p2_10)  

4. **Proposition**. Self-acting Adjusters have had numerous special experiences.  
	> "You have been informed of the classification of Adjusters in relation to experience — virgin, advanced, and supreme. You should also recognize a certain functional classification — the self-acting Adjusters. A self-acting Adjuster is one who:  
	> 1. Has had certain requisite experience in the evolving life of a will creature, either as a temporary indweller on a type of world where Adjusters are only loaned to mortal subjects or on an actual fusion planet where the human failed of survival. Such a Monitor is either an advanced or a supreme Adjuster.  
	> 2. Has acquired the balance of spiritual power in a human who has made the third psychic circle and has had assigned to him a personal seraphic guardian.  
	> 3. Has a subject who has made the supreme decision, has entered into a solemn and sincere betrothal with the Adjuster. The Adjuster looks beforehand to the time of actual fusion and reckons the union as an event of fact.  
	> 4. Has a subject who has been mustered into one of the reserve corps of destiny on an evolutionary world of mortal ascension.  
	> 5. At some time, during human sleep, has been temporarily detached from the mind of mortal incarceration to perform some exploit of liaison, contact, reregistration, or other extrahuman service associated with the spiritual administration of the world of assignment.  
	> 6. Has served in a time of crisis in the experience of some human being who was the material complement of a spirit personality intrusted with the enactment of some cosmic achievement essential to the spiritual economy of the planet." [UB 109:2.1-7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p2_1)  

5. **Proposition**. Experienced Adjusters contribute much to unusual human performances.  
	> "The type of Adjuster has much to do with the potential for expression of the human personality. On down through the ages, many of the great intellectual and spiritual leaders of Urantia have exerted their influence chiefly because of the superiority and previous experience of their indwelling Adjusters.“[UB 109:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p4_3)  

6. **Proposition**. The experienced Adjuster may become a potent force on the planet.  
	> “I have observed a Thought Adjuster indwelling a mind on Urantia who has, according to the records on Uversa, indwelt fifteen minds previously in Orvonton. We do not know whether this Monitor has had similar experiences in other superuniverses, but I suspect so. This is a marvelous Adjuster and one of the most useful and potent forces on Urantia during this present age. What others have lost, in that they refused to survive, this human being (and your whole world) now gains. From him who has not survival qualities, shall be taken away even that experienced Adjuster which he now has, while to him who has survival prospects, shall be given even the pre-experienced Adjuster of a slothful deserter." [UB 109:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p4_5)  


## XI. Handicaps Of Adjuster Indwelling  

1. **Proposition**. Animal natures, shifting attitudes, settled opinions, and long-standing prejudices thwart the work of the Adjusters.  
	> ”But your unsteady and rapidly shifting mental attitudes often result in thwarting the plans and interrupting the work of the Adjusters. Their work is not only interfered with by the innate natures of the mortal races, but this ministry is also greatly retarded by your own preconceived opinions, settled ideas, and long-standing prejudices. Because of these handicaps, many times only their unfinished creations emerge into consciousness, and confusion of concept is inevitable. Therefore, in scrutinizing mental situations, safety lies only in the prompt recognition of each and every thought and experience for just what it actually and fundamentally is, disregarding entirely what it might have been." [UB 109:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p5_3)  

2. **Proposition**. Adjuster efforts are retarded by both physical and mental poisons.  
	> "The Adjuster remains with you in all disaster and through every sickness which does not wholly destroy the mentality. But how unkind knowingly to defile or otherwise deliberately to pollute the physical body, which must serve as the earthly tabernacle of this marvelous gift from God. All physical poisons greatly retard the efforts of the Adjuster to exalt the material mind, while the mental poisons of fear, anger, envy, jealousy, suspicion, and intolerance likewise tremendously interfere with the spiritual progress of the evolving soul.“ [UB 110:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p1_5)  

3. **Proposition**. Conflicts of our dual nature add to the problems of the Adjuster both before and after death. See: [UB 111:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p7_4)  

## XII. Personallzed Adjusters  

1. **Proposition**. Adjusters of special distinction, who are not fused, are many times personalized.  
	> “Personalized Adjusters, those who have served with the incarnated Paradise Sons, together with many who have achieved unusual distinction during the mortal indwelling, but whose subjects rejected survival. We have reasons for believing that such Adjusters are personalized on the recommendations of the Ancients of Days of the superuniverse of their assignment.” [UB 107:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p2_8)  

2. **Proposition**. The Adjuster of the Michael bestowal was the Adjuster of Machiventa Melchizedek.  
	> "The activities of Adjusters in your local universe are directed by the Personalized Adjuster of Michael of Nebadon, that very Monitor who guided him step by step when he lived his human life in the flesh of Joshua ben Joseph. Faithful to his trust was this extraordinary Adjuster, and wisely did this valiant Monitor direct the human nature, ever guiding the mortal mind of the Paradise Son in the choosing of the path of the Father's perfect will. This Adjuster had previously served with Machiventa Melchizedek in the days of Abraham and had engaged in tremendous exploits both previous to this indwelling and between these bestowal experiences.” [UB 109:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p6_4)  

3. **Proposition**. Adjusters attain personality only by service-ministry to personal beings.  
	> “We cannot state whether or not non-Adjuster Father fragments are personalizable, but you have been informed that personality is the sovereign freewill bestowal of the Universal Father. As far as we know, the Adjuster type of Father fragment attains personality only by the acquirement of personal attributes through service-ministry to a personal being. These Personalized Adjusters are at home on Divinington, where they instruct and direct their prepersonal associates.” [UB 109:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p7_1)  

4. **Proposition**. Personalized Adjusters combine Creator and creature experience - existential and experiential. They are conjoint time and eternity beings.  
	> “Personalized Thought Adjusters are the untrammelled, unassigned, and sovereign stabilizers and compensators of the far-flung universe of universes. They combine the Creator and creature experience — existential and experiential. They are conjoint time and eternity beings. They associate the prepersonal and the personal in universe administration.” [UB 109:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p7_2)  

5. **Proposition**. Personalized Adjusters are the wise and powerful executives of the Architects of the Master Universe.  
	> “Personalized Adjusters are the all-wise and powerful executives of the Architects of the Master Universe. They are the personal agents of the full ministry of the Universal Father — personal, prepersonal, and superpersonal. They are the personal ministers of the extraordinary, the unusual, and the unexpected throughout all the realms of the transcendental absonite spheres of the domain of God the Ultimate, even to the levels of God the Absolute.” [UB 109:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p7_3)  

## XIII. Indwelling The Human Mind  

1. **Proposition**. The spirit of the Universal Father lives in your mind.  
	> “. . . What a mistake to dream of God far off in the skies when the spirit of the Universal Father lives within your own mind!” [UB 5:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p2_3)  

2. **Proposition**. Adjusters must function through the mechanism of material mind.  
	> “The Thought Adjuster has no special mechanism through which to gain self-expression; there is no mystic religious faculty for the reception or expression of religious emotions. These experiences are made available through the naturally ordained mechanism of mortal mind. And therein lies one explanation of the Adjuster's difficulty in engaging in direct communication with the material mind of its constant indwelling.” [UB 101:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/101#p1_2)  

3. **Proposition**. Adjuster communication is prevented by animal resistance.  
	> “Adjusters rejoice to make contact with the mortal mind; but they must be patient through the long years of silent sojourn during which they are unable to break through animal resistance and directly communicate with you. The higher the Thought Adjusters ascend in the scale of service, the more efficient they become. But never can they greet you, in the flesh, with the same full, sympathetic, and expressionful affection as they will when you discern them mind to mind on the mansion worlds.” [UB 110:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p7_7)  

4. **Proposition**. Avoid confusing Adjuster activity with dreams and conscience.  
	> “It is extremely dangerous to postulate as to the Adjuster content of the dream life. The Adjusters do work during sleep, but your ordinary dream experiences are purely physiologic and psychologic phenomena. Likewise, it is hazardous to attempt the differentiation of the Adjusters' concept registry from the more or less continuous and conscious reception of the dictations of mortal conscience. . . .” [UB 110:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p5_5)  

5. **Proposition**. There are three great days in the career of an Adjuster.  
	> “The great days in the individual careers of Adjusters are: first, when the human subject breaks through into the third psychic circle, thus insuring the Monitor's self-activity and increased range of function (provided the indweller was not already self-acting); then, when the human partner attains the first psychic circle, and they are thereby enabled to intercommunicate, at least to some degree; and last, when they are finally and eternally fused." [UB 110:6.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_22)  

6. **Proposition**. The indwelling Adjuster communicates with the superconsciousness.  
	> “Adjusters should not be thought of as living in the material brains of human beings. They are not organic parts of the physical creatures of the realms. The Thought Adjuster may more properly be envisaged as indwelling the mortal mind of man rather than as existing within the confines of a single physical organ. And indirectly and unrecognized the Adjuster is constantly communicating with the human subject, especially during those sublime experiences of the worshipful contact of mind with spirit in the superconsciousness.” [UB 110:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p1_1)  

7. **Proposition**. All created beings would delight to be hosts to the Mystery Monitors.  
	> “There are no created beings that would not delight to be hosts to the Mystery Monitors, but no orders of beings are thus indwelt excepting evolutionary will creatures of finaliter destiny.” [UB 107:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p7_7)  

8. **Proposition**. A word about the Adjuster concerned with the Urantia Revelation.  
	> “The Adjuster of the human being through whom this communication is being made enjoys such a wide scope of activity chiefly because of this human's almost complete indifference to any outward manifestations of the Adjuster's inner presence; it is indeed fortunate that he remains consciously quite unconcerned about the entire procedure. He holds one of the highly experienced Adjusters of his day and generation, and yet his passive reaction to, and inactive concern toward, the phenomena associated with the presence in his mind of this versatile Adjuster is pronounced by the guardian of destiny to be a rare and fortuitous reaction. And all this constitutes a favorable co-ordination of influences, favorable both to the Adjuster in the higher sphere of action and to the human partner from the standpoints of health, efficiency, and tranquillity.” [UB 110:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p5_7)  


## XIV. Adjusters And The Human Will  

1. **Proposition**. The will of personality transcends the volitions of the pre-personal Adjuster.  
	> “Why then, if Thought Adjusters possess volition, are they subservient to the mortal will? We believe it is because Adjuster volition, though absolute in nature, is prepersonal in manifestation. Human will functions on the personality level of universe reality, and throughout the cosmos the impersonal — the nonpersonal, the subpersonal, and the prepersonal — is ever responsive to the will and acts of existent personality.” [UB 107:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p7_4)  

2. **Proposition**. We are subjects of predestination, but it is not foreordained that we must accept the divine plan.  
	> “When Thought Adjusters indwell human minds, they bring with them the model careers, the ideal lives, as determined and foreordained by themselves and the Personalized Adjusters of Divinington, which have been certified by the Personalized Adjuster of Urantia. Thus they begin work with a definite and predetermined plan for the intellectual and spiritual development of their human subjects, but it is not incumbent upon any human being to accept this plan. You are all subjects of predestination, but it is not foreordained that you must accept this divine predestination; you are at full liberty to reject any part or all of the Thought Adjusters' program. . . .” [UB 110:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p2_1)  

3. **Proposition**. Adjusters are persistent workers but they never do violence to the volitional selfhood.  
	> “They are persistent, ingenious, and perfect in their methods of work, but they never do violence to the volitional selfhood of their hosts. No human being will ever be spiritualized by a divine Monitor against his will; survival is a gift of the Gods which must be desired by the creatures of time. . . .” [UB 110:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p2_2)  

4. **Proposition**. The ideal life is one of loving service - not fearful apprehension.  
	> "... But a devoted and determined effort to realize eternal destiny is wholly compatible with a light-hearted and joyous life and with a successful and honorable career on earth. Co-operation with the Thought Adjuster does not entail self-torture, mock piety, or hypocritical and ostentatious self-abasement; the ideal life is one of loving service rather than an existence of fearful apprehension.” [UB 110:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p3_4)  

5. **Proposition**. What Adjusters are trying to do for mortals.  
	> “I wish it were possible for me to help evolving mortals to achieve a better understanding and attain a fuller appreciation of the unselfish and superb work of the Adjusters living within them, who are so devoutly faithful to the task of fostering man's spiritual welfare. These Monitors are efficient ministers to the higher phases of men's minds; they are wise and experienced manipulators of the spiritual potential of the human intellect. These heavenly helpers are dedicated to the stupendous task of guiding you safely inward and upward to the celestial haven of happiness. These tireless toilers are consecrated to the future personification of the triumph of divine truth in your life everlasting. They are the watchful workers who pilot the God-conscious human mind away from the shoals of evil while expertly guiding the evolving soul of man toward the divine harbors of perfection on far-distant and eternal shores. The Adjusters are loving leaders, your safe and sure guides through the dark and uncertain mazes of your short earthly career; they are the patient teachers who so constantly urge their subjects forward in the paths of progressive perfection. They are the careful custodians of the sublime values of creature character. I wish you could love them more, co-operate with them more fully, and cherish them more affectionately.” [UB 110:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p1_2)  

6. **Proposition**. There are four ways in which we can augment Adjuster harmony.  
	> "You must not regard co-operation with your Adjuster as a particularly conscious process, for it is not; but your motives and your decisions, your faithful determinations and your supreme desires, do constitute real and effective co-operation. You can consciously augment Adjuster harmony by:  
	> 1. Choosing to respond to divine leading; sincerely basing the human life on the highest consciousness of truth, beauty, and goodness, and then co-ordinating these qualities of divinity through wisdom, worship, faith, and love.  
	> 2. Loving God and desiring to be like him — genuine recognition of the divine fatherhood and loving worship of the heavenly Parent.  
	> 3. Loving man and sincerely desiring to serve him — wholehearted recognition of the brotherhood of man coupled with an intelligent and wise affection for each of your fellow mortals.  
	> 4. Joyful acceptance of cosmic citizenship — honest recognition of your progressive obligations to the Supreme Being, awareness of the interdependence of evolutionary man and evolving Deity. This is the birth of cosmic morality and the dawning realization of universal duty." [UB 110:3.6-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p3_6)  

7. **Proposition**. Adjusters manipulate but never dominate man's mind against his will.  
	> “But man does not passively, slavishly, surrender his will to the Adjuster. Rather does he actively, positively, and co-operatively choose to follow the Adjuster's leading when and as such leading consciously differs from the desires and impulses of the natural mortal mind. The Adjusters manipulate but never dominate man's mind against his will; to the Adjusters the human will is supreme. And they so regard and respect it while they strive to achieve the spiritual goals of thought adjustment and character transformation in the almost limitless arena of the evolving human intellect.” [UB 111:1.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p1_8)  

8. **Proposition**. Mind is your ship, the Adjuster is the pilot, but human will is captain.  
	> ”Mind is your ship, the Adjuster is your pilot, the human will is captain. The master of the mortal vessel should have the wisdom to trust the divine pilot to guide the ascending soul into the morontia harbors of eternal survival. Only by selfishness, slothfulness, and sinfulness can the will of man reject the guidance of such a loving pilot and eventually wreck the mortal career upon the evil shoals of rejected mercy and upon the rocks of embraced sin. With your consent, this faithful pilot will safely carry you across the barriers of time and the handicaps of space to the very source of the divine mind and on beyond, even to the Paradise Father of Adjusters." [UB 111:1.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p1_9)  

## XV. Adjuster Communion  

1. **Proposition**. Adjuster communication involves moral, mental, and spiritual status.  
	> “The entire experience of Adjuster communion is one involving moral status, mental motivation, and spiritual experience. The self-realization of such an achievement is mainly, though not exclusively, limited to the realms of soul consciousness, but the proofs are forthcoming and abundant in the manifestation of the fruits of the spirit in the lives of all such inner-spirit contactors.” [UB 5:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p2_6)  

2. **Proposition**. The prepersonal Monitor exudes a divine flavor which is highly personal.  
	> “The realization of the recognition of spiritual values is an experience which is superideational. There is no word in any human language which can be employed to designate this 'sense,' 'feeling,' 'intuition,' or 'experience' which we have elected to call God-consciousness. The spirit of God that dwells in man is not personal — the Adjuster is prepersonal — but this Monitor presents a value, exudes a flavor of divinity, which is personal in the highest and infinite sense. If God were not at least personal, he could not be conscious, and if not conscious, then would he be infrahuman.” [UB 103:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/103#p1_6)  

3. **Proposition**. The Monitor urges altruism but a misguided conscience may cause much unhappiness.  
	> “. . . The impulse of the spirit Monitor is realized in human consciousness as the urge to be altruistic, fellow-creature minded. At least this is the early and fundamental experience of the child mind. When the growing child fails of personality unification, the altruistic drive may become so overdeveloped as to work serious injury to the welfare of the self. A misguided conscience can become responsible for much conflict, worry, sorrow, and no end of human unhappiness.” [UB 103:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/103#p2_10)  

4. **Proposition**. It ennobles us to realize that our altruistic impulses have a divine origin.  
	> "It is fatal to man's idealism when he is taught that all of his altruistic impulses are merely the development of his natural herd instincts. But he is ennobled and mightily energized when he learns that these higher urges of his soul emanate from the spiritual forces that indwell his mortal mind.  
	> "It lifts man out of himself and beyond himself when he once fully realizes that there lives and strives within him something which is eternal and divine. And so it is that a living faith in the superhuman origin of our ideals validates our belief that we are the sons of God and makes real our altruistic convictions, the feelings of the brotherhood of man.” [UB 103:5.8-9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/103#p5_8)  

5. **Proposition**. Deliverance from fear supplies a fulcrum for the Adjuster's uplifting spiritual lever.  
	> "The Thought Adjusters would like to change your feelings of fear to convictions of love and confidence; but they cannot mechanically and arbitrarily do such things; that is your task. In executing those decisions which deliver you from the fetters of fear, you literally supply the psychic fulcrum on which the Adjuster may subsequently apply a spiritual lever of uplifting and advancing illumination. [UB 108:5.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p5_8)  

6. **Proposition**. Adjusters are delighted when they can flash a message direct to the minds of their human partners.  
	> ”The Adjusters are the eternal ancestors, the divine originals, of your evolving immortal souls; they are the unceasing urge that leads man to attempt the mastery of the material and present existence in the light of the spiritual and future career. The Monitors are the prisoners of undying hope, the founts of everlasting progression. And how they do enjoy communicating with their subjects in more or less direct channels! How they rejoice when they can dispense with symbols and other methods of indirection and flash their messages straight to the intellects of their human partners!" [UB 108:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p6_7)  

7. **Proposition**. Sometimes it is possible for the illuminated mind to hear the divine voice.  
	> “It is sometimes possible to have the mind illuminated, to hear the divine voice that continually speaks within you, so that you may become partially conscious of the wisdom, truth, goodness, and beauty of the potential personality constantly indwelling you.” [UB 109:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p5_2)  

8. **Proposition**. Only occasionally do we catch a faint and distant echo of the Adjuster's voice.  
	> ”Adjusters are playing the sacred and superb game of the ages; they are engaged in one of the supreme adventures of time in space. And how happy they are when your co-operation permits them to lend assistance in your short struggles of time as they continue to prosecute their larger tasks of eternity. But usually, when your Adjuster attempts to communicate with you, the message is lost in the material currents of the energy streams of human mind; only occasionally do you catch an echo, a faint and distant echo, of the divine voice." [UB 110:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p3_1)  

9. **Proposition**. Adjuster communication is difficult - too often the message is aborted, perverted, or garbled.  
	> “There exists a vast gulf between the human and the divine, between man and God. The Urantia races are so largely electrically and chemically controlled, so highly animallike in their common behavior, so emotional in their ordinary reactions, that it becomes exceedingly difficult for the Monitors to guide and direct them. You are so devoid of courageous decisions and consecrated co-operation that your indwelling Adjusters find it next to impossible to communicate directly with the human mind. Even when they do find it possible to flash a gleam of new truth to the evolving mortal soul, this spiritual revelation often so blinds the creature as to precipitate a convulsion of fanaticism or to initiate some other intellectual upheaval which results disastrously. Many a new religion and strange 'ism' has arisen from the aborted, imperfect, misunderstood, and garbled communications of the Thought Adjusters.” [UB 110:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p4_5)  

10. **Proposition**. A message from the Adjuster to the mind of indwelling.  
	> “During the making and breaking of a contact between the mortal mind of a destiny reservist and the planetary supervisors, sometimes the indwelling Adjuster is so situated that it becomes possible to transmit a message to the mortal partner. Not long since, on Urantia, such a message was transmitted by a self-acting Adjuster to the human associate, a member of the reserve corps of destiny. This message was introduced by these words: 'And now, without injury or jeopardy to the subject of my solicitous devotion and without intent to overchastise or discourage, for me, make record of this my plea to him.' Then followed a beautifully touching and appealing admonition. Among other things, the Adjuster pleaded 'that he more faithfully give me his sincere co-operation, more cheerfully endure the tasks of my emplacement, more faithfully carry out the program of my arrangement, more patiently go through the trials of my selection, more persistently and cheerfully tread the path of my choosing, more humbly receive credit that may accrue as a result of my ceaseless endeavors — thus transmit my admonition to the man of my indwelling. Upon him I bestow the supreme devotion and affection of a divine spirit. And say further to my beloved subject that I will function with wisdom and power until the very end, until the last earth struggle is over; I will be true to my personality trust. And I exhort him to survival, not to disappoint me, not to deprive me of the reward of my patient and intense struggle. On the human will our achievement of personality depends. Circle by circle I have patiently ascended this human mind, and I have testimony that I am meeting the approval of the chief of my kind. Circle by circle I am passing on to judgment. I await with pleasure and without apprehension the roll call of destiny; I am prepared to submit all to the tribunals of the Ancients of Days.' ” [UB 110:7.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p7_10)  

## XVI. The Seven Psychic Circles  

1. **Proposition**. Personality realization ascends through seven levels of conquest.  
	> ”'The sum total of personality realization on a material world is contained within the successive conquest of the seven psychic circles of mortal potentiality. Entrance upon the seventh circle marks the beginning of true human personality function. Completion of the first circle denotes the relative maturity of the mortal being. Though the traversal of the seven circles of cosmic growth does not equal fusion with the Adjuster, the mastery of these circles marks the attainment of those steps which are preliminary to Adjuster fusion." [UB 110:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_1)  

2. **Proposition**. The psychic circles are concerned with personality status, mind attainment, soul growth, and Adjuster attunement.  
	> “The psychic circles are not exclusively intellectual, neither are they wholly morontial; they have to do with personality status, mind attainment, soul growth, and Adjuster attunement. The successful traversal of these levels demands the harmonious functioning of the _entire personality_, not merely of some one phase thereof. The growth of the parts does not equal the true maturation of the whole; the parts really grow in proportion to the expansion of the entire self — the whole self — material, intellectual, and spiritual.” [UB 110:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_3)  

3. **Proposition**. Circle ascension facilitates Monitor ministry.  
	> “The Adjusters are always near you and of you, but rarely can they speak directly, as another being, to you. Circle by circle your intellectual decisions, moral choosings, and spiritual development add to the ability of the Adjuster to function in your mind; circle by circle you thereby ascend from the lower stages of Adjuster association and mind attunement, so that the Adjuster is increasingly enabled to register his picturizations of destiny with augmenting vividness and conviction upon the evolving consciousness of this God-seeking mind-soul." [UB 110:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_5)  

4. **Proposition**. Conquest of the psychic levels is reflected in three ways.  
	> “It is difficult precisely to define the seven levels of human progression, for the reason that these levels are personal; they are variable for each individual and are apparently determined by the growth capacity of each human being. The conquest of these levels of cosmic evolution is reflected in three ways:  
	> 1. _Adjuster attunement_. The spiritizing mind nears the Adjuster presence proportional to circle attainment.  
	> 2. _Soul evolution_. The emergence of the morontia soul indicates the extent and depth of circle mastery.  
	> 3. _Personality reality._ The degree of selfhood reality is directly determined by circle conquest. Persons become more real as they ascend from the seventh to the first level of mortal existence." [UB 110:6.7-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_7)  

5. **Proposition**. The psychic circles represent the potentials of the emerging morontia nature.  
	> As the circles are traversed, the child of material evolution is growing into the mature human of immortal potentiality. The shadowy reality of the embryonic nature of a seventh circler is giving way to the clearer manifestation of the emerging morontia nature of a local universe citizen." [UB 110:6.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_11)  

6. **Proposition**. Circle progression has more to do with Supreme relationship than with God-consciousness.  
	> Perhaps these psychic circles of mortal progression would be better denominated _cosmic levels_ — actual meaning grasps and value realizations of progressive approach to the morontia consciousness of initial relationship of the evolutionary soul with the emerging Supreme Being. And it is this very relationship that makes it forever impossible fully to explain the significance of the cosmic circles to the material mind. These circle attainments are only relatively related to God-consciousness. A seventh or sixth circler can be almost as truly God-knowing — sonship conscious — as a second or first circler, but such lower circle beings are far less conscious of experiential relation to the Supreme Being, universe citizenship. The attainment of these cosmic circles will become a part of the ascenders' experience on the mansion worlds if they fail of such achievement before natural death." [UB 110:6.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_16)  

7. **Proposition**. Rarely do we hear the Adjuster's voice - except:  
	1. Moments of supreme desire.  
	2. In a supreme situation.  
	3. After a supreme decision.  
	> While the voice of the Adjuster is ever within you, most of you will hear it seldom during a lifetime. Human beings below the third and second circles of attainment rarely hear the Adjuster's direct voice except in moments of supreme desire, in a supreme situation, and consequent upon a supreme decision." [UB 110:7.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p7_9)  


## XVII. The Inner Life  

1. **Proposition**. The inner voice is distinct from conscience. Its assurance transcends reason and logic.  
	> Religion, the conviction-faith of the personality, can always triumph over the superficially contradictory logic of despair born in the unbelieving material mind. There really is a true and genuine inner voice, that “true light which lights every man who comes into the world.” And this spirit leading is distinct from the ethical prompting of human conscience. The feeling of religious assurance is more than an emotional feeling. The assurance of religion transcends the reason of the mind, even the logic of philosophy. Religion is faith, trust, and assurance." [UB 101:0.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/101#p0_3)  

2. **Proposition**. Adjusters are cosmic windows through which the finite may glimpse the infinite.  
	> “. . . As evolution advances on an inhabited world, the Thought Adjusters increasingly participate in the development of the higher types of human religious insight. The Thought Adjuster is the cosmic window through which the finite creature may faith-glimpse the certainties and divinities of limitless Deity, the Universal Father.” [UB 103:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/103#p0_1)  

3. **Proposition**. Conscience is not the voice of God to the soul.  
	> “Do not confuse and confound the mission and influence of the Adjuster with what is commonly called conscience; they are not directly related. Conscience is a human and purely psychic reaction. It is not to be despised, but it is hardly the voice of God to the soul, which indeed the Adjuster's would be if such a voice could be heard. Conscience, rightly, admonishes you to do right; but the Adjuster, in addition, endeavors to tell you what truly is right; that is, when and as you are able to perceive the Monitor's leading.” [UB 110:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p5_1)  

4. **Proposition**. Our dreams testify to the failure of the Adjuster to harmonize the human and divine minds.  
	> “Man's dream experiences, that disordered and disconnected parade of the un-co-ordinated sleeping mind, present adequate proof of the failure of the Adjusters to harmonize and associate the divergent factors of the mind of man. The Adjusters simply cannot, in a single lifetime, arbitrarily co-ordinate and synchronize two such unlike and diverse types of thinking as the human and the divine. When they do, as they sometimes have, such souls are translated directly to the mansion worlds without the necessity of passing through the experience of death.” [UB 110:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p5_2)  


## XVIII. Mlnd - The Arena Of Choice  

1. **Proposition**. The spiritual work of the Adjuster rests upon an intellectual foundation.  
	> “Though the work of Adjusters is spiritual in nature, they must, perforce, do all their work upon an intellectual foundation. Mind is the human soil from which the spirit Monitor must evolve the morontia soul with the co-operation of the indwelt personality.” [UB 111:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p1_1)  

2. **Proposition**. Will determines the eternal choosing of mind.  
	> “Mind is the cosmic instrument on which the human will can play the discords of destruction, or upon which this same human will can bring forth the exquisite melodies of God identification and consequent eternal survival. . . .” [UB 111:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p1_6)  

3. **Proposition**. By moral choosing man facilitates the divine invasion of his soul.  
	> “Every time man makes a reflective moral choice, he immediately experiences a new divine invasion of his soul. Moral choosing constitutes religion as the motive of inner response to outer conditions. But such a real religion is not a purely subjective experience. It signifies the whole of the subjectivity of the individual engaged in a meaningful and intelligent response to total objectivity — the universe and its Maker.” [UB 196:3.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p3_20)  

4. **Proposition**. As we struggle through life, the Adjuster longs to comfort and inspire us.  
	> May I admonish you to heed the distant echo of the Adjuster's faithful call to your soul? The indwelling Adjuster cannot stop or even materially alter your career struggle of time; the Adjuster cannot lessen the hardships of life as you journey on through this world of toil. The divine indweller can only patiently forbear while you fight the battle of life as it is lived on your planet; but you could, if you only would — as you work and worry, as you fight and toil — permit the valiant Adjuster to fight with you and for you. You could be so comforted and inspired, so enthralled and intrigued, if you would only allow the Adjuster constantly to bring forth the pictures of the real motive, the final aim, and the eternal purpose of all this difficult, uphill struggle with the commonplace problems of your present material world." [UB 111:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p7_2)  


## XIX. Evolution Of The Soul  

1. **Proposition**. The Adjuster is the will of God abroad in his universe.  
	> “. . . Only by means of his far-flung personality circuit does God deal directly with the personalities of his vast creation of will creatures, but he is contactable (outside of Paradise) only in the presences of his fragmented entities, the will of God abroad in the universes. This Paradise spirit that indwells the minds of the mortals of time and there fosters the evolution of the immortal soul of the surviving creature is of the nature and divinity of the Universal Father. . . .” [UB 1:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p3_6)  

2. **Proposition**. Many peoples have approximated the recognition of the Adjuster.  
	> “In the conception of the _atman_ the Hindu teachers really approximated an appreciation of the nature and presence of the Adjuster, but they failed to distinguish the copresence of the evolving and potentially immortal soul. The Chinese, however, recognized two aspects of a human being, the _yang_ and the _yin_, the soul and the spirit. The Egyptians and many African tribes also believed in two factors, the _ka_ and the _ba_; the soul was not usually believed to be pre-existent, only the spirit.” [UB 111:0.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p0_4)  

3. **Proposition**. Man's soul is an experiential acquirement.  
	> “The soul of man is an experiential acquirement. As a mortal creature chooses to “do the will of the Father in heaven,” so the indwelling spirit becomes the father of a _new reality_ in human experience. The mortal and material mind is the mother of this same emerging reality. The substance of this new reality is neither material nor spiritual — it is _morontial_. This is the emerging and immortal soul which is destined to survive mortal death and begin the Paradise ascension.” [UB 0:5.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p5_10)  

4. **Proposition**. The morontia soul can be known only by cosmic insight and spiritual discovery.  
	> “The presence of the divine Adjuster in the human mind makes it forever impossible for either science or philosophy to attain a satisfactory comprehension of the evolving soul of the human personality. The morontia soul is the child of the universe and may be really known only through cosmic insight and spiritual discovery.” [UB 111:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p0_1)  

5. **Proposition**. Primitive man located the soul in various bodily organs or associated it with breath, blood, and shadows.  
	> “Before man realized that his evolving soul was fathered by a divine spirit, it was thought to reside in different physical organs — the eye, liver, kidney, heart, and later, the brain. The savage associated the soul with blood, breath, shadows and with reflections of the self in water.” [UB 111:0.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p0_3)  

6. **Proposition**. On the mind loom the Adjuster threads the spirit pattern of a potential finaliter.  
	> “The material mind of mortal man is the cosmic loom that carries the morontia fabrics on which the indwelling Thought Adjuster threads the spirit patterns of a universe character of enduring values and divine meanings — a surviving soul of ultimate destiny and unending career, a potential finaliter.” [UB 111:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p2_2)  

7. **Proposition**. Material mind and divine spirit are the factors in the evolution of the soul.  
	> “_The relationship between material mind and divine spirit_, which connotes a value and carries a meaning not found in either of the contributing factors to such an association. The reality of this unique relationship is neither material nor spiritual but morontial. It is the soul.” [UB 111:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p2_7)  

8. **Proposition**. What the Trinity is to God the Supreme, the Adjuster is to evolving man.  
	> “The Supreme Being evolves by virtue of his liaison with the Paradise Trinity and in consequence of the divinity successes of the creator and administrator children of that Trinity. Man's immortal soul evolves its own eternal destiny by association with the divine presence of the Paradise Father and in accordance with the personality decisions of the human mind. What the Trinity is to God the Supreme, the Adjuster is to evolving man.” [UB 117:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/117#p3_10)  

9. **Proposition**. Adjusters are the prisoners of spirit hope confined within the minds of men.  
	> “The Adjuster is man's eternity possibility; man is the Adjuster's personality possibility. Your individual Adjusters work to spiritize you in the hope of eternalizing your temporal identity. The Adjusters are saturated with the beautiful and self-bestowing love of the Father of spirits. They truly and divinely love you; they are the prisoners of spirit hope confined within the minds of men. They long for the divinity attainment of your mortal minds that their loneliness may end, that they may be delivered with you from the limitations of material investiture and the habiliments of time.” [UB 107:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p6_2)  

10. **Proposition**. Any time before Adjuster fusion, man can rescind his choice of survival.  
	> “The mistakes of mortal mind and the errors of human conduct may markedly delay the evolution of the soul, although they cannot inhibit such a morontia phenomenon when once it has been initiated by the indwelling Adjuster with the consent of the creature will. But at any time prior to mortal death this same material and human will is empowered to rescind such a choice and to reject survival. Even after survival the ascending mortal still retains this prerogative of choosing to reject eternal life; at any time before fusion with the Adjuster the evolving and ascending creature can choose to forsake the will of the Paradise Father. Fusion with the Adjuster signalizes the fact that the ascending mortal has eternally and unreservedly chosen to do the Father's will.” [UB 111:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p3_1)  


## XX. Personality Survival  

1. **Proposition**. Adjusters, while passive regarding your temporal welfare, are divinely active concerning your eternal future.  
	> “Adjusters are interested in, and concerned with, your daily doings and the manifold details of your life just to the extent that these are influential in the determination of your significant temporal choices and vital spiritual decisions and, hence, are factors in the solution of your problem of soul survival and eternal progress. The Adjuster, while passive regarding purely temporal welfare, is divinely active concerning all the affairs of your eternal future.” [UB 110:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p1_4)  

2. **Proposition**. God has embarked upon the eternal adventure with man.  
	> “The great God makes direct contact with mortal man and gives a part of his infinite and eternal and incomprehensible self to live and dwell within him. God has embarked upon the eternal adventure with man. If you yield to the leadings of the spiritual forces in you and around you, you cannot fail to attain the high destiny established by a loving God as the universe goal of his ascendant creatures from the evolutionary worlds of space.” [UB 5:1.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p1_12)  

3. **Proposition**. In survival without delay, the Adjuster joins the soul in the new morontia form.  
	> “If the human individual survives without delay, the Adjuster, so I am instructed, registers at Divinington, proceeds to the Paradise presence of the Universal Father, returns immediately and is embraced by the Personalized Adjusters of the superuniverse and local universe of assignment, receives the recognition of the chief Personalized Monitor of Divinington, and then, at once, passes into the 'realization of identity transition,' being summoned therefrom on the third period and on the mansion world in the actual personality form made ready for the reception of the surviving soul of the earth mortal as that form has been projected by the guardian of destiny.” [UB 112:4.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p4_13)  

4. **Proposition**. There is nothing which can prevent a divinely motivated soul from ascending to the portals of Paradise.  
	> “Man is spiritually indwelt by a surviving Thought Adjuster. If such a human mind is sincerely and spiritually motivated, if such a human soul desires to know God and become like him, honestly wants to do the Father's will, there exists no negative influence of mortal deprivation nor positive power of possible interference which can prevent such a divinely motivated soul from securely ascending to the portals of Paradise.” [UB 5:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p1_7)  

## XXI. Personality And Reality  

1. **Proposition**. Mind knows quantity - quality is felt. The spirit reality-izes.  
	> “Mind knows quantity, reality, meanings. But quality — values — is _felt_. That which feels is the mutual creation of mind, which knows, and the associated spirit, which reality-izes.” [UB 111:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p3_6)  

2. **Proposition**. Mind decisions determine the potential of eternal existence.  
	> “Mortal mind is a temporary intellect system loaned to human beings for use during a material lifetime, and as they use this mind, they are either accepting or rejecting the potential of eternal existence. Mind is about all you have of universe reality that is subject to your will, and the soul — the morontia self — will faithfully portray the harvest of the temporal decisions which the mortal self is making. . . .” [UB 111:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p1_5)  

3. **Proposition**. In the evolving mind, Adjusters are rehearsing the realities of the universe career.  
	> “. . . But the Adjuster's efforts, while living within you, are not so much concerned with the affairs of temporal life and planetary existence. Today, the Thought Adjusters are, as it were, rehearsing the realities of the universe career in the evolving minds of human beings.” [UB 109:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p0_1)  

4. **Proposition**. Temporal identity of mind and eternal identity of Adjuster produce the surviving identity of the soul.  
	> The material self has personality and identity, temporal identity; the prepersonal spirit Adjuster also has identity, eternal identity. This material personality and this spirit prepersonality are capable of so uniting their creative attributes as to bring into existence the surviving identity of the immortal soul." [UB 5:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p6_7)  


## XXII. Adjuster Fusion  

1. **Proposition**. The Adjuster, subjective Deity, is carrying on an endless revelation of God - objective Deity.  
	> Can you really realize the true significance of the Adjuster's indwelling? Do you really fathom what it means to have an absolute fragment of the absolute and infinite Deity, the Universal Father, indwelling and fusing with your finite mortal natures? When mortal man fuses with an actual fragment of the existential Cause of the total cosmos, no limit can ever be placed upon the destiny of such an unprecedented and unimaginable partnership. In eternity, man will be discovering not only the infinity of the objective Deity but also the unending potentiality of the subjective fragment of this same God. Always will the Adjuster be revealing to the mortal personality the wonder of God, and never can this supernal revelation come to an end, for the Adjuster is of God and as God to mortal man." [UB 107:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p4_7)  

2. **Proposition**. Adjusters gain experience in other ways than serving with mortals who do not survive.  
	> “Most Adjusters who have translated their subjects from Urantia were highly experienced and of record as previous indwellers of numerous mortals on other spheres. Remember, Adjusters gain valuable indwelling experience on planets of the loan order; it does not follow that Adjusters only gain experience for advanced work in those mortal subjects who fail to survive.” [UB 110:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p7_3)  

3. **Proposition**. Supreme love and spirit ministry are but a part of the mystery of Adjuster bestowal.  
	> “In their relationship to fusion creatures they reveal a supernal love and spiritual ministry that is profoundly confirmative of the declaration that God is spirit. But there is much that takes place in addition to this transcendent ministry that has never been revealed to Urantia mortals. Neither do we fully understand just what really transpires when the Universal Father gives of himself to be a part of the personality of a creature of time. . . .” [UB 107:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p1_6)  

4. **Proposition**. You evolve upward and inward to God; Adjusters evolve outward and downward to man.  
	> The first stage of Adjuster evolution is attained in fusion with the surviving soul of a mortal being. Thus, while you are in nature evolving inward and upward from man to God, the Adjusters are in nature evolving outward and downward from God to man; and so will the final product of this union of divinity and humanity eternally be the son of man and the son of God." [UB 109:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p1_5)  

5. **Proposition**. Upon fusion, an Adjuster translates from the absolute existential level to the finite experiential level.  
	> _Fused Adjusters_ — finaliters — those who have become one with the ascending creatures of the superuniverses, the eternity partners of the time ascenders of the Paradise Corps of the Finality. Thought Adjusters ordinarily become fused with the ascending mortals of time, and with such surviving mortals they are registered in and out of Ascendington; they follow the course of ascendant beings. Upon fusion with the ascending evolutionary soul, it appears that the Adjuster translates from the absolute existential level of the universe to the finite experiential level of functional association with an ascending personality. While retaining all of the character of the existential divine nature, a fused Adjuster becomes indissolubly linked with the ascending career of a surviving mortal." [UB 107:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/107#p2_7)  

6. **Proposition**. After Adjuster fusion you receive your new name.  
	> Human subjects are often known by the numbers of their Adjusters; mortals do not receive real universe names until after Adjuster fusion, which union is signalized by the bestowal of the new name upon the new creature by the destiny guardian." [UB 108:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p3_3)  

7. **Proposition**. When evolving soul and divine Adjuster are fused, each gains the experiencible qualities of the other.  
	> When the evolving soul and the divine Adjuster are finally and eternally fused, each gains all of the experiencible qualities of the other. This co-ordinate personality possesses all of the experiential memory of survival once held by the ancestral mortal mind and then resident in the morontia soul, and in addition thereto this potential finaliter embraces all the experiential memory of the Adjuster throughout the mortal indwellings of all time. But it will require an eternity of the future for an Adjuster ever completely to endow the personality partnership with the meanings and values which the divine Monitor carries forward from the eternity of the past.” [UB 110:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p7_5)  

8. **Proposition**. The Adjuster imparts past-eternity memory and a qualified potential absoluteness.  
	> Thought Adjuster fusion imparts eternal actualities to personality which were previously only potential. Among these new endowments may be mentioned: fixation of divinity quality, past-eternity experience and memory, immortality, and a phase of qualified potential absoluteness.” [UB 112:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p7_1)  

9. **Proposition**. Adjuster fusion can occur anywhere from the nativity world to the universe headquarters.  
	> Fusion with the Adjuster is usually effected while the ascender is resident within his local system. It may occur on the planet of nativity as a transcendence of natural death; it may take place on any one of the mansion worlds or on the headquarters of the system; it may even be delayed until the time of the constellation sojourn; or, in special instances, it may not be consummated until the ascender is on the local universe capital." [UB 112:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p7_3)  

10. **Proposition**. Adjuster fusion ends all danger to the eternal career.  
	> When fusion with the Adjuster has been effected, there can be no future danger to the eternal career of such a personality. Celestial beings are tested throughout a long experience, but mortals pass through a relatively short and intensive testing on the evolutionary and morontia worlds." [UB 112:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p7_4)  

11. **Proposition**. Fusion with the Adjuster is a blending of Creator and creature - finaliters for outer space service.  
	> We believe that the mortals of Adjuster fusion, together with their finaliter associates, are destined to function in some manner in the administration of the universes of the first outer space level. We have not the slightest doubt that in due time these enormous galaxies will become inhabited universes. And we are equally convinced that among the administrators thereof will be found the Paradise finaliters whose natures are the cosmic consequence of the blending of creature and Creator." [UB 112:7.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p7_17)  

12. **Proposition**. The Adjuster-mortal partnership is the amazing phenomenon of this universe age.  
	> On the Adjuster-fusion worlds the destiny of the Mystery Monitor is identical with that of the ascending mortal — the Paradise Corps of the Finality. And neither Adjuster nor mortal can attain that unique goal without the full co-operation and faithful help of the other. This extraordinary partnership is one of the most engrossing and amazing of all the cosmic phenomena of this universe age." [UB 112:7.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p7_11)  

13. **Proposition**. The administrators of outer space - personalized and humanized Adjusters and eternalized mortals.  
	> What an adventure! What a romance! A gigantic creation to be administered by the children of the Supreme, these personalized and humanized Adjusters, these Adjusterized and eternalized mortals, these mysterious combinations and eternal associations of the highest known manifestation of the essence of the First Source and Center and the lowest form of intelligent life capable of comprehending and attaining the Universal Father. We conceive that such amalgamated beings, such partnerships of Creator and creature, will become superb rulers, matchless administrators, and understanding and sympathetic directors of any and all forms of intelligent life which may come into existence throughout these future universes of the first outer space level.” [UB 112:7.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p7_18)  


## XXIII. Adjusters After Death  


1. **Proposition**. Monitors leave their subjects upon physical, intellectual, or spiritual death.  
	> When death of a material, intellectual, or spiritual nature occurs, the Adjuster bids farewell to the mortal host and departs for Divinington. From the headquarters of the local universe and the superuniverse a reflective contact is made with the supervisors of both governments, and the Monitor is registered out by the same number that recorded entry into the domains of time." [UB 112:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p4_1)  

2. **Proposition**. In failure of survival, the Adjuster carries all values over into some future service. No real value ever perishes.  
	> Adjusters never fail; nothing worth surviving is ever lost; every meaningful value in every will creature is certain of survival, irrespective of the survival or nonsurvival of the meaning-discovering or evaluating personality. And so it is, a mortal creature may reject survival; still the life experience is not wasted; the eternal Adjuster carries the worth-while features of such an apparent life of failure over into some other world and there bestows these surviving meanings and values upon some higher type of mortal mind, one of survival capacity. No worth-while experience ever happens in vain; no true meaning or real value ever perishes." [UB 109:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p6_1)  

3. **Proposition**. What the Adjuster cannot do for you in this life, he will do for you in the next.  
	> What the Thought Adjuster cannot utilize in your present life, those truths which he cannot successfully transmit to the man of his betrothal, he will faithfully preserve for use in the next stage of existence, just as he now carries over from circle to circle those items which he fails to register in the experience of the human subject, owing to the creature's inability, or failure, to give a sufficient degree of co-operation..” [UB 108:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p5_2)  

### THE BIBLE  

> “But it is the spirit in man, the breath of the Almighty, that makes him understand.” [Job 32:8](/en/Bible/Job/32#v8)  
> 
> “The spirit of man is the lamp of the Lord, searching all his innermost parts.” [Prov 20:27](/en/Bible/Proverbs/20#v27)  
> 
> “And the dust returns to the earth as it was, and the spirit returns to God who gave it.” [Eccl 12:7](/en/Bible/Ecclesiastes/12#v7)  
> 
> “And I will put m spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes.” [Ezek 36:27](/en/Bible/Ezekiel/36#v27)  
> 
> “It is the spirit himse1f·bearing witness with our spirit that we are the children of God.” [Rom 8:16](/en/Bible/Romans/8#v16)  
> 
> “For what person knows a man's thoughts except the spirit of the man which is in him.” [1 Cor 2:11](/en/Bible/1_Corinthians/2#v11)  
> 
> “Do you not know that you are God's temple and that God's spirit dwells in you?” [1 Cor 3:16](/en/Bible/1_Corinthians/3#v16)  
> 
> “And by this we know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has given us.” [1 John 3:24](/en/Bible/1_John/3#v24)


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/30">30. The Kingdom of Heaven</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/32">32. Prayer and Worship</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>