---
title: "Workbook V — Theology of The Urantia Book — 34. The Spirit of Truth"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/33">33. Religious Experience</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/35">35. Christianity</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

Author: **William S. Sadler**



1. **Proposition.** Jesus said that it was better that he leave his followers in the flesh, that he might more fully be with them in spirit.  
	> “Jesus continued to teach, saying: 'When I have gone to the Father, and after he has fully accepted the work I have done for you on earth, and after I have received the final sovereignty of my own domain, I shall say to my Father: Having left my children alone on earth, it is in accordance with my promise to send them another teacher. And when the Father shall approve, I will pour out the Spirit of Truth upon all flesh. Already is my Father's spirit in your hearts, and when this day shall come, you will also have me with you even as you now have the Father. This new gift is the spirit of living truth. The unbelievers will not at first listen to the teachings of this spirit, but the sons of light will all receive him gladly and with a whole heart. And you shall know this spirit when he comes even as you have known me, and you will receive this gift in your hearts, and he will abide with you. You thus perceive that I am not going to leave you without help and guidance. I will not leave you desolate. Today I can be with you only in person. In the times to come I will be with you and all other men who desire my presence, wherever you may be, and with each of you at the same time. Do you not discern that it is better for me to go away; that I leave you in the flesh so that I may the better and the more fully be with you in the spirit?' ” [UB 180:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/180#p4_1)  

2. **Proposition.** This new teacher is the living conviction of truth.  
	> “The new helper which Jesus promised to send into the hearts of believers, to pour out upon all flesh, is the Spirit of Truth. This divine endowment is not the letter or law of truth, neither is it to function as the form or expression of truth. The new teacher is the conviction of truth, the consciousness and assurance of true meanings on real spirit levels. And this new teacher is the spirit of living and growing truth, expanding, unfolding, and adaptative truth." [UB 180:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/180#p5_1)  

3. **Proposition.** It is not strange that these spirit-infused men felt themselves translated into a new world of joy and power.  
	> It is not strange that these spirit-infused men should have seized upon this opportunity to express their feelings of triumph over the forces which had sought to destroy their Master and end the influence of his teachings. At such a time as this it was easier to remember their personal association with Jesus and to be thrilled with the assurance that the Master still lived, that their friendship had not ended, and that the spirit had indeed come upon them even as he had promised.  
	> These believers felt themselves suddenly translated into another world, a new existence of joy, power, and glory. The Master had told them the kingdom would come with power, and some of them thought they were beginning to discern what he meant. [UB 194:0.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p0_5)  

4. **Proposition.** It is easy to understand how they began to preach a new gospel about Jesus.  
	> And when all of this is taken into consideration, it is not difficult to understand how these men came to preach a new gospel about Jesus in the place of their former message of the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of men. [UB 194:0.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p0_7)  

5. **Proposition.** The new message about Jesus converted two thousand souls.  
	> It was about two o'clock when Peter stood up in that very place where his Master had last taught in this temple, and delivered that impassioned appeal which resulted in the winning of more than two thousand souls. The Master had gone, but they suddenly discovered that this story about him had great power with the people. No wonder they were led on into the further proclamation of that which vindicated their former devotion to Jesus and at the same time so constrained men to believe in him. Six of the apostles participated in this meeting: Peter, Andrew, James, John, Philip, and Matthew. They talked for more than an hour and a half and delivered messages in Greek, Hebrew, and Aramaic, as well as a few words in even other tongues with which they had a speaking acquaintance. [UB 194:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p1_2)  

6. **Proposition.** It is the work of this spirit to personalize truth and destroy all feelings of orphanhood.  
	> The first mission of this spirit is, of course, to foster and personalize truth, for it is the comprehension of truth that constitutes the highest form of human liberty. Next, it is the purpose of this spirit to destroy the believer's feeling of orphanhood. Jesus having been among men, all believers would experience a sense of loneliness had not the Spirit of Truth come to dwell in men's hearts. [UB 194:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p2_2)  

7. **Proposition.** Bestowal of the Son's spirit prepares normal minds for the reception of Adjusters.  
	> This bestowal of the Son's spirit effectively prepared all normal men's minds for the subsequent universal bestowal of the Father's spirit (the Adjuster) upon all mankind. In a certain sense, this Spirit of Truth is the spirit of both the Universal Father and the Creator Son. [UB 194:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p2_3)  

8. **Proposition.** The spirit leads into all truth and enhances the realities of Jesus' teaching.  
	> Next, the Spirit of Truth came to help the believer to witness to the realities of Jesus' teachings and his life as he lived it in the flesh, and as he now again lives it anew and afresh in the individual believer of each passing generation of the spirit-filled sons of God.  
	> Thus it appears that the Spirit of Truth comes really to lead all believers into all truth, into the expanding knowledge of the experience of the living and growing spiritual consciousness of the reality of eternal and ascending sonship with God. [UB 194:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p2_6)  

9. **Proposition.** The Spirit of Truth completes the sevenfold spirit bestowal.  
	> “In a way, mankind is subject to the double influence of the sevenfold appeal of the universe spirit influences. The early evolutionary races of mortals are subject to the progressive contact of the seven adjutant mind-spirits of the local universe Mother Spirit. As man progresses upward in the scale of intelligence and spiritual perception, there eventually come to hover over him and dwell within him the seven higher spirit influences. And these seven spirits of the advancing worlds are:  
	> 
	> 1. The bestowed spirit of the Universal Father — the Thought Adjusters.  
	> 2. The spirit presence of the Eternal Son — the spirit gravity of the universe of universes and the certain channel of all spirit communion.  
	> 3. The spirit presence of the Infinite Spirit — the universal spirit-mind of all creation, the spiritual source of the intellectual kinship of all progressive intelligences.  
	> 4. The spirit of the Universal Father and the Creator Son — the Spirit of Truth, generally regarded as the spirit of the Universe Son.  
	> 5. The spirit of the Infinite Spirit and the Universe Mother Spirit — the Holy Spirit, generally regarded as the spirit of the Universe Spirit.  
	> 6. The mind-spirit of the Universe Mother Spirit — the seven adjutant mind-spirits of the local universe.  
	> 7. The spirit of the Father, Sons, and Spirits — the new-name spirit of the ascending mortals of the realms after the fusion of the mortal spirit-born soul with the Paradise Thought Adjuster and after the subsequent attainment of the divinity and glorification of the status of the Paradise Corps of the Finality." [UB 194:2.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p2_12)  

10. **Proposition.** At Pentecost the religion of Jesus broke all national restrictions and racial fetters.  
	> “On the day of Pentecost the religion of Jesus broke all national restrictions and racial fetters. It is forever true, ”Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." On this day the Spirit of Truth became the personal gift from the Master to every mortal. This spirit was bestowed for the purpose of qualifying believers more effectively to preach the gospel of the kingdom, but they mistook the experience of receiving the outpoured spirit for a part of the new gospel which they were unconsciously formulating.” [UB 194:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p3_5)  

11. **Proposition.** Pentecost forever disassociates the idea of spiritual experience from the notion of especially favorable environments.  
	> “The bestowal of the Spirit of Truth was independent of all forms, ceremonies, sacred places, and special behavior by those who received the fullness of its manifestation. When the spirit came upon those assembled in the upper chamber, they were simply sitting there, having just been engaged in silent prayer. The spirit was bestowed in the country as well as in the city. It was not necessary for the apostles to go apart to a lonely place for years of solitary meditation in order to receive the spirit. For all time, Pentecost disassociates the idea of spiritual experience from the notion of especially favorable environments.” [UB 194:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p3_10)  

12. **Proposition.** Pentecost endowed man with the power to challenge the evils of hate and anger by the fearless acts of love and forbearance.  
	> “Pentecost endowed mortal man with the power to forgive personal injuries, to keep sweet in the midst of the gravest injustice, to remain unmoved in the face of appalling danger, and to challenge the evils of hate and anger by the fearless acts of love and forbearance. Urantia has passed through the ravages of great and destructive wars in its history. All participants in these terrible struggles met with defeat. There was but one victor; there was only one who came out of these embittered struggles with an enhanced reputation — that was Jesus of Nazareth and his gospel of overcoming evil with good. The secret of a better civilization is bound up in the Master's teachings of the brotherhood of man, the good will of love and mutual trust.” [UB 194:3.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p3_12)  

13. **Proposition.** Mankind can be unified only by the spiritual approach.  
	> “Pentecost was designed to lessen the self-assertiveness of individuals, groups, nations, and races. It is this spirit of self-assertiveness which so increases in tension that it periodically breaks loose in destructive wars. Mankind can be unified only by the spiritual approach, and the Spirit of Truth is a world influence which is universal.” [UB 194:3.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p3_18)  

14. **Proposition.** Pentecost signifies that the Jesus of history has become the divine Son of living experience.  
	> "The coming of the Spirit of Truth purifies the human heart and leads the recipient to formulate a life purpose single to the will of God and the welfare of men. The material spirit of selfishness has been swallowed up in this new spiritual bestowal of selflessness. Pentecost, then and now, signifies that the Jesus of history has become the divine Son of living experience. The joy of this outpoured spirit, when it is consciously experienced in human life, is a tonic for health, a stimulus for mind, and an unfailing energy for the soul.” [UB 194:3.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p3_19)  

15. **Proposition.** The influence of the Spirit of Truth continues through the local universe.  
	> “And so it is with the spiritual circuits: Man utilizes these in his ascent through the universes, but he never possesses them as a part of his eternal personality. But these circuits of spiritual ministry, whether Spirit of Truth, Holy Spirit, or superuniverse spirit presences, are receptive and reactive to the emerging values in ascending personality, and these values are faithfully transmitted through the Sevenfold to the Supreme.” [UB 117:5.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/117#p5_8)


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/33">33. Religious Experience</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/35">35. Christianity</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>