---
title: "NEWSFLASH! — Issue 1 — April 1998"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
tags: Urantia Movement Event, Fellowship, Urantia Foundation, NewsFlash, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1998 Urantia Foundation</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_newsflash#issue-1-april-1998">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 1 — April 1998 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


_A monthly News Bulletin from Urantia Foundation to IUA Officers, Foundation Office Managers, Coordinating Committee members, Foundation Representatives, Translators, and other readers for the purpose of disseminating this information to readers in local areas._


## What's the purpose of this bulletin?

This publication is the first of a monthly bulletin that will be sent to all Governing Board members of IUA, Foundation Office Managers, Coordinating Committee members, Urantia Foundation Representatives, and Translators working with the Foundation. In other words, to all of you who are our key people in the field who have regular contact with the readers.

It is intended to be an informal communication vehicle to give you up-to-date news on Foundation matters. We ask that you disseminate the information with other readers in your local groups through your local newsletters or any other method you choose, as not everyone will be getting this.

## What's the difference between this bulletin and URANTIAN News?

_URANTIAN News_ is a semi-annually publication which goes to the entire Foundation mailing list of approximately 13,000 readers, traditionally has been polished, and is professional and conservative. Because of the vast constituency, it tends to be impersonal and news is often announced months after the event. _Newsflash_ is designed to get news out quickly to key people in the readership who work with the Foundation. Not a lot of attention will be made to format we will only be interested in imparting information in a timely fashion to you. You are viewed by the Foundation as an essential part of our team you're our hands and feet you are the ones who are in touch with grass-roots levels of the movement and we want you to know what is going on so you can assist us in keeping the readership informed and up-to-date with news and events.

We realize that a lack of communication from the Foundation has oftentimes contributed to allowing the spread of misinformation and negativity to work against us. It is important that readers are well apprised of what we do so that they can be in a better position to discern the truth about the Foundation's approach to its work and its trust.

We encourage you to contact us if you require clarification on any issue or concern, or if we have not informed you clearly in any way. We will need feedback to know if we are serving your needs adequately.

Here are the first of a set of monthly announcements:

## IUA Administrator and Coordinator Appointed: Cathy Jones and Trevor Swadling

For some time now, National Associations, Staff, and the Coordinating Committee have been asking the Trustees to provide a position or positions for IUA administration and coordination. This is so that there can be full time staff devoted to addressing the administrative needs of the IUA and assisting in the development and coordination of association activities. We are pleased to announce the appointment of Cathy Jones of Phoenix, Arizona to the position of IUA Administrator, and Trevor Swadling, a full time volunteer at 533 in Chicago (on loan from Sydney, Australia), as the IUA Coordinator. Their job descriptions are as follows:

_IUA Administrator:_

- Oversee all administrative aspects for the development, inauguration, and licensing of new associations.
- Arrange for announcements of new associations when appropriate.
- Provide advice and assistance to association officers for the understanding of the duties of governing board members to insure the smooth operation of their associations.
- Provide advice and support to associations in the development of study groups and reader contact.
- Liaison with the Coordinating Committee and IUA officers, and provide them with assistance and coordination of projects as required.
- Maintain a record oflUA's finances in liaison with the Foundation's Bookkeeper and Development Coordinator in Chicago.
- Be prepared to do whatever functions IUA deems necessary to assist in the dissemination of the teachings of _The Urantia Book_

_IUA Coordinator:_

- Assist the IUA Administrator in the development of study groups and reader contact by providing contact and referral information to local and national associations.
- Create and maintain a study group data base for referrals ensuring that they are bona-fide Urantia Book study groups (meaning that the group focuses on the study of _The Urantia Book_ and its teachings).
- Assist the IUA Administrator with the update and maintenance of lUA's mailing list and referrals.
- Respond to reader inquiries when needed and appropriate, and provide information on Urantia Foundation's purpose and function as well as information on IUA and reader activity.
- Assist the IUA Administrator with liaising between the Coordinating Committee and IDA officers, providing them assistance and coordinating projects as required.
- Provide assistance to the IlJA Administrator and the Coordinating Committee in the development, inauguration, and licensing of new associations.
- Be responsible for the physical production and mailing of the IlJA Journal.
- Maintain records of IUA Journal subscriptions, arrange for annual renewals, and liaison with Journal chief editor and IUA Administrator on Journal expenses and budget.

## Urantia Foundation Representatives

The Foundation has opened offices in some countries to deal with book distribution and reader services in the surrounding regions. However, as the Foundation is starting to deal with more and more countries as new translations are being published, it is not economically viable to open an office in each country. Nor do the laws in some countries allow for non-profit organizations to function as freely as in some others.

To circumvent this problem, the Foundation has decided to enter into formal agreements with individual readers who are willing to work with the Foundation. These readers become official Foundation representatives. The following is their job description:

A Foundation Representative shall:

- Assist Urantia Foundation in book distribution.
- Help Urantia Foundation in the preparation and attendance of book fairs and book exhibitions.
- Perform reader services.
- Foster the formation and development of study groups.
- Provide all information related to _The Urantia Book_ from and to Urantia Foundation.
- Help Urantia Foundation understand cultural and social differences in their respective countries, and explain Urantia Foundation's policies and viewpoints to their fellow countrymen.
- Present a quarterly detailed report and make recommendations through the Representatives' Coordinator to the Trustees and the Executive Director.
- Cooperate with Urantia Foundation in the spirit of _The Urantia Book_.
- Have access to the available information and to the mailing list of his or her country.
- Be provided with a list of bookshops and distributors that cany _The Urantia Book_ in the representative's country.
- Maintain an updated mailing list and make a quarterly copy thereof for the Foundation.
- Facilitate and assist in the formation of IUA association(s) in the representative's country.
- Render services on a voluntary basis without compensation.
- Use the trademarks under the tenns of a Licensing Agreement, and recognize the ownership of Urantia Foundation on the copyright of _The Urantia Book_ and its translations.

So far the following Foundation Representatives have been established:

Monsieur Francois Dupont, Brussels, Belgium; Senhor Luiz Carlos Dolabella Chagas, São Paulo, Brazil; Señor Mario Casassus Bulnes, Santiago de Chile, Chile; Señor Ramón Jacobo Ortiz, Santa Fe de Bogotá, Colombia; Mr. Peep Sõber, Tallinn, Estonia; Señor Gabriel Juárez Salazar, Zacatecas, Mexico; Señor Alfonso Luque Vásquez, Arequipa, Peru; Mrs. Victoria Strauss, Bern, Switzerland; Señor Carlos Ortega, Caracas, Venezuela.

Three more readers (in Norway, Lithuania, and Holland) have been invited to assume the role of representative but their response is still pending.

## Manager of Translations and International Representatives Appointed: Seppo Kanerva

Due to the increased work involved with the coordination and administration of the translation project and the International Representative program, a new position titled “Manager of Translations and International Representatives” has been created to manage these two very important areas of work. Urantia Foundation is pleased to announce the appointment of Seppo Kanerva from Helsinki, Finland to this position.

Seppo is a multi-linguist and we are most fortunate to have access to his talents and services. He will be managing and coordinating all of the translation efforts, as well as the International Representatives.

The following is a brief description of his duties:

_As Translations Manager his duties will include:_ providing advice on translation issues, assisting in decision-making with regard to translations, acting as the interface between the Trustees and the translators, assessing the practicability of any new book translation efforts, and monitoring and assisting ongoing translation efforts.

_As Foundation Representative Manager his duties will include:_ providing the representatives with assistance, instruction, and information on their duties, acting as an interface between the representatives and the Foundation executive management, and receiving regular reports from the representatives and submitting a synthesis of them to the Executive Director.


## New format and Job Description for the Coordinating Committee

The Coordinating Committee met at the Foundation in Chicago on February 28, 1998. The purpose of the meeting was to create the new Coordinating Committee and to define its role in support of Urantia Foundation, the Trustees, the Staff, and the readership. Travis Binion has been appointed Chair and Cathy Jones Vice Chair.

_The Role of the Coordinating Committee:_

The role of the Coordinating Committee has altered in that it is now a voluntary arm of the Trustees and office staff devoted to assisting the Foundation and IUA in getting work done. Each CC member will head a functional sub-committee—the duties of which have been stated in specific job descriptions. Each CC member will liaise with office staff and will choose their own committee members with the approval of the CC Chair. The CC's job is multi-functional:

1. To provide information and advice to the Trustees.
2. To relay the pulse and concerns of the readership.
3. To conduct research on various issues and make recommendations therefrom.
4. To provide clarification to the IUA members and general readership concerning organizations, Foundation policies, and staff functions.
5. To assist the readership under the auspices of the various sub-committee functions.
6. To provide organizational structure to assist in policy and plan dissemination.

A brief description of the CC subcommittees, and the CC members heading the committees are as follows:

_Human Resources, Lee Armstrong:_ will assist Urantia Foundation in its role as an employer in personnel matters.

_Association Development, Cathy Jones:_ will assist the establishment of local and national associations.

_Charter, Jo Anne Nelson:_ will oversee revisions to the WA charter and bylaws.

_International Relations, Trevor Swadling:_ will work with and assist the National Associations.

_Study Group, Suzanne Kelly-Ward:_ will assist readers to form study groups.

_Education, Pat Goodson:_ will work to encourage the development of study aids and other educational material.

_History, Sioux Harvey:_ will develop material to document a history of the Foundation.

_Financial, Bill Page:_ will help oversee the financial affairs and audits of the Foundation.

_Publications, Carolyn Prentice:_ will help to define the editorial policy for, and monitor the quality of secondary works that will be identified with the Foundation's trademarks.

_Legal, Nancy Shaffer:_ will assist as a consultant in legal training.

_Public Relations, Bryan Snowden:_ will help anticipate and advise on issues that may impact the Foundation's public relations, and develop press releases and answers to frequently asked questions.

_Internet, Les Tibbals:_ will help to develop websites and will also monitor the use of trademarks and text on the Web.

_Translations, Hannu Stenroos:_ will translate all secondary publications into other languages.

_Internet School, Michael Zehr:_ will develop a website as a kind of electronic correspondence school for study of _The Urantia Book_ in conjunction with the Education committee.

## Group Bookings to Helsinki

For all of you who are wondering about travel plans to Finland for the Helsinki conference, we have made arrangements with Wildwest Travel for a group package for travel from the USA. This package has been designed to suit those who wish to take a side tour after the conference. We have only reserved 50 seats so we advise that you book now to guarantee this group rate. You will need to contact Jill at Wildwest Travel to make the reservations. Her Phone number is 1-800-526-9429, and fax is (307) 789-5402.

The price is $918.77 (ifyou pay by credit card an additional 3% will be charged). We save about $400 on the round trip fare if we go this way.

**Note: Tbis group package price is only for the flights from the USA to Helsinki and back. It does not include accommodation or side tours.**

Details and deadlines are below. Check with the travel agent for details on visa requirements. We do know that no visas are required for Finland or England for U.S., Canadian, Australian, and Mexican citizens.

As you will be able to see from the itinerary, we have allowed a “window” of 4 days after the Helsinki conference before departure back to the United States, with a 2 night stop-over in London. This free time can be used for side trips which you will need to arrange independently with the travel agent. Also you will need to make independent arrangements for accommodation for 2 nights in London on the way home.

There is a train that travels between Helsinki and St. Petersburg for those who wish to take a trip into Russia. You can book a trip through Jill at Wildwest. If you are interested in staying in St. Petersburg overnight, a hotel must be booked also. There are other details about an overnight stay in Russia that you will need to know about — Jill can give you that information. 

**Note: Estonian Conference**: There is a _URANTIA Book_ readers conference in Estonia, August 11^th^ through the 14^th^, right after the Helsinki conference, which some of you may wish to attend. The cost for the conference ranges from US$30 to US$60 depending on the accommodation chosen. This cost includes lodging and meals. For further information contact the Foundation. If you wish to attend this conference you will need to apply to the conference organizers in Estonia and make your fravel arrangements from Helsinki and back through the travel agent.

Following is the itinerary for the group package:

&nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp;
--- | --- | ---
Aug 5 | Depart Newark, (NJ) | 6:35pm
Aug 6 | Arrive London | 6:35am
Aug 6 | Depart London | 11:40am
Aug 6 | Arrive Helsinki | 4:40pm
\* Aug 14 | Depart Helsinki | 5:40pm
\* Aug 14 | Arrive London <br>alternative: | 6:50pm
\*\* Aug 14 | Depart Helsinki | (Still to be<br>confirmed)
\*\* Aug 14 | Arrive London | "
Aug 16 | Depart London | 3:05pm
Aug 16 | Arrive Newark, NJ | 5:55pm

\* This flightcan take 12 people
\*\* This flight can take 38 people

Deadlines:

- May 7 — last day to cancel seats for a full refund of deposit
- June 5 — all names due — cannot be changed after this
- July 6 — final payments due.

If you have any further questions, call Kathleen or Connie at the Foundation, or Jill at Wildwest travel.


## Trustees visit the West Coast of the USA

Last month the Trustees and Tonia Baney visited the West Coast in an effort to give readers there an opportunity to meet with them, ask questions, and voice concerns. Readers from both the IUA and Fellowship groups were encouraged to attend. Open meetings, sponsored by the local IUA groups, were held in Vancouver, San Diego, San Francisco, and Portland. Smaller meetings were held in Seattle and Los Angeles. Overall the meetings were a great success. They met with over 240 people, shared a lot information, and made many new friendships. The recent moves towards unity seems to be filling many readers from all groups with a sense of hope. Barriers are coming down and people are feeling good about talking with one another. More trips to visit with readers in other states are planned for later in the year.

## Policy on Unity

> “_You do not have to see alike or feel alike or even think alike in order spiritually ***to be alike***._”  <a id="a210_110"></a>[The URANTIA Book [UB 141:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p5_1)]v

During the first quarterly meeting of 1998, the Trustees of URANTIA Foundation developed a policy of support for the unity of all readers and reader groups involved in the dissemination of the teachings of _The URANTIA Book_ to the peoples of the world. 

Formerly, URANTIA Foundation has not had a publicly stated policy on this subject. The Trustees feel that it is imperative to the growth ofthis revelation that all readers work toward the same goal, unified in purpose, and diversified in means; that URANTIA Foundation support those who want to disseminate the teachings, as long as the principles follow those within _The URANTIA Book_, and are not distorted, nor represent a negative View of the URANTIA Papers.

URANTIA Foundation calls on all readers and groups to work together in cooperation to solve the many challenges ahead. The Trustees know that we as a group will not succeed in our mission if we are divided. We call on all who are involved to look inward and find the courage and energy to accomplish this great challenge of unity within a spirit of fratemal affection and intelligent cooperation.

> _The higher a creature's education, the more respect he has for the knowledge, experience, and opinions of others._ <a id="a218_118"></a>[UB 25:3.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/25#p3_12)

## Common Concerns about the new Trustee Appointments

The appointment of two former members of the Fellowship's Executive Committee has occasioned a number of questions from members of the International Urantia Association. We thought that you might be interested in the most frequently asked questions and our answers.

**Question:** Is Urantia Foundation going to license any other organization to publish _The Urantia Book_?

**Answer:** No. Publishing the book is a business function and therefore a Foundation matter.

There are two broad functions associated with _The Urantia Book_: business, and social-fraternal. Both of these were assigned to the Foundation by the Declaration of Trust creating Urantia Foundation. The Trustees chose to delegate the social-fraternal function to the former Brotherhood and more recently to the International Urantia Association. The Urantia Foundation handles the “business” matters such as publication, translation, distribution, and protection of _The Urantia Book_.

**Question:** Is the Urantia Foundation going to print a book with two columns and with angels or Jesus or both on the cover?

**Answer:** No. Urantia Foundation has no plans to print _The Urantia Book_ with two columns or to change its cover design. It will continue to print _The Urantia Book_, formatted and paginated as it was in 1955 and having the same physical appearances as it did in 1955. In addition, all translations in content, format, pagination, and physical appearance will continue, as much as possible, to be “true to the original” English text. Our goal is to have Urantia Books appear on bookshelves that have the same basic classical image that we have enjoyed in the past. However, any suggestions to improve the quality of the Foundation's products are always welcome.

**Question:** Has the Foundation increased its emphasis on fund-raising?

**Answer:** There has always been, and we believe there will always be, sufficient funds to enable Urantia Foundation to execute its Trust. At the same time, we know that running a rapidly growing multinational organization requires professional management, wise stewardship, and adequate funding.

Sales and expenses are about triple what they were five years ago. Today, 5 translations have been published and about a dozen are in progress. Five years ago, only 2 translations were being published, and only 2 were in progress. Five years ago, the Foundation had no Executive Director and employed only 4 staff members. Today, the Foundation employs 7 persons full-time and has 2 full-time volunteers. Five years ago, there were no computer, CD-ROM, and audio versions. Five years ago, there were only 3 associations of IUA. Today, there are 26 associations with over 700 members.

As the Foundation seeks to undertake more projects to increase the availability of _The Urantia Book_ and to provide services to readers, the work load increases. Therefore we must pay attention to the fact that additional funding is needed to support the work that needs to be done.

Notwithstanding that the Trustees desire that the Foundation be professionally managed and financially secure, their top priority continues to be the execution of the Declaration of Trust with emphasis on the “Principal Object,” and the “Concordant Objects.”

_PRINCIPAL OBJECT: The object for which this Foundation is created is the promotion, improvement, and expansion among the peoples of the world of the comprehension and understanding of Cosmology and the relation of the planet on which we live to the Universe, of the genesis and destiny of Man and his relation to God, and of the true teachings of Jesus Christ; and for the inculcation and encouragement of the realization and appreciation of the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man—in order to increase and enhance the comfort, happiness, and well being of Man, as an individual and as a member of society, through the fostering of a religion, a philosophy, and a cosmology which are commensurate with Man's intellectual and cultural development._

_CONCORDANT OBJECTS: The concordant objects for which the Foundation is created are **to perpetually preserve inviolate the** text of The Urantia Book and to disseminate the principles, teachings, and doctrines of The Urantia Book [emphasis added]._

**Question:** Can a member of the Fellowship also be a member of IUA?

**Answer:** Yes. Anyone is eligible to join an association of IUA if they have read the entire Urantia Book, accept its teachings, and support the Foundation, the _Declaration of Trust,_ and the Foundation's ownership of the copyright and marks. An individual desiring membership in IUA applies to their nearest regional association and that association's membership committee decides for or against acceptance.

**Question:** What is the difference between membership in the International Urantia Association and membership in some other organization of readers of _The Urantia Book_?

**Answer:** The members of IUA are formally interdependent with Urantia Foundation. They sign a document stating that they accept the teachings of _The Urantia Book_, and that they support the Urantia Foundation, the _Declaration of Trust,_ and the Foundation's ownership of the copyright and marks.

The International Urantia Association was organized by a collaborative effort between the Trustees and friends and supporters of the Foundation worldwide.

IUA is a democratic organization whose purposes are the in-depth study of the book and the orderly dissemination of its teachings. IUA is a “task-driven” fraternal organization with particular emphasis on servicing the needs of readers and potential readers worldwide.

## International URANTIA Association and Fellowship — Stage Historic Meeting

On Friday, April 17, 1998, members of the Coordinating Committee and representatives of the International URANTIA Association from five nations met in Chicago with the Executive Committee of the Fellowship and some members of their General Council to explore common interests. The Trustees attended this meeting in the capacity as the Board of Directors of IUA. The goal was to discuss common interests, address differences, and seek agreement which might lead tojoint projects.

The meeting began with each organization outlining its vision and organizational structure. Lee Armstrong, IUA Coordinating Committee Human Resources Chair, characterized the International URANIA Association as a task-oriented group of readers committed to addressing readership issues, fostering the in-depth study of _The URANTIA Book_ and the orderly dissemination of its teachings. IUA members provide services to readers and students of _The URANTIA Book_ and are committed to preserving the revelation for future generations. Armstrong outlined IUA's organizational structure and discussed how local and national associations come into being, as service projects and reader needs create demand. He also explained the activities of the Coordinating Committee as administrators for, and advisors to the Trustees of URANTIA Foundation.

Speakers for the Fellowship included President Janet Farrington-Graham, Dan Massey, Lori Krasny, and Steve Dreier. Their presentations outlined the structure, history, projects, and vision of the Fellowship. An important objective of the Fellowship is to embrace diversity of viewpoints, expression, and philosophies. The Fellowship's projects, activities, workshops, and initiatives highlighted the positive nature of the organization's outreach programs. Of particular interest was the Fellowshipts new Family Life program, and its focus on educational programs and activities for children.

One of the objectives of the IUA representatives in this meeting was to “seek first to understand” the differences between the two organizations. Another objective was to understand the Fellowship's position regarding the materials published on its web page, some of which are openly disparaging of the Foundation and it supporters. The Fellowship leaders emphasized that they exert no authority over the activities of individual members of the Fellowship or its societies, including the content of materials posted by individuals on the Fellowship's web page. The Fellowship representatives explained that under the Fellowship Constitution, the Executive Committee and General Council are prohibited from interfering with the activities of individual members or of its societies, which are strictly autonomous. Consequently, individuals are free to embark on projects and publish their own viewpoints on the Fellowship's website. Janet FarringtonGraham explained that only statements bearing her signature represent official positions of the Fellowship.

Exploration of the missions, scope, and structure of the organizations revealed clear and distinct differences between the established cultures of the organizations and framed some of the challenges and issues that remain.

The overall tone of the meeting was optimistic and progressive. The organizations agreed to:

- Provide points of contact for future joint conference interaction;
- Publicize, in each other's newsletters, the Fellowship's Family Life Program and the Coordinating Committee's project to compile a catalog of study aids and secondary works;
- Form a Fellowship Unity & Conciliatory Committee to dovetail with the Coordinating Committee's Unity and Cooperation Committee;
- Hold a meeting to discuss international trade shows;
- Form joint working groups to make recommendations to each organization relating to translations, website content, and reader and study group referrals.

In addition, both organizations agreed to have further discussions in smaller groups regarding matters of mutual interest, including:
- Joint participation in the presentation of _The Urantia Book_ and Urantia teachings at public book fairs;
- Joint efforts to produce a video suitable for introducing _The Urantia Book_ to prospective readers;
- The desirability of coordinating regional meetings and conferences and publishing a joint conference calendar.

International Urantia Association, the Coordinating Committee, and Urantia Foundation sincerely support the movement toward unity among all readers of _The Urantia Book_. We desire to cooperate with organizations throughout the world whose actions are consistent with the values taught in _The Urantia Book_. We look forward to progress in future meetings with the leadership of the Fellowship and in the pursuit of unity among readers.


## References

- [Urantia Foundation's NewsFlash!](https://www.urantia.org/news/1998-04)
- [Urantia Foundation's News archive](https://www.urantia.org/urantia-foundation/newsletter-pdf-archives)
- [Urantia Book Historical Society](https://ubhs.hosted-by-files.com/http/FrameDocTypesUN.html)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_newsflash#issue-1-april-1998">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 1 — April 1998 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
