---
title: "NEWSFLASH! — Issue 8 — March 1999"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
tags: Urantia Foundation—Copyright, Fellowship, Urantia Foundation, NewsFlash, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 1999 Urantia Foundation</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_newsflash#issue-8-march-1999">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 8 — March 1999 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


_A monthly News Bulletin from Urantia Foundation to IUA Officers, Foundation Office Managers, Coordinating Committee members, Foundation Representatives, Translators, and other readers for the purpose of disseminating this information to readers in local areas._

## Expanded Newsflash Recipient List

For those of you receiving this newsletter for the first time, we'd like to let you know that it has been in publication since April of last year. It was originally intended a quick, no-frills newsletter that could be sent to the officers of the local and national associations of the IUA and Foundation workers in the field for the purpose of keeping readers in touch with Foundation activity. It has been well received and we have decided to expand the mailing list to include some others who have shown support for the Foundation in the last few years. We feel that this newsletter will help to keep you informed in greater detail than the biannual URANTIAN News. We do our best to publish this either monthly or bi-monthly and do not spend a lot of time on formatting so that we can get the news to you as frequently as possible.

If you would like to receive back issues of this publication or if you would prefer to receive this by email, please let us know and it can be arranged. Our format is WORD 97 for Windows but we can also send it as text or as a message in the body of the email. We hope you enjoy this publication and take this opportunity to thank you for your loyalty to and support of Urantia Foundation.

Tonia Baney

## Foundation and IUA “Meet the Readers” In Florida and Montreal

The Trustees, Executive Director Tonia Baney, and IUA Administrator Cathy Jones continued the Foundation's efforts to reach out to readers in recent visits to Orlando, Florida, and Quebec, Canada. The bond of “interdependence” with the Foundation shone forth as IUA members and other Florida readers of _The Urantia Book_ responded to the request to meet and get to know the Foundation's leaders.

_Orlando, Florida - February 14,1999_

It was a “heart” felt meeting with 80 readers in attendance. The “magic World of Disney” did not equal the spiritual energy flowing at the Courtyard Marriott in Lake Buena Vista.

Trustees Richard Keeler and Mo Siegel, shared their insights on Foundation history and action plans for future distribution of the Revelation. Tonia Baney explained the many elements involved in the administration of 533. Questions and answers ensued and there was a sense of realization among the readers that their opinions really mattered.

Cathy Jones explained the organizational structure of the IUA, which included the newly formed international governing body, the Council of Presidents and Vice Presidents (CNP.) All responded enthusiastically to the need of working shoulder-to-shoulder, as material partners, with the Thought Adjusters who have prepared those ready for the advanced teachings of _The Urantia Book._

_Montreal, Canada - February 28, 1999_

The cold Canadian winter weather didn't dampen the determination of 45 enthusiastic readers who attended the Montreal meeting. Tonia Baney represented the Foundation, and Cathy Jones, the IUA.

Tonia gave a very comprehensive presentation on _Urantia Book_ distribution and the function and responsibilities of a Foundation of fice pointing out that Urantia Foundation does not make any money through the sale of books.

Cathy Jones gave an overview of the IDA organizational structure, with a special emphasis on the CNP. She announced the formation of the Urantia National Association of Canada, which would include all three Canadian local associations. The Quebec group has the choice of actively participating with the other two English speaking groups or applying to the CNP for recognition as a separate entity based on their primary French language.

Tonia Baney said: “It was a joy to spend this time with our brothers and sisters in Quebec and to share in a unity of spirit amidst the differences in culture and language. We are thankful for their friendship.”

## Foundation offices to be Opened in Vancouver and Quebec City - Nathen and Kassandra Jansen, Richard Dore, Colette Peltier

Plans are underway and volunteers have been found to open Foundation offices in Vancouver and Quebec City to service the book trade and readers for both English and French speaking provinces throughout Canada.

Husband and wife team, **Nathen and Kassandra Jansen**, long time students of _The Urantia Book,_ have kindly volunteered their services to manage the office in Vancouver. This office will service the English speaking provinces and will be a distribution and information center for the English _Urantia Book_

Another wonderful husband and wife team, **Richard Dore** and **Colette Peltier** have volunteered their services to manage the office in Quebec City. Preliminary arrangements were made there recently during **Tonia Baney**'s visit to Quebec City. This office will handle Foundation business for the French speaking province of Quebec and will be a distribution and information center for _Le Livre d'Urantia._

From Montreal, **Pierre and Lise Routhier** will assist Richard and Colette in some of the duties of the Quebec office.

After the news about the office in Quebec City was announced at the reader meeting, readers were not shy in coming forward to volunteer their services. A supporter of the Quebec readers has offered to supply 100 completely operational computers for under $100 each. An experienced reader offered to organize a Quebec Teachers Corps. An IUA member offered his services as a financial professional to the Quebec Urantia Foundation office. All this is proof that the spirit of _The Urantia Book_ is alive and well in Quebec.

Our deepest gratitude is extended to all those willing men and women who understand the needs for the spreading of this revelation and who choose to work interdependently and cooperatively with the Foundation.

## URANTIA. 2000 — New York City, August 4-7, 2000

The next international conference for IUA will be held at the Wagner College, Staten Island, NY from August 4-7, 2000. The college overlooks the beautiful New York Harbor and is a short ferry ride to Manhattan Island.

USUA is the National Association responsible for hosting this next International Urantia Association event and they have recruited the services of two of their local associations, the Urantia Association of New England and the Urantia Association of Greater New York to take care of the arrangements.

The theme for the conference will be ***Living the Will of our Father***. A children's and young people's program will be an integral part of the conference. Staten Island is a twenty minute car ride from Newark International airport and approximately forty-five minutes from JFK international airport. The Web Site for the college is www.wagner.edu

More details will be forthcoming but further information can be obtained by contacting:

Nick Scalzo,
51 Iron Works Rd,
Clinton, CT 06413-1227, USA,
Telephone/fax: +1-860 669-4900,
email:<NICHOLASWS@AOL.COM>

## Prison Project Complete

_The following is an announcement from Elizabeth Engstrom who initiated, managed, and coordinated a very successful prison library donation project._

> As of February 1, 1999, the Prison Project has placed a copy of _The Urantia Book_ in every prison in the United States. This amazing accomplishment was made possible in only twenty-two months with the contribution of thousands of dollars by hundreds of Urantia Book readers and believers, and with the cooperation of the Urantia Foundation, who made books available to this project for the $5 postage fee.
> 
> As a result, hundreds of prison chaplains have become familiar with the book, study groups are forming in prisons, and a newsletter forum for prisoner-readers to communicate with each other is being formulated. There is still a needfor books to be replaced in prison libraries as these books disappear, and as readership grows within prison walls. The Urantia Foundation willfulfill these requests made by the prison librarians and chaplains with books at a discounted rate. Donations for this purpose may be sent directly to the Foundation.
> 
> This concludes the Prison Project in its present form, as the time has come for us to turn our attention to other ministries. We encourage all of you who have donated to this project to monitor, when possible, the prisons who benefited from your generosity, and help the librarians replace the books when necessary.
> 
> Thanks to all of you who made this incredible journey possible.


## Report on Millennium Initiative Meeting March 12-14, 1999

_The following was received from the Millennium Initiative Committee:_

Worldwide growth of interest in _The Urantia Book_ is bringing increasingly diverse viewpoints into the readership. Embracing this diversity without encouraging sectarian division is one of the major challenges to growth of our movement.

Last weekend, ten concerned readers met to explore how deepened friendship, grounded in a shared dedication to the teachings, might help inspire a new vision for the evolution of our community. We came as individuals, apart from organizational affiliation, to begin our quest free from the divisive legacy of social strife.

The participants were Lyn Lear, Travis Binion, Steve Dreier, David Elders, Seppo Kanerva, Carolyn Kendall, Dan Massey, Nancy Shaffer, and Kathleen Swadling, with Marta Elders facilitating. We began with our shared desire to do the Father's will, a willingness to listen, and a desire to better understand issues dividing our community. Through confrontation and laughter, debate and prayer, we all came to appreciate that the obstacles to improved social experience with the revelation go far beyond our current legacy of organizational strife to include differences of culture, language, nationality, temperament, personal experience, attitude, spiritual sensitivity, and psychic maturity.

This weekend we began a dialogue that must continue in further meetings. No small group can fully address current or future issues, so this dialogue must expand to include readers of varied cultures, languages, organizations, and viewpoints.

Only by considering the full spectrum of possibilities will our movement successfully unify for greater planetary service. We hope this and future meetings will foster a genuine experience of mutual appreciation and goodwill among all who believe in the Urantia Revelation, _“sonship with God, brotherhood with man, and ever-ascending citizenship in the eternal universe.”_ <a id="a117_374"></a>[The Urantia Book [UB 94:10.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/94#p10_3)]

We hope you agree we have nothing to lose and everything to gain by continuing and expanding this dialogue. The will to put our differences behind us and to embrace the diversity of new growth must come from all of us. Free and open discussion is the key to resolution of differences. We will establish communication mechanisms to keep you informed about this work and to facilitate your input to the process. Thank you for your expressions of encouragement, your open-mindedness, and your continuing support.

With faith in our ongoing adventure,  

The Millennium Initiative

## The Fellowship Accepts License

The Foundation has been offering the Fellowship a license to display the text of _The Urantia Book_ on their website since the new “fair use” policies were introduced. At the last General Council meeting of the Fellowship it was voted to accept the Foundation's of fer. This means that the Fellowship is now able to display the text of the book legally on their website and to allow people to download the text for personal use.

## Maaherra Appeals Final Judgement

After the Foundation won the appeal in the Ninth Circuit Court, the case of Urantia Foundation vs. Kristen Maaherra was sent back down to the lower court in Arizona for final declaratory judgement. Judge Urbom from the Arizona District Court announced on January 29, 1999:

> It iS ordered and declared the final judgement in this case that the defendant, Kristen Maaherra infringed the renewal copyrights in _The Urantia Book_ by the verbatim copying of onto computer diskettes and distributing the diskettes to others.

We have been looking forward to the prospect of being free at last of courtroom visits. Unfortunately, however, we have just been informed that Ms. Maaherra has filed an appeal. We shall continue to keep you posted.

## References

- [Urantia Foundation's NewsFlash!](https://www.urantia.org/news/1999-03)
- [Urantia Foundation's News archive](https://www.urantia.org/urantia-foundation/newsletter-pdf-archives)
- [Urantia Book Historical Society](https://ubhs.hosted-by-files.com/http/FrameDocTypesUN.html)

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_newsflash#issue-8-march-1999">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 8 — March 1999 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
