---
title: "Causes, effects II"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-10-17T22:23:59Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-10-17T22:23:59Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2013 Simon Orsini<br>© 2013 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>
<br>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Chaz_Wesley/Eveille_a_la_plenitude_de_la_vie">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Awakened to the fullness of life</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-64-autumn-2013">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 64 — Autumn 2013</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Jean_Claude_Romeuf/La_fee">
          <span class="pr-2">The fairy</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



In the spiritual and material universe the physical elements that constitute the electron are made of another matter. If we could modify the rotation of the primary units of matter and at the same time transform these associations of energy into adapted frequencies, we could create a new substance, we would then enter a new dimension.

At this point, I specify that the diffuse background heard and recorded by two scientists at random during their research on microwaves, which earned them the Nobel Prize (according to the theory of the big bang) is in reality nothing other than the residual resonance of the space cyclone generated by nuclear eruptions in the different phases contained inside the nebulae, which gave birth in several stages to the suns and planets of our galaxy. Not to be confused with micrometric radiation, this radiation is a particular phenomenon undoubtedly due to the accumulation of the very irradiant and very dense missing matter in the universe. In space, many influences intervene to give the illusion that the speed increases by at least 180 km per second, for each million light years added to the distance. The illusion makes us believe that distant star systems are fleeing our sector at a speed of more than 50,000 km per second. But this apparent speed of recession is not real, it results from many erroneous factors including observation angles.

All these anomalies result from the deformations of space-time and the rotations in the opposite direction of certain levels of space. All these movements tend to equalize the balances in the universe as well as the spatial tensions, movement and space are complements and balancers of gravity. Space is not empty. In sixteen cubic centimeters of space there are at least one hundred particles, identical to those which constitute electrons. These particles act as points of force, in order to maintain stability in space. It is the Universal and Absolute Father, Eternal and Infinite, without exterior or beyond who assumes the total balance of the material universe that he created. In a fairly near period, scientists thanks to their new satellites will progress in the discovery of the truth about our universe, but the discoveries will follow one another on both the material and spiritual levels. Infinity being known only by the three Absolutes, the search will be eternal.

The real history of our earth began when the earth's crust was cold enough to cause the formation of the first ocean. The nebula completed its journey in four stages:

1. the primary stage (said of a compound whose function is attached to an atom obtained by subtraction) the nebula then becomes circular,
2. the secondary stage (spiral evolution),
3. the tertiary stage (dispersion of the suns)
4. Ten billion years ago, the quaternary cycle began, which led to the relative stabilization of the solar systems of our local universe.

## Energy and strength

Our Creator being eternal and infinite, there is an absolute force. It is this absolute force which holds all powers and all energy:

1. there is the emerging energy (the cosmic force, the energy reservoir (dark energy)
2. universal power (the Universal Absolute).
3. physical energy (dark matter) oriented and channeled in space.
3. The conditioned universe (of which we are a part),
4. the unconditioned universe without life (which holds the primordial force and which reacts to transcendental causes to the extent that the force is absolute (the Universal Absolute).

There are two levels of emerging energy: powerful energy and gravitational energy. Physical energy has been matured to the point where it can be directed into channels of power and put to use for the many purposes of the Creator.

Powerful energy is the energy of orientation, of mass movements. When energy becomes matter, it becomes sensitive to gravitation. It is the energy that contains the potential of universal power and thus becomes the active ancestor of all matter in the universe.

## Composition and properties of matter

The physical properties of matter depend on the speed of rotation of the elements that compose it, the number and size of those that rotate at a distance from the nuclear body, or the spatial content of the matter.

The main interactions which act inside the atom (knowledge in the year 2010):
- neuteron (nucleus of the atom),
- deuteron (nucleus of the deuterium atom isotope of hydrogen),
- Baryon (neutrons and protons) belong to the baryon family,
- Gluons bosons and photons (weak interaction),
- Mesons strong interaction particles composed of a quark and an anti-quark.

The spatial charge of universal force is homogeneous and differentiated. The organization in terms of evolved energy leads to the concentration of energy in discontinuous masses, of defined dimensions, of established weight (**quantum**).

Local gravity comes into full effect when atomic organization appears. Pre-atomic matter becomes slightly sensitive to gravity when activated by x-rays or other similar energies. The particles that make up the electron obey, respond only to the gravity field of the Universal Absolute (Paradise) they do not react to linear gravity or the gravitational field. Physicists are looking for the Higgs boson, the ultimate particles are found in the electron (one hundred particles per electron). If the particles that make up the electron were accelerated in their rotation speed, to the maximum critical speed, they would lose their individuality and return to the power energy stage (which is found in the unconditioned universe). It is the rotation speed of the particles around their axis that determines their negative or positive reactions in the different types of electronic units.

Each atom has a diameter slightly greater than a quarter-millionth of a millimeter, and an electron weighs slightly less than two-thousandth of the smallest atom, that of hydrogen.

The characteristic positive proton of the atomic nucleus is no larger than a negative electron but weighs two or three thousand times more. At the center of each tiny universe of energy there exists a nuclear portion of material existence. Around this center revolve the units of energy vaguely comparable to the planets circling the sun. Inside the atom, the electrons revolve around the central proton at distances proportional to those of the planets circling the sun. In our solar system, in comparison with their actual size, the distance between the atomic nucleus and the nearest electronic circuit is the same as between the sun and Mercury, the planet nearest to the sun.

The axial rotational speeds of electrons and their speeds in their orbits around the atomic nucleus are beyond imagination. The positive particles of radium fly through space at a rate of 16,000 thousand kilometers per second, while the negative particles approach that of light.

Among several factors, gravity is one that helps to keep the tiny energy system of an atom in shape, but a powerful unknown energy is also present, it is the secret of their fundamental constitution and ultimate behavior. This force may be that of the Universal Absolute, it influences all the interior space of the tiny energy organization of an atom. Linear gravity is the short-range cohesive force of the microcosm.

## The electronic stadium

This stage is the basis of all materialization in the universe; mutual attraction ensures the cohesion of energetic particles in the constitution of an electron. When electrons pass from higher energy levels of orbital revolution to lower levels, quanta are always emitted. Changes in the orbit of electrons produce the ejection or absorption of measurable particles of light energy when they undergo a collision. Manifestations of wave energy also accompany the activities of positive bodies and other elements of the electronic stage.

Long before physicists discovered the infinitesimal particles that would form the electron, they would undoubtedly detect the phenomena due to the rain of these rays on the earth. These short and powerful rays represent the initial activity of energies that are slowed down to the point of turning towards the electronic organization of matter. As the energies agglomerate into electrons, a condensation occurs with a corresponding storage of energy.

(to be continued)

Simon Orsini



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Chaz_Wesley/Eveille_a_la_plenitude_de_la_vie">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Awakened to the fullness of life</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-64-autumn-2013">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 64 — Autumn 2013</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Jean_Claude_Romeuf/La_fee">
          <span class="pr-2">The fairy</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
