---
title: "Preface"
description: "Men of the Old Stone Age"
published: true
date: 2024-08-13T14:02:03.086Z
tags: History, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-08-13T14:02:03.086Z
---

<span id="pvii">[<sup><small>p. vii</small></sup>]</span>

This volume is the outcome of an ever memorablte tour through the country of the men of the Old Stone Age, guided by three of the distinguished archaeologists of France, to whom the work is gratefully dedicated. This Palaeolithic tour[^1] of three weeks, accompanied as it was by a constant flow of conversation and discussion, made a very profound impression, namely, of the very early evolution of the spirit of man, of the close relation bet'ween early human environment and industry and the development of mind, of the remote antiquity of the human powers of observation, of discovery, and of invention. It appears that men with faculties and powers like our own, but in the infancy of education and tradition, were living in this region of Europe at least 25,000 years ago. Back of these intelligent races were others, also of eastern origin but in earlier stages of mental development, all pointing to the very remote ancestry of man from earlier mental and physical stages.

Another great unpression from this region is that it is the oldest centre of human habitation of which we have a complete, unbroken record of continuous residence from a period as remote as 100,000 years corresponding with the dawm of human culture, to the hamlets of the modem peasant of France of A. D. 1915. In contrast, Egyptian, ZEgean, and Mesopotamian civilizations appear as of yesterday.

The history of this region and its people has been developed chiefly through the genius of French archaeologists, beginning with Boucher de Perthes. The more recent discoveries, which have come in rapid and almost bewdldering succession since the foundation of the _Institut de Paleontologie humaine_, have been treated in a number of works recently published by some of the <span id="pviii">[<sup><small>p. viii</small></sup>]</span> experienced archeologists of England, France, and Germany. I refer especially to the _Prehistoric Times_ of Lord Avebury, to the _Ancient Hunters_ of Professor Sollas, to _Der Mensch der Vorzeit_ of Professor Obermaier, and to _Die dibmale Vorzeit Deutschlands_ of Doctor R. R. Schmidt. Thus, on receiving the invitation from President Wheeler to lecture upon this subject before the University of California, I hesitated from the feeling that it would be difficult to say anything which had not been already as well or better said. On further reflection, however, I accepted the invitation with the purpose of attempting to give this great subject a more strictly historical or chronological treatment than it had previously received within the limits of a popular work in our own language, also, to connect the environment, the animal and human life, and the art.

This element of the _time_ in which the various events occurred can only be drawn from a great variety of sources, from the simultaneous consideration of the geography, climate, plants and animals, the mental and bodily development of the various races, and the industries and arts which reflect the relations between the mind and the environment. In more technical terms, I have undertaken in these lectures to make a synthesis of the results of geology, palaeontology, anthropology, and archaeology, a correlation of environmental and of human events in the European Ice Age. Such a synthesis was begun many years ago in the preparation of my _Age of Mammals_, but could not be completed until I had gone over the territory myself.

The attempt to place this long chapter of prehistory on a historical basis has many dangers, of which I am fully aware. After weighing the evidence presented by the eminent authorities in these various branches of science, I have presented my conclusions in very definite and positive form rather than in vague or general terms, believing that a positive statement has at least the merit of being positively supported or rebutted by fresh evidence. For example, I have placed the famous Piltdown man, _Eoanthropus_, in a comparatively recent stage of geologic time, an entirely opposite conclusion to that reached by Doctor A. Smith Woodward, <span id="pix">[<sup><small>p. ix</small></sup>]</span> who has taken a leading part in the discovery of this famous race and has concurred with other British geologists in placing it in early Pleistocene times. The difference between jany and late Pleistocene times is not a matter of thousands but of hundreds of thousands of years; if so advanced a stage as the Piltdown man should definitely occur in the early Pleistocene, we may well expect to discover man in the Pliocene; on the contrary, in my opinion even in late Pliocene times man had only reached a stage similar to the _Pithecanthropus_, or prehuman Trinil race of Java ; in other words, according to my view, man as such chiefly evolved during the half million years of the Pleistocene Epoch and not during the Pliocene.

This question is closely related to that of the antiquity of the oldest implements shaped by the human hand. Here again I have adopted an opinion opposed by some of the highest authorities, but supported by others, namely, that the earliest of these undoubted handiworks occur relatively late in the Pleistocene, namely, about 125,000 years ago. Since the Piltdown man was found in association with such implements, it is at once seen that the two questions hang together.

This work represents the co-operation of many specialists on a single, very complex problem. I am not in any sense an archaeologist, and in this important and highly technical field I have relied cluefly upon the work of Hugo Obermaier and of Dechelette in the Lower Palaeolithic, and of Henri Breuil in the Upper Palaeolithic. Through the courtesy of Doctor Obermaier I had the privilege of watching the exploration of the wonderful grotto of Castillo, in northern Spain, which affords a unique and almost complete sequence of the industries of the entire Old Stone Age. This visit and that to the cavern of Altamira, with its wonderful frescoed ceiling, were in themselves a liberal education in the prehistory of man. With the Abbe Breuil I visited all the old camping stations of Upper Palaeolithic times in Dordogne and noted with wonder and admiration his detection of all the fime gradations of invention which separate the flint-makers of that period. With Professor Cartailhac I enjoyed a broad survey of the Lower <span id="px">[<sup><small>p. x</small></sup>]</span> and Upper Palaeolithic stations and caverns of the Pyrenees region and took note of his learned and spirited comments. Here also welfead the prixilege of being with the party who entered for the first time the cavern of Tuc d’Audoubert, with the Comte de Begouen and his sons.

In the American Museum I have been greatly aided by Mr. Nels C. Nelson, who has reviewed all the archaeological notes and greatly assisted me in the classification of the flint and bone implements which is adopted in this volume.

In the study of the divisions, duration, and fluctuations of climate during the Old Stone Age I have been assisted chiefly by Doctor Chester A. Reeds, a geologist of the American Museum, who devoted two months to bringing together in a comprehensive and intelligible form the results of the great researches of Albrecht Penck and Eduard Bruckner embraced in the three-volume work, _Die Alpen im Eiszeitalter_. The temperatures and snow-levels of the Glacial Epoch, which is contemporaneous with the Old Stone Age, together with the successive phases of mammalian life which they conditioned, afford the firm basis of our chronology ; that is, we must reckon the grand divisions of past time in terms of Glacial and Interglacial Stages; the subdivisions are recorded in terms of the human invention and progress of the flint industry. I have also had frequent recourse to _The Great Ice Age_ and the more recent _Antiquity of Man in Europe_ of James Geikie, the founder of the modern theory of the multiple Ice Age in Europe.

It is a unique pleasure to express my indebtedness to the Upper Palaeolithic artists of the now extinct Crô-Magnon race, from whose work I have sought to portray so far as possible the mammalian and human life of the Old Stone Age. While we owe the discovery and early interpretation of this art to a generation of archeologists, it has remained for the Abbé Breuil not only to reproduce the art with remarkable fidelity but to firmly establish a chronology of the stages of art development. These results are brilliantly set forth in a superb series of volumes published by the _Institut de Paleontologie humaine_ on the foundation of the Prince of Monaco; in fact, the memoirs on the art <span id="pxi">[<sup><small>p. xi</small></sup>]</span> and industry of _Grimaldi_, _Font-de-Gaume_, _Altamira_, _La Pasiega_, and the Cantabrian caves of Spain (_Les Cavernes de la Region Cantabrique_), representing the combined labors of Capitan, Cartailhac, Verneau, Boule, Obermaier, and Breuil, mark a new epoch in the prehistory of man in Europe. There never has been a more fortunate union of genius, opportunity, and princely support.

In the collection of materials and illustrations from the vast number of original papers and memoirs consulted in the preparation of this volume, as well as in the verification of the text and proofs, I have been constantly aided by one of my research assistants, Miss Christina D. Matthew, who has greatly facilitated the work. I am indebted also to Miss Mabel R. Percy for the preparation and final revision of the manuscript. From the bibliography prepared by Miss Jannette M. Lucas, the reader may find the original authority for every statement which does not rest on my owm observation or reflection.

Interest in human evolution centres chiefly in the skull and in the brain. The slope of the forehead and the other angles, which are so important in forming an estimate of the brain capacity, may be directly compared throughout this volume, because the profile or side view of every skull figured is placed in exactly the same relative position, namely, on the lines established by the anatomists of the Frankfort Convention to conform to the natural pose of the head on the living body.

In anatomy I have especially profited by the co-operation of my former student and present university colleague Professor J. Howard McGregor, of Columbia, who has shown great anatomical as well as artistic skill in the restoration of the heads of the four races of _Trinil_, _Piltdown_, _Neanderthal_, and _Crô-Magnon_. The new reconstruction of the Piltdown head is with the aid of casts sent to me by my friend Doctor A. Smith Woodward, of the British Museum of Natural History. The problem of reconstruction of the Piltdown skull has, through the differences of interpretation by Smith Woodward, EUiot Smith, and Arthur Eeith, become one of the _causes célèbres_ of anthropology. On the placing of the fragments of the skull and jaws, which have few points <span id="pxii">[<sup><small>p. xii</small></sup>]</span> of contact, depends the all-important question of the size of the brain and the character of the profile of the face and jaws. In Professor McGregor’s reconstruction different methods have been used from those employed by the British anatomists, and advantage has been taken of an observation of Mr. A. E. Anderson that the single canine tooth belongs in the upper and not in the lower jaw. In these models, and in all the restorations of men by Charles R. Knight under my direction, the controlling principle has been to make the restoration as _human_ as the anatomical evidence will admit. This principle is based upon the theory for which I believe very strong grounds may be adduced, that all these races represent stages of advancing and progressive development; it has seemed to me, therefore, that in our restorations we should indicate as much alertness, intelligence, and upward tendency as possible. Such progressive expression may, in fact, be observed in the faces of the higher anthropoid apes, such as the chimpanzees and orangs, when in process of education. No doubt, our ancestors of the early Stone Age were brutal in many respects, but the representations which have been made chiefly by French and German artists of men with strong gorilla or chimpanzee characteristics are, I believe, unwarranted by the anatomical remains and are contrary to the conception which we must form of beings in the scale of rapidly ascending intelligence.

Henry Fairfield Osborn.

American Museum of Natural History
June 21, 1915.

In sending forth the second edition I have been able to add the results of recent research on the jaw of the Piltdown man, and on the presence of anthropoid apes in Europe during the Old Stone Age.

H. F. 0.

December 20, 1915.

## Footnotes

[^1]: The folding map at the end of the volume exhibits the entire extent of the author’s tour.