---
title: "The Problem of Business"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-02-14T14:02:03.086Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-02-14T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2010 Dan Amyx<br>© 2010 The Urantia Book Fellowship</p>

Throughout my life there have been aspects of business that have troubled me. I have observed wealthy international corporations damage the environment, cause cultural problems in developing nations, even cause deaths, all for the want of money. For some people, this might suggest that money and business are bad or evil. But it is not the money that’s the problem, it is the administration of it; the wielding of financial power without ethics or morality. Sure, many businesses follow the law, but often they find “loopholes” that allow them to do what they will, without regard to peripheral consequences. In other words, business generally does what it can get away with, and not what is right. I believe part of the reason is that for centuries, business has been treated as a separate entity from our daily lives. It is considered amoral, without morals either good or bad—just without. This has allowed men and women who normally live their lives ethically or morally, to take a sabbatical from proper behavior while they conduct their business. 

A wonderful example was brought to my attention, when overhearing a business owner discuss a recent windfall. This woman attends church regularly and participates in other church functions, and she considers herself a good Christian. Her retail business is supplied by different vendors providing various products that contribute to her sales. One of her vendors forgot to bill her this summer for an order she received. She perceived their loss as her windfall. She had no intention of contacting her vendor to tell them of the mistake. “If they forgot, that’s their problem,” she said, “It’s just business.” 

What is it that allows an otherwise moral person to behave so unscrupulously? One part of the question can be answered by human psychology; we tend to compartmentalize our lives so that certain parts don’t touch other parts. This is somewhat like the behavior of my kid brother many years ago, who kept his green peas far away from the mashed potatoes—don’t let my morals interfere with my money making. But an even more insidious reason can be found in the following quote: 

> When the final roll was called, the corporeal members of the Prince’s staff were found to have aligned themselves as follows: Van and his entire court of co-ordination had remained loyal. Ang and three members of the food council had survived. The board of animal husbandry were all swept into rebellion as were all of the animal-conquest advisers. Fad and five members of the educational faculty were saved. __Nod and all of the commission on industry and trade joined Caligastia.__ Hap and the entire college of revealed religion remained loyal with Van and his noble band. Lut and the whole board of health were lost. The council of art and science remained loyal in its entirety, but Tut and the commission on tribal government all went astray. Thus were forty out of the one hundred saved, later to be transferred to Jerusem, where they resumed their Paradise journey. [[UB 67:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/67#p4_1)] (my emphasis)

Liberty with license was the framework of trade and industry, otherwise known as business, and is apparent to this day. This failure of business, to resurrect itself after rebellion, is found in our world economic problems. Business, as a model, is currently practiced without ethics and morality, as a zero sum game. It is the goal of business owners world-wide to get ahead of competitors─if not crush them, and to create profit at any expense. The world’s business model is obviously broken and in need of, not repair, but complete replacement. For those of you that understand “Systems Theory,” you cannot replace a portion of any system and expect it to change. You must build something within the system and foster its growth separately. _The Urantia Book_ refers to this as “scaffolding.” 

## How Can I Fix This? 

For many years I kept a reference log of politicians and businessmen and their nefarious interconnections. The depth of criminal behavior was very deep and cast a wide net. This discovery made me both angry—because I felt there must be something I could do, and depressed— because in my heart, I knew the problem was so vast I was helpless to change it. I had to put the notebook aside as it was affecting my health and well-being. All this time I had been focusing on the negative, the truly despicable acts of people we were supposed to trust. This is like a starving man, convinced there is no food to be had, doesn’t see the restaurant in front of him. Our minds, left to their own without guidance, can be dangerous to our well-being. I had to change my approach to the problem— and my perspective. 

There came a time in my relationship with God, or “Dad” as I call Him, that I experienced the fact that I own nothing. I don’t own the clothes on my back, the car in my garage, or the money in my bank. I _own_ no thing—nothing. At first this was a little confusing. I mean, what do I do with all this stuff— throw it out, give it away, buy more? Why do I even bother to have it? But as I chewed on this concept for awhile, I started to feel a bit freer. I started to understand that these “things” were in my possession so that I may help others on their path toward finding God. A light came on: “my business, I can use my business!” 

Over many years I have watched people use their religion to attract people to their businesses. As a “Christian” I have been dismayed at how business owners will put something “secret” in their ads, maybe the sign of the fish, or use a biblical term like “maranatha” to attract similar religionists to their business, then, using the current business model, fall short of providing exceptional service, service from the heart. Religion in business was being used as a money-making scam. 

But I could use my business as a ministry, not in a traditional way, but by using Urantia teachings in the way I do business. If we are all one big “Family of God,” then I had to change the way I looked at people that came for my services. No longer were these clients or patients, but these people were my brothers, sisters, parents, aunts, uncles, and children. A fundamental shift occurred in my relationships with these people—we started to become family. Some of these family members are difficult, some are affectionate, some are needy, and honestly, there are a few that I just don’t like. But they are family members nonetheless, and they are my tests for growth. 

This change to a positive perspective has enabled me to change the way I do business. The effect on my patients and my business has been wonderful. If you could observe the goings-on in our office, you would be amazed at the camaraderie, the friendship and the affection. Because we look at these people as family, they feel a trust in us that they cannot find in other businesses. We give them advice when they come to us, we don’t just sell items that make us money. In fact we will often talk someone out of a product that is not appropriate for their needs. As part of this “honest” treatment, we offer a full refund if the person is not happy, and we seldom have to give refunds (maybe three in five years). Our patients know we care for them, and are interested in them, and they respond to us in a like manner. 

Our ministry goes further than just the “we are family” thing. Everyone is treated uniquely, according to what we perceive their need to be. For some, we provide the best service for them that we can; they want and need nothing else. For others, we try to add something to their thinking, maybe a bit of positive philosophy, or a perspective giving them a wider view of life, only when appropriate of course. Others may only want a kind word or some respect and appreciation from us, something they may receive rarely. Still others will engage in wonderful spiritual conversations on the nature of humanity and his/her relationship with God. Of course these are the most exciting for us, when someone is open and searching the universe (or our shop) for meaning. 

One of my favorite examples comes from a couple that takes great pleasure in visiting our office. Linda, whose dysfunctional parents have heaped guilt on her over the years, came into the office very distraught. After some discussion about her mother and ailing father, she almost pleaded for help: “I just don’t know what to do. I pray every day, I’m a good person, I do what God wants. So why is God punishing me with these terrible problems?” The tears were welling up in her eyes. I had such a feeling of compassion for her, and sorrow for her burden. I said: “Linda, God isn’t punishing you. God doesn’t punish.” Her eyes opened wider almost in disbelief as she asked me to repeat what I just said. I told her that “God loves us and would never punish us.” These problems we face come from human relations and not an eternally loving God. I held her for a moment as tears flowed down her cheeks. “Oh thank you, thank you for telling me that,” she said. Maybe it seems “mushy” but it touches the heart of someone who needs it (“Whatever you do to the least of mine...”). 

This is just one example of the hugs we receive and family stories we are told by our patients. Oftentimes we look at the waiting area to see people who don’t know each other, talking and laughing together. The air within the office is thick with the feeling of safety and friendliness, and everyone feels it. Well, almost everyone. Sometimes we are visited by the unhappiest of people and they can pollute the atmosphere with their distress; but we deal with them in the best way we can, often asking the Father for guidance. I believe these incidents are rare because, for those that are receptive to our treatment of them, they blossom and then bring their friends; for those that are not receptive, they go elsewhere to find their behavior mirrored to them, thus proving to themselves that the world is just like them. 

But what about the money you ask. “To spend so much time on relationships, you can’t be making any money at what you’re doing?!” Consider this: our optical office provides a service that you can get anywhere, in the mall, down the street, or up the road. Eyeglasses and eye exams are not in short supply and there are wide ranges of quality and cost. But, we operate a values-added/ values-based business, where the relationship foundations come from the teachings of _The Urantia Book_. Where else can you get this? If these concepts are implemented with sincerity and the understanding that you are a “steward” for the business you “own,” and its purpose (in your hands) is to uplift humanity one person at a time, then you are offering something no one else can offer—no one. Of course, in time that will change and many people will practice these values in their business, but that’s the whole point. We want to infect others with this “Divine” virus of love. We want other business owners to adopt these principles, if only by observing us and how successful we are. 

We bought our first office in late 2004. It had just started a downward slide because the minor-owner/manager was ineffectual and the office needed modernizing. In our first full year of “stewardship” we replaced the displays, flooring, etc., and began upgrading inventory. The first year our income grew 22% and the two years following, growth was 23% and 25% respectively. The economic slowdown in 2008 dropped our growth to 15%, and the figures aren’t in yet for 2009. In late 2007 we purchased another office that was about to close its doors. Again we replaced all the displays, flooring, etc., and upgraded inventory. That business has completely turned around and is now growing fast enough to require additional employees. This is the evidence that relationshipbased businesses can also make a healthy profit. 

## What Can We Do Together? 

If there is only one business in the world that operates using patterns and ideals from _The Urantia Book_, it’s a wonderful thing, but a united and dedicated group of Urantia business people can be a planet-changing force. With the knowledge and perspective the Urantia teachings provide for us, we can combine our efforts and literally change the cultural direction of our planet, and hasten our way toward Light and Life (in an evolutionary way of course). The possibilities are infinite, but that’s the way it’s supposed to be—infinite possibilities. We are unfettered in the positive things we can do on this planet, we just have to believe it. Anything, in liaison with God, is possible. One day our planet will reach Light and Life, it is a fact in the Mind of God. Assuming this to be true, we can assert that business in that future time will function, not only with ethics and morals, but from what is true, righteous and beautiful. So what is there to stop us from consciously creating the beginnings of that future right now? 

In light of these ideas, a _Urantia Book_ business to business (UB2B) program is being developed to unite and strengthen businesses owned by _Urantia Book_ readers, and consciously work toward the goals of Light and Life. This organization’s focus is to create a network of healthy, profitable businesses that practice the highest concepts of living, found in _The Urantia Book_. In doing so, we are creating a wider and stronger financial base to support the teachings of this Revelation, and creating a new business model from higher truths. 

We will begin by developing a business network, so that we know what is available to us within our community. We have started compiling “The Urantia Business Blue Pages” listing businesses owned and/or operated by _Urantia Book_ readers. Names, addresses, products and services will be included in this directory so we may reference it for our business needs. All of these business leaders will be part of an ongoing discussion to develop the most effective techniques of utilizing teachings of _The Urantia Book_ in our business activities. Each business will implement these ideals in ways most suitable to that particular business. We have created a basic form of this already. 

As this network evolves, we will seek out cost effective services that will benefit us such as: group health insurance, retirement programs, merchant services, etc. Our combined leverage can be used to reduce our costs of operation and increase profit margins. In addition, we are developing a way in which we can invest in each other’s businesses. This will provide much needed funds for new-business start-ups; equipment purchases; business improvements, etc., while providing a return on investment that stays within, and supports the goals of, the Urantia community. If we are all tied together, we are more likely to help each other grow, honestly. As one grows, so goes the group; as the group grows, so goes the individual. 

Of course all of this is easy to talk about, but this millennial project will take dedication, hard work and a constant eye on that distant goal, if only to remind us of what we are working toward. It will take the combined efforts of God-seeking, God-knowing individuals (that know in their hearts that Light and Life is a futurefact for this planet) to make this endeavor successful. I encourage you to participate in this relationship building, revelation supporting, soul-growing project to create a more loving future for those that follow after us. And make money and have fun while we’re at it. 

In Conclusion: Business, as a function of human relations, need not be zero sum in its goals. Businesses can succeed, even thrive, with healthy competition. In addition, successful business owners can make great contributions to society, education, and their local community, if morality and ethics are built into the model. A business owner cannot easily participate in his/her community if the business does not make enough money to allow the free time. Owners of successful Urantia businesses can more easily support the revelation and the activities that surround it, creating a wider, more stable financial foundation. This is what we are aiming for—_Urantia Book_ entrepreneurs working together to build a better model, scaffolding within the current framework, waiting for its moment to become the entire structure. As these enterprises grow and become more profitable, these spiritized leaders can take a more active role in their community, allowing them to help others implement these models. By showcasing these higher concepts and providing practical evidence of their functionality, we can begin to lift the world’s business model to one that would more reflect what the Planetary Prince’s schools of industry and trade had originally strived for. 

We cannot change the world now, but we can change the world of tomorrow by acting now. 

> Dan has been an active _Urantia Book_ reader for over thirty years. He recently completed a two-term presidency of the Florida Students of _The Urantia Book_ and is currently working on several new projects to further the teachings of _The Urantia Book_. His wife, Lara, is a member of the Fellowship General Council. 
> 
> Contact Info: UB Entrepreneurs: https://www.facebook.com/home.php?ref=home#/group.php?gid=137503970209 
{.is-info}


## References

- Article obtained from: https://urantia-book.org/archive/newsletters/herald/