---
title: "The Lives of the Prophets"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

The names of the prophets, and where they are from, and where they died and how, and where they lie. 


## Isaiah — Chapter 1


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Isaiah, from Jerusalem, died under Manasseh by being sawn in two, and was buried underneath the Oak of Rogel, near the place where the path crosses the aqueduct whose water Hezekiah shut off by blocking its source. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And God worked the miracle of Siloam for the prophet’s sake, for, being faint before he died, he prayed for water to drink, and immediately it was sent to him from it; therefore it is called Siloam, which means “sent.” 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And in the time of Hezekiah, before he made the cisterns and the pools, in response to the prayer of Isaiah a little water came out, for the nation was besieged by foreigners and (this happened) in order that the city might not perish for lack of water. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  For the enemies were asking, “From where are they drinking?” 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And having the city under siege they were encamped at Siloam. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  If, then, the Jews were coming, water would come out, but if foreigners (approached), (it would) not. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  Wherefore to this day it comes out intermittently, in order that the mystery may be manifested.

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And since this happened through Isaiah, as a memorial of it the nation also buried him nearby with care and in great honor,' so that through his prayers even after his death they might enjoy the benefit of the water, for an oracle was also given to them concerning him. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  His tomb is near the tomb of the kings, west of the tomb of the priests" in the southern part of the city. 

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  For Solomon made the tombs, in accordance with David’s design, east of Zion, which? has an entrance from Gabaon, twenty stadia distant from the city. 

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And he made a secret construction with winding passages; and it is to this day unknown to most. 

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  There the king kept the gold from Ethiopia and the spices. 

<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  And because Hezekiah showed the gentiles the secrets of David and Solomon and defiled the bones of the place of his fathers, God swore that his offspring should be enslaved to his enemies, and God made him sterile from that day. 


## Jeremiah — Chapter 2


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Jeremiah was from Anathoth, and he died in Taphnai of Egypt, having been stoned by his people. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  He was buried in the environs of Pharaoh’s palace, because the Egyptians held him in high esteem, having been benefitted through him. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  For he prayed, and the asps left them, and the monsters of the waters, which the Egyptians call Nephoth and the Greeks crocodiles. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And those who are God’s faithful pray at the place to this very day, and taking the dust of the place they heal asps’ bites. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And we have heard from the children of Antigonus and Ptolemy, old men, that Alexander the Macedonian, after standing at the prophet’s graves and witnessing his mysteries, transferred his remains to Alexandria and placed them in a circle around (the city) with due honor; 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  and the whole race of asps was kept from the land, and from the river likewise the crocodiles. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And to the same end he introduced the snakes which are called Argolai, which means snake-fighters, which he brought from Argos of the Peloponnesus, whence they are also called Argolai, that is, ‘fortunate ones from Argos”; for everything fortunate they call laia. 

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  This Jeremiah gave a sign to the priests of Egypt, that it was decreed that their idols would be shaken and collapse [through a savior, a child born of a virgin, in a manger]. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  Wherefore even to this day they revere a virgin giving birth and, placing an infant in a manger, they worship. 

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And when Ptolemy the king inquired about the cause, they said, “It is an ancestral mystery delivered to our fathers by a holy prophet, and we are to await, he says, the consummation of his mystery.” 

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  This prophet, before the capture of the Temple, seized the ark of the Law and the things in it, and made them to be swallowed up in a rock. 

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  And to those standing by he said, “The Lorp has gone away from Zion into heaven and will come again in power. 

<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  And this will be for you a sign of his coming, when all the gentiles worship a piece of wood.”

<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  And he said, “This ark no one is going to bring out except Aaron, and none of the priests or prophets will any longer open the tablets in it except Moses, God’s chosen one. 

<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  And in the resurrection the ark will be the first to be resurrected and will come out of the rock and be placed on Mount Sinai, and all the saints will be gathered to it’ there as they await the Lorp and flee from the enemy who wishes to destroy them.” 

<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  In the rock with his finger he set as a seal the name of God, and the impression was like a carving made with iron, and a cloud covered the name, and no one knows the place nor is able to read the name to this day and to the consummation. 

<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  And the rock is in the wilderness, where the ark was at first, between the two mountains on which Moses and Aaron lie. 

<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  And at night there is a cloud like fire, just like the ancient one, for the glory of God will never cease from his Law. 

<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  And God bestowed this favor upon Jeremiah, that he might himself perform the completion of his mystery, so that he might become a partner of Moses, and they are together to this day.” 


## Ezekiel — Chapter 3


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Ezekiel. This man was from the land of Arira, of the priests, and he died in the land of the Chaldeans during the captivity, after having prophesied many things to those in Judea. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  The ruler of the people Israel killed him there as he was being reproved by him concerning the worship of idols. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And they buried him in the field of Maour in the grave of Shem and Arpachshad, ancestors of Abraham, and the tomb is a double cave, for Abraham also made Sarah’s tomb in Hebron like it.

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  It is called “double” because there is a twisting passage and an upper room which is hidden from the ground floor, and it is hung over the ground level in the cliff. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  This prophet gave a portent to the people, so that they should pay attention to the river Chebar: When it failed they should set their hope in the scythe which desolates to the end of the earth, and when it flooded, in the return to Jerusalem. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  For the saint also lived there, and many used to congregate to him. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And once when there was a multitude with him the Chaldeans were afraid that they would rebel, and came up against them to destroy them. 

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And he made the water stop so that they might escape by getting to the other side. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And those of the enemies who dared to pursue were drowned. 

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  Through prayer he furnished them of his own accord with an abundant supply of fish, and for many who were at the point of dying he entreated that life should come from God. 

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  When the people was being destroyed by its enemies, he went to the (enemy) leaders and, terrified by the prodigies, they ceased. 

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  He used to say this to them: “Are we lost? Has our hope perished?” and in the wonder of the dead bones he persuaded them that there is hope for Israel both here and in the coming (age). 

<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  While he was there he used to show the people Israel what was happening in Jerusalem and in the Temple. 

<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  He was snatched up from there and he went to Jerusalem to rebuke those who were faithless. 

<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  Like Moses, this man saw the pattern of the Temple, with its wall and broad outer wall, just as Daniel also said that it would be built. 

<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  He pronounced judgment in Babylon on the tribe of Dan and that of Gad, because they were committing sacrilege against the Lorp by persecuting those who were keeping the Law. 

<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  And respecting them he worked this great wonder, that snakes would devour their infants and all their flocks, and he foretold that on their account the people would not return to its land but would be in Media until the consummation of their error. 

<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  And the one who killed him was one of them. 

<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  For they opposed him all the days of his life. 


## Daniel — Chapter 4


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Daniel. This man was of the tribe of Judah, of the family of those prominent in the royal service, but while yet a child he was taken from Judea to the land of the Chaldeans. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  He was born in Upper Beth-Horon, and he was a chaste man, so that the Judeans thought that he was a eunuch. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  He mourned greatly over the city, and in fasts he abstained from all desirable food, and he was a man gaunt in appearance but beautiful in the favor of the Most High. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  He prayed much for Nebuchadnezzar, at the entreaty of his son Baltasar, when he became a wild animal and beast of the field, so that he might not perish. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  His fore parts with the head were like an ox, and the feet with the hind parts like a lion. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  Concerning this mystery it was revealed to the holy man that (Nebuchadnezzar) had become a beast of the field because he was fond of pleasure and stiffnecked, and because those who belong to Beliart become like an ox under yoke. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  Tyrants have these (vices) in their youth, and in the end they become monsters, seizing, destroying, killing, and smiting. 

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  Through divine revelation the saint knew that he was eating grass like an ox and that it became human food. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  It was also for this reason that Nebuchadnezzar, recovering a human heart after digestion, used to weep and honor the LORD, praying forty times each day and night.

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  Behemoth used to come upon him, and he would forget that he had been a man; his tongue was taken from him so that he might not speak, and perceiving (this) he immediately wept; his eyes were like raw flesh from crying. 

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  For many were going out of the city and gazing at him. 

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  Daniel alone did not wish to see him, because he was in prayer for him the whole time of his changed condition; and he kept saying, “He will become a man again,” and they did not believe him. 

<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  Daniel made the seven years, which he called seven seasons, become seven months; the mystery of the seven seasons was accomplished in his case, for he was restored in seven months; during the six years and six months (remaining) he prostrated himself to the Lorp and confessed his impiety, and after the forgiveness of his wickedness he restored to him the kingdom. 

<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  He neither ate bread or meat nor drank wine as he made his confession, for Daniel had ordered him to appease the Lorp with (a diet of) soaked pulse and greens. 

<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  Nebuchadnezzar called him Baltasar because he wanted to make him joint heir with his children. 

<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  But the holy man said, “Far be it from me to leave the heritage of my fathers and cleave to the inheritances of the uncircumcised.”

<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  And for other kings of the Persians he wrought many prodigies, which they did not write down. 

<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  There he died, and was buried by himself and with great honor in the royal grotto. 

<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  And he gave a portent with respect to the mountains which are above Babylon: “When the mountain on the north smokes, the end of Babylon is coming; and when it lies as in fire, the end of all the earth. 

<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  And if the mountain in the south pours forth water the people will return to its land, and if it pours forth blood, Beliar’s slaughter will take place in all the earth.” 

<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  And the holy man fell asleep in peace. 


## Hosea — Chapter 5


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Hosea. This man was from Belemoth of the tribe of Issachar, and he was buried in his own district? in peace. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And he gave a portent, that the Lorp would arrive upon the earth if ever the oak which is in Shiloh were divided from itself, and twelve oaks came to be. 


## Micah — Chapter 6


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Micah the Morathite was of the tribe of Ephraim. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Having done many things to Ahab, he was killed by Joram his son at a cliff, because he rebuked him for the impieties of his fathers. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And he was buried in his own district by himself, near the burial ground of the Anakim. 


## Amos — Chapter 7

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Amos was from Tekoa. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And when Amaziah had tortured him sorely, at last his son also killed him with a club by striking him on the temple.

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And while he was still breathing he went to his own district, and after some days he died and was buried there. 


## Joel — Chapter 8


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Joel was from the territory of Reuben, in the countryside of Bethomoron. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  He died in peace and was buried there. 


## Obadiah — Chapter 9


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Obadiah was from the district of Shechem, of the countryside of Bethacharam.

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  This man was a disciple of Elijah, and endured much because of him, and escaped with his life. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  This was the third captain of fifty whom Elijah spared and (with whom) he went down to Ahaziah. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  After these events he left the service of the king and prophesied. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And he died and was buried with his fathers. 


## Jonah — Chapter 10


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Jonah was from the district of Kariathmos near the Greek city of Azotus by the sea. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And when he had been cast forth by the sea monster and had gone away to Nineveh and had returned, he did not remain in his district, but taking his mother along he sojourned in Sour, a territory (inhabited by) foreign nations; 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  for he said, “So shall I remove my reproach, for I spoke falsely in prophesying against the great city of Nineveh.” 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  At that time Elijah was rebuking the house of Ahab, and when he had invoked famine upon the land he fled. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And he went and found the widow with her son, for he could not stay with uncircumcised people; and he blessed her. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And when her son died, God raised him again from the dead through Elijah, for he wanted to show him that it is not possible to run away from God. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And after the famine he arose and went into the land of Judah. 

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And when his mother died along the way, he buried her near Deborah’s Oak. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And after sojourning in the land of Saraar he died and was buried in the cave of Kenaz, who became judge of one tribe in the days ef the anarchy. 

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And he gave a portent concerning Jerusalem and the whole land, that whenever they should see a stone crying out piteously the end was at hand. 

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And whenever they should see all the gentiles in Jerusalem, the entire city would be razed to the ground. 


## Nahum — Chapter 11


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Nahum was from Elkesi on the other side of Isbegabarin of the tribe of 
Simeon. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  After Jonah this man gave to Nineveh a portent, that it would be destroyed by fresh water and an underground fire, which also happened. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  For the lake which surrounds it inundated it during an earthquake, and fire coming from the wilderness burned its higher section. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  He died in peace and was buried in his own district. 


## Habakkuk — Chapter 12


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Habakkuk was of the tribe of Simeon, from the countryside of Bethzouchar.

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Before the captivity he had a vision concerning the conquest of Jerusalem, and he mourned greatly. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And when Nebuchadnezzar entered Jerusalem he fled to Ostrakine, and (later) sojourned in the land of Ishmael.4 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  When the Chaldeans turned back, and the remnant that was in Jerusalem (went) to Eg pt, he was living in his own district and ministering to those who were harvesting his field. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  When he took the food, he prophesied to his own family, saying, “I am going to a far country, and I will come quickly. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  But if I delay, take (food) to the harvesters.” 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And when he had gone to Babylon and given the meal to Daniel, he approached the harvesters as they were eating and told no one what had happened; he understood that the people would soon return from Babylon. 

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And he died two years before the return. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And he was buried alone in his own field. 

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  He gave a portent to those in Judea, that they would see a light in the Temple and so perceive the glory of the Temple. 

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And concerning the end of the Temple he predicted, “By a western nation it will happen.” 

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  “At that time,” he said, “the curtain of the Dabeir will be torn into small pieces, and the capitals of the two pillars will be taken away, and no one will know where they are; and they will be carried away by angels into the wilderness, where the tent of witness was set up in the beginning. 

<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  And by means of them the Lorp will be recognized at the end, for they will illuminate those who are being pursued by the serpent in darkness as from the beginning.” 


## Zephaniah — Chapter 13


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Zephaniah was of the tribe of Simeon, of the countryside of Sabaratha.

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  He prophesied concerning the city and about the end of the gentiles and the shaming of the impious. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And he died and was buried in his field. 

## Haggai — Chapter 14

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Haggai, who is also “the Messenger,” came from Babylon to Jerusalem, probably as a youth, and he openly prophesied concerning the return of the people, and witnessed in part the building of the Temple. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And when he died he was buried near the tomb of the priests, in great honor as were they. 


## Zechariah — Chapter 15


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Zechariah came from Chaldea when he was already well advanced in years, and there he prophesied many things to the people, and gave portents as proof. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  This man told Jozadak that he would beget a son and that he would serve as priest in Jerusalem. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  He also pronounced a blessing upon Shealtiel at the birth of his son, and named him Zerubbabel. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And concerning Cyrus he gave a portent of his victory, and prophesied regarding the service which he was to perform for Jerusalem, and he blessed him greatly. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  His prophesying in Jerusalem was based on his visions about the end of the gentiles, Israel, the Temple, the laziness of prophets and priests, and he set forth the twofold judgment. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And he died when he had attained a great age, and when he expired he was buried near Haggai. 


## Malachi — Chapter 16


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Malachi. This man was born in Sopha after the return, and while still a very young man he led a virtuous life. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And since the whole people honored him as holy and gentle, it called him Malachi, which means “angel”; for he was indeed beautiful to behold. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Moreover, whatever he himself said in prophecy, on the same day an angel of God appeared and repeated (it), as happened also in the days of the anarchy as written in Spharphotim,< that is, in the Book of Judges. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And while he was still a young man he was added to his fathers in his own field. 


## Nathan — Chapter 17


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Nathan, David’s prophet, was from Gaba, and it was he who taught him the law of the Lorp. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And he saw that David would transgress in the Bathsheba (affair); and while he was hastening to go to tell him, Beliar hindered him, for by the road he found a dead man who had been murdered lying naked; and he remained there, and that night he knew that (David) had committed the sin. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And he returned weeping, and when (David) killed her husband, the Lorp sent (him) to rebuke him. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And when he had grown very old he died and was buried in his own district. 


## Ahijah — Chapter 18


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Ahijah was from Shiloh, where the tabernacle was in ancient times, of Eli’s city. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  This man said concerning Solomon that he would give offense to the LORD. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And he rebuked Jeroboam, because he was going to walk deceitfully with the Lord: He saw a yoke of oxen trampling the people and running against the priests. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  He also foretold to Solomon that his wives would change him and all his posterity. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And he died and was buried near the Oak of Shiloh. 


## Joad — Chapter 19


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Joad was from Samareim. This is the one whom the lion attacked and he died, when he rebuked Jeroboam over the calves. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And he was buried in Bethel near the false prophet who deceived him. 

## Azariah — Chapter 20

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Azariah was from the district of Sybatha; (it was he) who turned from Israel the captivity of Judah. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And he died and was buried in his own field. 


## Elijah — Chapter 21

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Elijah, a Thesbite from the land of the Arabs, of Aaron’s tribe, was living in Gilead, for Thesbe was given to the priests. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  When he was to be born, his father Sobacha saw that men of shining white appearance were greeting him and wrapping him in fire, and they gave him flames of fire to eat. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And he went and reported (this) in Jerusalem, and the oracle told him, “Do not be afraid, for his dwelling will be light and his word judgment, and he will judge Israel.” 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  The signs which he did are these. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Elijah prayed, and it did not rain for three years, and after three years he prayed again and abundant rain came. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  In Zarephath of Sidon through the word of the Lorp he made the jar of the widow not to fail and the flask of oil not to diminish. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  Her son who had died God raised from the dead after (Elijah) prayed. 

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  When the question was posed by him and the prophets of Baal concerning who is the true and real God, he proposed that a sacrifice be offered both by him and by them, and that fire not be placed under (it), but that each should pray, and the one answering him would be God. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  Accordingly, the (prophets) of Baal prayed and cut themselves until the ninth hour, and no one answered them; and Elijah, when he had filled the place where the sacrifice was with much water, also prayed, and immediately fire came down and consumed the sacrifice, and the water was gone. 

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And all blessed God, and killed the four hundred and fifty (prophets) of Baal. 

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  When King Ahaziah sent to obtain an oracle from idols, (Elijah) prophesied death, and he died. 

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  When two captains of fifty were sent to him from Ahaziah, the king of Israel, he invoked the Lorp and fire came down from heaven, and the fire consumed them at the Lord’s command. 

<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  Ravens brought him bread in the morning and meat in the afternoon.

<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  With a sheepskin he struck the Jordan and it was divided, and they crossed over with dry feet, both he and Elisha. 

<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  Finally he was taken up in a chariot of fire. 


## Elisha — Chapter 22


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Elisha was from Abel Meholah in the land of Reuben. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And a marvel occurred concerning this man, for when he was born in Gilgal, the golden calf bellowed shrilly, so that it was heard in Jerusalem, and the priest declared through the Urim that a prophet had been born to Israel who would destroy their carved images and molten idols. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And when he died, he was buried in Samaria. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  The signs which he did are these. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  He too struck the Jordan with Elijah’s sheepskin, and the water was divided, and he too passed over with dry feet. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  The water in Jericho was foul and sterile; and hearing (this) from the city’s residents, he invoked God, and he said, “I am healing this water, and no longer will death and sterility issue from it,” and the water has remained healed to this day. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  When children treated him disrespectfully, he cursed them,‘ and two bears came out and tore to pieces’ forty-two of them. 

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  The wife of a prophet who had died was being pestered by creditors, and was unable to pay; she came to Elisha, and he commanded her to gather new vessels, as many as she could, and to pour the (jar) containing very little oil into them until the vessels were full; and she did this and filled the vessels and repaid her creditors, and she had the surplus for the sustenance of her children. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  He went to Shunem and stayed with a certain woman; she was not able to bear a child, but earnestly desired to have one; he prayed and made her able to conceive and give birth; then, when the child died, he prayed again and raised it from the dead. 

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  He went to Gilgal and was brought before the sons of the prophets; and when the food was boiled, and a deadly herb was boiled with the food, and they were all on the brink of danger, he made the food harmless and sweet. 

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  When the sons of the prophets were felling trees by the Jordan, the axehead fell off and sank; and Elisha, praying, made the axehead float to the surface. 

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  Through him Naaman the Syrian was cleansed of leprosy. 

<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  When his servant, named Gehazi, went to Naaman secretly, against his wishes, and asked for silver, and later upon returning denied it, Elisha rebuked and cursed him, and he became a leper. 

<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  When the king of Syria was making war against Israel, he protected the king of Israel by announcing to him the plans of the enemy. 

<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  When the king of Syria learned this he sent a force to bring the prophet, but he prayed and made them to be struck’ with blindness, and he led them to Samaria, to their enemies, but keeping them unharmed he preserved and fed them. 

<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  When the king of Syria learned this he stopped making war. 

<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  After Elisha’s death a man died, and as he was being buried he was thrown onto his bones, and just as he touched Elisha’s bones the dead man revived immediately. 


## Zechariah son of Jehoiada — Chapter 23


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Zechariah was from Jerusalem, son of Jehoiada the priest, and Joash the king of Judah killed him near the altar, and the house of David? poured out his blood in front of the Ailam, and the priests took him and buried him with his father. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  From that time visible portents occurred in the Temple,“ and the priests were not able to see a vision of angels of God or to give oracles from the Dabeir, or to inquire by the Ephod, or to answer the people through Urim as formerly. 

## Conclusion — Chapter 24


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And other prophets became hidden, whose names are contained in their genealogies in the books of the names of Israel; for the whole race of Israel are enrolled by name. 

