---
title: "Book V — XI, 8. Eighth Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_7">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XI, 7. Seventh Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_12_1">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XII, 1. First Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


<span id="p126">[<sup><small>p. 126</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v11_8_1"><sup><small>11:8:1</small></sup></span>

## EIGHTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_8_1_11"><sup><small>11:8:1:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, even as this cart-wheel, or a potter's wheel, would creak [^390] if not steadied, so, indeed, were these worlds unfirm and unsteadied.

<span id="v11_8_1_22"><sup><small>11:8:1:22.</small></sup></span>  Pra<i>g</i>âpati then bethought him, ‘How may these worlds become firm and steadied?’ By means of the mountains and rivers he stablished this (earth), by means of the birds and sun-motes [^391] the air, and by means of the clouds and stars the sky.

<span id="v11_8_1_33"><sup><small>11:8:1:33.</small></sup></span>  He then exclaimed, ‘Wealth!’—now, wealth [^392] (mahas) means cattle, whence they (cattle) thrive (mahîyante [^393]) exceedingly in the homestead of one who possesses many of them; and this (Sacrificer), indeed, possesses many of them, and in his homestead they do thrive exceedingly. Wherefore, if people were either to forcibly drive him from his home, or to bid him go forth, let him, after performing the Agni-hotra, approach (the fires) saying, ‘Wealth’; and he becomes firmly established by offspring and cattle, and is not deprived of his home.


<span id="p127">[<sup><small>p. 127</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v11_8_2"><sup><small>11:8:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_8_2_11"><sup><small>11:8:2:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, there are four kinds of fire,—the one laid down, the one taken out, the one taken forward, and the one spread (over the three hearths). Now, that which is laid down is this very (terrestrial) world; that which is taken out is the air-world, that which is taken forward is the sky, and that which is spread is the regions. And that which is laid down is Agni, that which is taken out is Vâyu (the wind), that which is taken forward is Âditya (the sun), and that which is spread is <i>K</i>andramas (the moon). And that which is laid down is the Gârhapatya, that which is taken out is the Âhavanîya, that which is taken forward is the (fire) they lead forth eastwards from the Âhavanîya; and that which is spread is the one they take northwards for the cooking of the victim, and that (used) for the by-offerings [^394]: let him therefore perform the animal sacrifice on a fire taken forward.


<span id="v11_8_3"><sup><small>11:8:3</small></sup></span>

## THIRD BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_8_3_11"><sup><small>11:8:3:11.</small></sup></span>  Here, now, they say, ‘To what deity should this victim belong?’—‘It should belong to Pra<i>g</i>âpati,’ they say; ‘for it was Pra<i>g</i>âpati who first saw it: therefore it is to Pra<i>g</i>âpati that this victim should belong.’

<span id="v11_8_3_22"><sup><small>11:8:3:22.</small></sup></span>  And they also say, ‘To Sûrya (the sun) that victim should belong;’—whence it is that cattle are tied up when he (the sun) has set: some of them <span id="p128">[<sup><small>p. 128</small></sup>]</span> they tie up [^395] in their respective stables, and others just flock together:—‘therefore,’ they say, ‘it is to Sûrya that this victim should belong.’

<span id="v11_8_3_33"><sup><small>11:8:3:33.</small></sup></span>  And they also say, ‘To Indra and Agni that victim should belong; for behind these two deities are (all) the other gods;—if one who is afflicted sacrifices, those two (gods) sustain him; and if one sacrifices with (a desire for) abundance [^396], they sustain him: therefore it is to Indra and Agni that this victim should belong.’

<span id="v11_8_3_44"><sup><small>11:8:3:44.</small></sup></span>  The animal sacrifice, indeed, is the breath, whence, as long as one lives, no other has power over his cattle, for they are tied to him.

<span id="v11_8_3_55"><sup><small>11:8:3:55.</small></sup></span>  Pra<i>g</i>âpati said to Agni, ‘I will perform sacrifice with thee: I will lay hands upon thee (as a victim).’—‘Nay,’ said he, ‘speak unto man!’ He said to man, ‘I will perform sacrifice with thee: I will lay hands upon thee.’—‘Nay,’ said he, ‘speak unto the cattle!’ He said to the cattle, ‘I will perform sacrifice with you: I will lay hands upon you.’—‘Nay,’ said they, ‘speak unto the moon!’ He said to the moon, ‘I will perform sacrifice with thee: I will lay hands upon thee,’—‘Nay,’ said he, ‘speak unto the sun!’ He said to the sun, ‘I will perform sacrifice with thee: I will lay hands upon thee.’ ‘So be it!’ said he; ‘but seeing that those liked it not (to be slaughtered), what, then, shall become mine that now is with these [^397]?’—‘Whatsoever <span id="p129">[<sup><small>p. 129</small></sup>]</span> thou mayest desire,’ he said.—‘So be it,’ he replied. He laid hands upon him, and this is that animal of his seized (for sacrifice). When slaughtered, it swelled, and by means of those Âprî-hymns, he appeased it [^398]; and inasmuch as, by means of these Âprî-hymns, he appeased it, they are called Âprîs. And let him, for that reason, say of the slaughtered animal, ‘Let it lie for a moment!’ As great as the world is which he gains by performing the horse-sacrifice, so great a world does he gain by this (animal sacrifice).

<span id="v11_8_3_66"><sup><small>11:8:3:66.</small></sup></span>  The (wind of the) eastern region breathed over that (dead victim), saying, ‘Breathe forth!’ and thereby laid the breath (of the mouth) into it; the southern region breathed over it, saying, ‘Breathe through!’ and thereby laid the through-breathing into it; the western region breathed over it, saying, ‘Breathe off!’ and thereby laid the off-breathing into it; the northern region breathed over it, saying, ‘Breathe up!’ and thereby laid the up-breathing (of the nostrils) into it; the upper region breathed over it, saying, ‘Breathe all about!’ and thereby laid the circulating breathing into it. Therefore, regarding a new-born son, let him say to five Brâhma<i>n</i>as, before the navel-string has been cut, ‘Breathe over him in this way [^399]!’ But if he should be unable to obtain them he may even <span id="p130">[<sup><small>p. 130</small></sup>]</span> himself breathe over him whilst walking round him; and that (son of his) attains the full measure of life [^400] and lives to old age.

<span id="v11_8_3_77"><sup><small>11:8:3:77.</small></sup></span>  He (the sun) took unto himself Agni's breath; whence that (fire) does not blaze unless fanned or kindled, for its breath has been taken from it; and, verily, he who knows this takes away the breath of life from his spiteful enemy.

<span id="v11_8_3_88"><sup><small>11:8:3:88.</small></sup></span>  He took to himself Vâyu's form; whence people hear it (the wind), as it were, shaking, but do not see it, for its form has been taken from it; and, verily, he who knows this takes away the form of his spiteful enemy.

<span id="v11_8_3_99"><sup><small>11:8:3:99.</small></sup></span>  He took to himself man's thought; whence people say, 'The divine thought protect thee, man's thought me!' for his thought has been taken from him; and, verily, he who knows this takes away the thought of his spiteful enemy.

<span id="v11_8_3_1010"><sup><small>11:8:3:1010.</small></sup></span>  He took to himself the eye of cattle; whence, even whilst seeing clearly, as it were, they do not know anything, but only know what it is when they smell at it, for their eye has been taken from them; and, verily, he who knows this takes away the eye of his spiteful enemy.

<span id="v11_8_3_1111"><sup><small>11:8:3:1111.</small></sup></span>  He took to himself the moon's shine; whence of these two (sun and moon), though being similar, the moon shines much less, for its shine has been taken from it; and, verily, he who knows this takes away the shine from his spiteful enemy. And inasmuch as he took these away (â-dâ), he (the sun) is called Âditya.


<span id="p131">[<sup><small>p. 131</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v11_8_4"><sup><small>11:8:4</small></sup></span>

## FOURTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_8_4_11"><sup><small>11:8:4:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, once upon a time, a tiger killed the samrâ<i>g</i>\-cow [^401] of those (who were sacrificing) with (the king of the) Ke<i>s</i>in as their G<i>ri</i>hapati [^402]. He (the king [^403]) said to his fellow-sacrificers, ‘What atonement is there for this?’ They replied, ‘There is no atonement for this: Kha<i>n</i><i>d</i>ika Audbhâri alone knows an atonement for it; but he certainly desires as much as this, and worse than this [^404], (to happen) to thee.’

<span id="v11_8_4_22"><sup><small>11:8:4:22.</small></sup></span>  He said, ‘Charioteer, put to my horses; I shall drive thither: if so be he will tell me, I shall succeed (with my sacrifice); but if he will have me die, I shall be shattered along with the shattered sacrifice.’

<span id="v11_8_4_33"><sup><small>11:8:4:33.</small></sup></span>  Having put to the horses, he drove off, and <span id="p132">[<sup><small>p. 132</small></sup>]</span> came thither [^405]. When he (Kha<i>n</i><i>d</i>ika) saw [^406] him, he said, ‘Seeing that there are those skins on deer, we break their ribs and cook them: the skin of the black antelope is attached to my neck [^407]\—is it with thoughts such as these that thou hast dared to drive over to me?’

<span id="v11_8_4_44"><sup><small>11:8:4:44.</small></sup></span>  ‘Not so,’ he replied; ‘a tiger has killed my samrâ<i>g</i>\-cow, reverend sir; if so be thou wilt tell me, I shall succeed; but if thou wilt have me die, I shall be shattered along with the shattered sacrifice.’

<span id="v11_8_4_55"><sup><small>11:8:4:55.</small></sup></span>  He said, ‘I will take counsel with my counsellors [^408].’ Having called them to counsel, he said, ‘If I tell him, his race, not mine, will prevail here [^409], <span id="p133">[<sup><small>p. 133</small></sup>]</span> but I shall gain the (other) world; and if I do not tell him, my own race, not his, will prevail here, but he will gain the (other) world.’ They said, 'Do not tell him, reverend sir, for, surely, this (the earth) is the Kshatriya's world [^410].' He replied, ‘Nay, I will tell him: there are more nights [^411] up yonder.’

<span id="v11_8_4_66"><sup><small>11:8:4:66.</small></sup></span>  And, accordingly, he then said to him,—‘Having offered the Sp<i>ri</i>tis [^412], he (the Adhvaryu) should say, “Drive up another (cow)!” and that one should be thy samrâ<i>g</i>\-cow [^413].’—‘\[Having offered. with,\] “From the moon I take thy mind, hail!—From the sun I take thine eye, hail!—From the wind I take thy breathings, hail!—From the regions I take thine ear, hail!—From the waters I take thy blood, hail!—From the earth <span id="p134">[<sup><small>p. 134</small></sup>]</span> I take thy body, hail!” let him then say, “Drive up another (cow)!” and that one shall be thy samrâg cow!’ He then departed from thence [^414], and, verily, members of the Ke<i>s</i>in race are born here even to this day.



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_7">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XI, 7. Seventh Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_12_1">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XII, 1. First Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^390]: 126:1 Sâya<i>n</i>a apparently takes ‘krand’ in the sense of ‘to shake, or wabble,’—‘even as a cart-wheel or some other wheel, not standing on the ground for want of the wooden rest (âlambana-kâsh<i>th</i>a,? axle-pin) or some other thing, would wabble (hvalet).’ What Sâya<i>n</i>a means to say, probably, is that the verb used by the author expresses the effect of the action intended.

[^391]: 126:2 Or, sun-beams (ra<i>s</i>mi), as Sâya<i>n</i>a takes ‘marî<i>k</i>i’; cf. Weber, Ind. Stud. IX, p. 9, note.

[^392]: 126:3 Or, joy;—cp. II, 3, 4, 25, which would seem to be the passage referred to in the present paragraph.

[^393]: 126:4 Or, perhaps, ‘they enjoy themselves, gambol,’ as the St. Petersb. Dict. takes it. Differently, again, Sâya<i>n</i>a,—yata ebhi<i>h</i> pa<i>s</i>ubhir mahîyate (he thrives?), ata ete maha<i>h</i>.

[^394]: 127:1 See III, 8, 3, 18; 8, 4, 9, with note.

[^395]: 128:1 Or, perhaps, cattle are shut up—some of them they shut up.

[^396]: 128:2 ? Thus, apparently, Sâya<i>n</i>a:—Anye tv indrâgnyo<i>h</i> sarvadevatâprâdhânyât svodde<i>s</i>ena yâga<i>m</i> k<i>ri</i>tavatâ<i>m</i> krame<i>n</i>ârtinâ<i>s</i>ak(atv)ân mahata<i>h</i> (? maha<i>s</i>a<i>h</i>) prâpakatvâ<i>k</i> <i>k</i>a pa<i>s</i>ur aindrâgna iti.

[^397]: 128:3 Eteshâ<i>m</i> svabhûta<i>m</i> vastu ki<i>m</i> labdha<i>m</i> bhavet, Sây.

[^398]: 129:1 See III, 8, 1, 2 (with note), where ‘â-prî’ is apparently taken by the Brâhma<i>n</i>a in the sense of ‘to fill up.’

[^399]: 129:2 The Brâhmans having been placed in the direction of the respective quarters, the father makes one after the other breathe upon the child,—the first from the east and the child's head, the second from the right side, &c., in sunwise succession; the fifth (whose position is not specified) breathing right down upon the child.

[^400]: 130:1 Viz. a hundred years, Sây. See X, 2, 6, 9; part iv, introd., p. xxiii.

[^401]: 131:1 That is the cow which supplies the milk for the Pravargya; this milk, when heated, being called ‘gharma (heat)’ or ‘samrâ<i>g</i> (sovereign king).’ See part ii, p. 104, note 3.

[^402]: 131:2 G<i>ri</i>hapati, or house-lord, master of the house, is the title of the principal sacrificer at a sacrificial session (sattra).—According to Sâya<i>n</i>a, the Ke<i>s</i>ina<i>h</i> were a race of nobles (râ<i>g</i>âna<i>h</i>), who, on this occasion, were performing a ‘sattra,’ and are therefore styled ‘householders’ (g<i>ri</i>hapati);—ke<i>s</i>ino nâma râ<i>g</i>âna<i>h</i> sattrayâgam anutish<i>th</i>anto g<i>ri</i>hapataya âsu<i>h</i>, Sâya<i>n</i>a thus takes ‘ke<i>s</i>i-g<i>ri</i>hapataya<i>h</i>,’ not as a bahuvrîhi, but as a tatpurusha (karmadhâraya, ‘the Ke<i>s</i>in householders’) which would, however, require the accent on the second member of the compound.—Though all those taking part in a sacrificial session ought to be Brahmans, the rule does not seem to have been strictly observed. Cf. part iv, introd., p. xxv; Weber, Ind. Stud. X, pp. 25 94.

[^403]: 131:3 G<i>ri</i>hapatishu pradhânabhûta<i>h</i> ke<i>s</i>irâ<i>g</i>a<i>h</i>, Sây.

[^404]: 131:4 That is, that even a greater misfortune should happen to thee,—atyanta<i>m</i> pâpayukta<i>m</i> govadhâdidoshayuktam ity artha<i>h</i>, Sây.

[^405]: 132:1 Sâya<i>n</i>a makes Kha<i>n</i><i>d</i>ika the subject of this last verb:—sa ha ratham a<i>s</i>vai<i>h</i> sa<i>m</i>yo<i>g</i>ya Kha<i>n</i><i>d</i>ikasamîpa<i>m</i> yayau; soऽpi Kha<i>n</i><i>d</i>ika<i>h</i> ke<i>s</i>inam â<i>g</i>agâma, gatvâ <i>k</i>a vivakta<i>m</i> (? vivikta<i>m</i>) Ke<i>s</i>ina<i>m</i> pratikhyâya nirâk<i>ri</i>tya sadayam eva prathamam uvâ<i>k</i>a. He thus seems not to allow here to ‘yâ’ the meaning of ‘to drive,’ but to take ‘yayau’ in the sense of ‘he went thither.’ It might, of course, also mean ‘he set off.’

[^406]: 132:2 Sâya<i>n</i>a apparently takes ‘prati-khyâ’ in the sense of ‘to refuse admittance to, to reject,’ ‘abweisen.’

[^407]: 132:3 Sâya<i>n</i>a's comment on this passage is as follows:—‘O Ke<i>s</i>in, the skin of the cow that yields the gharma-milk is worn by thee on the neck: those (i.e. suchlike) skins, indeed, are (i.e. are seen) on deer; and having broken (i.e., torn to pieces) the “p<i>ri</i>sh<i>t</i>i” (i.e. the small-sized does) amongst them we cook them: that black-antelope skin is fastened on my neck.’ Kha<i>n</i><i>d</i>ika having spoken thus, the king said, ‘No, this is not my intention.’

[^408]: 132:4 Literally, those that should be consulted, whom further on Sâya<i>n</i>a calls ‘âptâ<i>h</i>’ or trusty men.

[^409]: 132:5 Or, perhaps, the people here (the Ke<i>s</i>ins) will become his, not mine; cf. Delbrück, Altind. Syntax, pp. 32; 141 (two different renderings). Sâya<i>n</i>a, on the other hand, takes ‘pra<i>g</i>â,’ not in the sense either of ‘family’ or ‘people,’ but in that of ‘(sacred) knowledge’—perhaps with reference to the threefold science (the Veda) as the p. 133 thousandfold progeny of Vâ<i>k</i>, speech (cf. IV, 5, 8, 4; 6, 7, 3; V, 5, 5, 12)—which Kha<i>n</i><i>d</i>ika would thus lose, whilst, by imparting the sacred knowledge, he would gain a seat in heaven.

[^410]: 133:1 Sâya<i>n</i>a's comment is not very intelligible, the MS. being more than usually corrupt on this last page:—eva<i>m</i>vidhe virodha udbhâvitê sati to âptâ û<i>k</i>u<i>h</i>, he bhagavo vidyâ<i>m</i> mâ vo<i>k</i>a<i>h</i>, kshatriyasya loko na bhavishyatîti; nanu tavânu<i>s</i>aya<i>h</i> (? appanage, domain, following) sa tasya nâsti; aya<i>m</i> vâva ayam eva khalu, kshatriyasya lokas tasmât sauspatrâter (?) evam ukte sati sadve<i>k</i>enarâpatra bhavânti (!) ato vakshyâmy evety uvâ<i>k</i>a.

[^411]: 133:2 That is, days,—by giving up a brief life of earthly power and glory, he gains eternal life.

[^412]: 133:3 That is, oblations performed with a view of ‘taking hold (sp<i>ri</i>)’ of something; cf. Katy. <i>S</i>rautas. XXV, 6, 11. 12.

[^413]: 133:4 The particle ‘iti’ here causes some difficulty of construction which would be removed by the latter clause being taken as part of the Adhvaryu's speech; though Kâtyâyana, it is true, does not recognise it as such. Perhaps, however, Kha<i>n</i><i>d</i>ika's speech ends here, and what follows up to ‘that one shall be thy samrâ<i>g</i>\-cow’ has to be taken as a ritualistic insertion, in which case the final ‘iti’ would have some such meaning as ‘having been told thus.’

[^414]: 134:1 Sâya<i>n</i>a takes this thus:—‘Thus instructed, Ke<i>s</i>in disappeared (or, passed away, vanished, utsasâda vinash<i>t</i>a<i>h</i>) from that region (tato de<i>s</i>ât)’—after which there is a lacuna in the MS. Perhaps, however, it is Kha<i>n</i><i>d</i>ika, rather than Ke<i>s</i>in, to which this refers,—he (and his race) then, indeed, passed away from that region, whilst the Ke<i>s</i>ins flourished.