---
title: "Book V — XI, 6. Sixth Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XI, 5. Fifth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_7">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XI, 7. Seventh Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="v11_6_1"><sup><small>11:6:1</small></sup></span>

## SIXTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_6_1_11"><sup><small>11:6:1:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, Bh<i>ri</i>gu, the son of Varu<i>n</i>a, deemed himself superior to his father Varu<i>n</i>a in knowledge [^347]. Varu<i>n</i>a became aware of this: ‘He deems himself superior to me in knowledge,’ he thought.

<span id="v11_6_1_22"><sup><small>11:6:1:22.</small></sup></span>  He said, ‘Go thou eastward, my boy; and <span id="p109"><sup><small>[ p. 109 ]</small></sup></span> having seen there what thou shalt see, go thou southwards; and having seen there what thou shalt see, go thou westward; and having seen there what thou shalt see, go thou northward; and having seen there what thou shalt see, go thou toward the northern of those two intermediate quarters in front [^348], and tell me then what thou shalt see there.’

<span id="v11_6_1_33"><sup><small>11:6:1:33.</small></sup></span>  He then went forth from thence eastward, and lo, men were dismembering men [^349], hewing off their limbs one by one, and saying, ‘This to thee, this to me!’ He said, ‘Horrible! woe is me! men here have dismembered men, hewing off their limbs one by one!’ They replied, ‘Thus, indeed, these dealt with us in yonder world, and so we now deal with them in return.’ He said, ‘Is there no atonement for this?’—‘Yes, there is,’ they replied.—‘What is it?’—‘Thy father knows.’

<span id="v11_6_1_44"><sup><small>11:6:1:44.</small></sup></span>  He went forth from thence southward, and lo, men were dismembering men, cutting up their limbs one by one, and saying, ‘This to thee, this to me!’ He said, ‘Horrible! woe is me! men here have dismembered men, cutting up their limbs one by one!’ They replied, ‘Thus, indeed, these dealt with us in yonder world, and so we now deal with them in return.’ He said, ‘Is there no atonement for this?’—‘Yes, there is,’ they replied.—‘What is it?’—‘Thy father knows.’ <span id="p110"><sup><small>[ p. 110 ]</small></sup></span> 11:6:1:55\. He went forth from thence westward, and lo, men, sitting still, were being eaten by men, sitting still! He said, ‘Horrible! woe is me! men, sitting still, are eating men, sitting still!’ They replied, ‘Thus, indeed, these have dealt with us in yonder world, and so we now deal with them in return.’ He said, ‘Is there no atonement for this? Yes, there is,’ they replied.—‘What is it? Thy father knows.’

<span id="v11_6_1_66"><sup><small>11:6:1:66.</small></sup></span>  He went forth from thence northward, and lo, men, crying aloud, were being eaten by men, crying aloud! He said, ‘Horrible! woe is me! men, crying aloud, here are eating men, crying aloud!’ They replied, ‘Thus, indeed, these dealt with us in yonder world, and so we now deal with them in return.’ He said, ‘Is there no atonement for this?’—‘Yes, there is,’ they replied.—‘What is it? Thy father knows.’

<span id="v11_6_1_77"><sup><small>11:6:1:77.</small></sup></span>  He went forth from thence toward the northern of those two intermediate quarters in front, and lo, there were two women, one beautiful, one over-beautiful [^350]: between them stood a man, black, with yellow eyes, and a staff in his hand. On seeing him, terror seized him, and he went home, and sat down. His father said to him, 'Study thy day's lesson (of scripture): why dost thou not, study thy lesson?‘ He said, What am I to study? there is nothing whatever.’ Then Varu<i>n</i>a knew, 'He has indeed seen it!

<span id="v11_6_1_88"><sup><small>11:6:1:88.</small></sup></span>  He spake, ‘As to those men whom thou <span id="p111"><sup><small>[ p. 111 ]</small></sup></span> sawest in the eastern region being dismembered by men hewing off their limbs one by one, and saying, “This to thee, this to me!” they were the trees: when one puts fire-wood from trees on (the fire) he subdues the trees, and conquers the world of trees.

<span id="v11_6_1_99"><sup><small>11:6:1:99.</small></sup></span>  ‘And as to those men whom thou sawest in the southern region being dismembered by men cutting up their limbs one by one, and saying, “This to thee, this to me!” they were the cattle; when one makes offering with milk he subdues the cattle, and conquers the world of cattle.

<span id="v11_6_1_1010"><sup><small>11:6:1:1010.</small></sup></span>  ‘And as to those men thou sawest in the western region who, whilst sitting still, were being eaten by men sitting still, they were the herbs: when one illumines (the Agnihotra milk) with a straw [^351], he subdues the herbs, and conquers the world of herbs.

<span id="v11_6_1_1111"><sup><small>11:6:1:1111.</small></sup></span>  ‘And as to those men thou sawest in the northern region who, whilst crying aloud, were being eaten by men crying aloud, they were the waters: when one pours water to (the Agnihotra milk), he subdues the waters, and conquers the world of waters.

<span id="v11_6_1_1212"><sup><small>11:6:1:1212.</small></sup></span>  ‘And as to those two women whom thou sawest, one beautiful and one over-beautiful,—the beautiful one is Belief: when one offers the first libation (of the Agnihotra) he subdues Belief, and conquers Belief; and the over-beautiful one is Unbelief: when one offers the second libation, he subdues Unbelief, and conquers Unbelief.

<span id="v11_6_1_1313"><sup><small>11:6:1:1313.</small></sup></span>  ‘And as to the black man with yellow eyes, <span id="p112"><sup><small>[ p. 112 ]</small></sup></span> who was standing between them with a staff in his hand, he was Wrath: when, having poured water into the spoon, one pours (the libation into the fire), he subdues Wrath, and conquers Wrath; and, verily, whosoever, knowing this, offers the Agnihotra, thereby conquers everything, and subdues everything.’


<span id="v11_6_2"><sup><small>11:6:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_6_2_11"><sup><small>11:6:2:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, <i>G</i>anaka of Videha once met some Brâhma<i>n</i>as who were travelling about [^352], to wit, <i>S</i>vetaketu Âru<i>n</i>eya, Soma<i>s</i>ushma Sâtyaya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>i, and Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya. He said to them, ‘How do ye each of you perform the Agnihotra?’

<span id="v11_6_2_22"><sup><small>11:6:2:22.</small></sup></span>  <i>S</i>vetaketu Âru<i>n</i>eya replied, ‘O great king, I make offering, in one another, to two heats, never-failing and overflowing with glory.’—‘How is that?’ asked the king.—‘Well, Âditya (the sun) is heat: to him I make offering in Agni in the evening; and Agni, indeed, is heat: to him I make offering in the morning in Âditya [^353].’—‘What becomes of him who offers in this way?’ asked the <span id="p113"><sup><small>[ p. 113 ]</small></sup></span> king.—'He verily becomes never-failing in prosperity and glory, and attains to ‘the fellowship of those two deities, and to an abode in their world.’

<span id="v11_6_2_33"><sup><small>11:6:2:33.</small></sup></span>  Then Soma<i>s</i>ushma Sâtyaya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>i said, ‘I, O king, make offering to light in light.’—‘How is that?’ asked the king.—‘Well, Âditya is light: to him I make offering in Agni in the evening; and Agni, indeed, is light: to him I make offering in Âditya in the morning.’—‘What becomes of him who offers in this way? He verily becomes lightsome, and glorious, and prosperous; and attains to the fellowship of those two deities, and to an abode in their world.’

<span id="v11_6_2_44"><sup><small>11:6:2:44.</small></sup></span>  Then Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya said, ‘When I take out the fire (from the Gârhapatya), it is the Agnihotra itself, I thereby raise [^354] Now when Âditya (the sun) sets, all the gods follow him; and when they see that fire taken out by me, they turn back. Having then cleansed the (sacrificial) vessels, and deposited them (on the Vedi), and having milked the Agnihotra cow, I gladden them, when I see them, and when they see me.’—‘Thou, O Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya, hast inquired most closely into the nature of the Agnihotra,’ said the king; ‘I bestow a hundred cows on thee. But not even thou (knowest) either the uprising, or the progress, or the support, or the contentment, or the return, or the renascent world of those two (libations of the Agnihotra).’ Thus saying, he mounted his car and drove away.

<span id="v11_6_2_55"><sup><small>11:6:2:55.</small></sup></span>  They said, ‘Surely, this fellow of a Râ<i>g</i>anya has outtalked us: come, let us challenge him to <span id="p114"><sup><small>[ p. 114 ]</small></sup></span> a theological disputation!’ Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya said, ‘We are Brâhma<i>n</i>as, and he is a Râ<i>g</i>anya: if we were to vanquish him, whom should we say we had vanquished? But if he were to vanquish us, people would say of us that a Râ<i>g</i>anya had vanquished Brâhma<i>n</i>as: do not think of this!’ They approved of his words. But Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya, mounting his car, drove after (the king). He overtook him, and he (the king) said, ‘Is it to know the Agnihotra, Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya?’—‘The Agnihotra, O king!’ he replied.

<span id="v11_6_2_66"><sup><small>11:6:2:66.</small></sup></span>  ‘Well, those two libations, when offered, rise upwards: they enter the air, and make the air their offering-fire, the wind their fuel, the sun-motes their pure libation: they satiate the air, and rise upwards therefrom.

<span id="v11_6_2_77"><sup><small>11:6:2:77.</small></sup></span>  ‘They enter the sky, and make the sky their offering-fire, the sun their fuel, and the moon their pure libation: they satiate the sky, and return from there.

<span id="v11_6_2_88"><sup><small>11:6:2:88.</small></sup></span>  ‘They enter this (earth), and make this (earth) their offering-fire, the fire their fuel, and the herbs their pure libation: they satiate this (earth), and rise upwards therefrom.

<span id="v11_6_2_99"><sup><small>11:6:2:99.</small></sup></span>  ‘They enter man, and make his mouth their offering-fire, his tongue their fuel, and food their pure libation: they satiate man; and, verily, for him who, knowing this, eats food the Agnihotra comes to be offered. They rise upwards from there.

<span id="v11_6_2_1010"><sup><small>11:6:2:1010.</small></sup></span>  ‘They enter woman, and make her lap their offering-fire, her womb the fuel,—for that (womb) is called the bearer, because by it Pra<i>g</i>âpati bore creatures,—and the seed their pure libation: they satiate woman; and, verily, for him who, knowing this, approaches his mate, the Agnihotra comes to <span id="p115"><sup><small>[ p. 115 ]</small></sup></span> be offered. The son who is born therefrom is the renascent world: this is the Agnihotra, Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya, there is nothing higher than this.’ Thus he spoke; and Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya granted him a boon. He said, ‘Let mine be the (privilege of) asking questions of thee when I list, Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya!’ Thenceforth <i>G</i>anaka was a Brahman.


<span id="v11_6_3"><sup><small>11:6:3</small></sup></span>

## THIRD BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_6_3_11"><sup><small>11:6:3:11.</small></sup></span>  <i>G</i>anaka of Videha performed a sacrifice accompanied with numerous gifts to the priests. Setting apart a thousand cows, he said, ‘He who is the most learned in sacred writ amongst you, O Brâhma<i>n</i>as, shall drive away these (cows) [^355]!’

<span id="v11_6_3_22"><sup><small>11:6:3:22.</small></sup></span>  Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya then said, ‘This way (drive) them!’ They said, ‘Art thou really the most learned in sacred writ amongst us, Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya?’ He replied, ‘Reverence be to him who is most learned in sacred writ! We are but hankering after cows [^356]!’

<span id="v11_6_3_33"><sup><small>11:6:3:33.</small></sup></span>  They then said (to one another), ‘Which of us shall question him?’ The shrewd <i>S</i>âkalya said, ‘I!’ When he (Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya) saw him, he said, ‘Have the Brâhma<i>n</i>as made of thee a thing for quenching the firebrand, <i>S</i>âkalya?’

<span id="v11_6_3_44"><sup><small>11:6:3:44.</small></sup></span>  He said [^357], ‘How many gods are there, Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya?’—‘Three hundred and three, and three thousand and three,’ he replied.—‘Yea, so it is!’ he said. ‘How many gods are there really, Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya?’—‘Thirty-three.’—‘Yea, so it is!’ he said. <span id="p116"><sup><small>[ p. 116 ]</small></sup></span> ‘How many gods are there really, Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya?’—‘Three.’—‘Yea, so it is!’ he said. ‘How many gods are there really, Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya?’—‘Two.’—‘Yea, so it is!’ he said. ‘How many gods are there really, Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya?’—‘One and a half.’—‘Yea, so it is!’ he said. ‘How many gods are there really, Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya?’—‘One.’—‘Yea, so it is!’ he said. ‘Who are those three hundred and three, and three thousand and three?’

<span id="v11_6_3_55"><sup><small>11:6:3:55.</small></sup></span>  He replied, ‘These are their powers, but thirty-three gods indeed there are.’—‘Who are those thirty-three? Eight Vasus, eleven Rudras, and twelve Âdityas,—that makes thirty-one; and Indra and Pra<i>g</i>âpati make up the thirty-three.’

<span id="v11_6_3_66"><sup><small>11:6:3:66.</small></sup></span>  ‘Who are the Vasus?’—‘Agni, the Earth, Vâyu (the wind), the Air, Âditya (the sun), Heaven, the Moon, and the Stars:—these are the Vasus, for these cause all this (universe) to abide (vas), and hence they are the Vasus.’

<span id="v11_6_3_77"><sup><small>11:6:3:77.</small></sup></span>  ‘Who are the Rudras?’—‘These ten vital airs in man, and the self (spirit) is the eleventh: when these depart from this mortal body, they cause wailing (rud), and hence they are the Rudras.’

<span id="v11_6_3_88"><sup><small>11:6:3:88.</small></sup></span>  ‘Who are the Âdityas?’—‘The twelve months of the year: these are the Âdityas, for they pass whilst laying hold on everything here; and inasmuch as they pass whilst laying hold (â-dâ) on everything here, they are the Âdityas.’

<span id="v11_6_3_99"><sup><small>11:6:3:99.</small></sup></span>  ‘Who is Indra, and who Pra<i>g</i>âpati?’—‘Indra, indeed, is thunder [^358], and Pra<i>g</i>âpati the sacrifice.’—‘What is thunder?’—‘The thunderbolt.’—‘What is the sacrifice?’—‘Cattle.’ <span id="p117"><sup><small>[ p. 117 ]</small></sup></span> 11:6:3:1010\. ‘Who are those three gods?’—‘These three worlds, for therein all the gods are contained.’—‘Who are those two gods?’—‘Food and breath. (life).’—‘Who is the one and a half?’—‘He who is blowing here [^359] (Vâyu, the wind).’—‘Who is the one god?’—‘Breath.’

<span id="v11_6_3_1111"><sup><small>11:6:3:1111.</small></sup></span>  He (Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya) said, ‘Thou hast gone on questioning me beyond the deity [^360], beyond which there must be no questioning: thou shalt die ere such and such a day, and not even thy bones shall reach thy home!’ And so, indeed, did he (<i>S</i>âkalya) die; and robbers carried off his bones [^361], taking them for something else [^362]. Wherefore let no man decry [^363] any one, for even (by) knowing this, he gets the better of him [^364].



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XI, 5. Fifth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_7">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XI, 7. Seventh Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^347]: 108:3 On this legend, see Prof. Weber, Indische Streifen, I, p. 24 seqq., where the scenes here depicted are taken to be reflections of the popular belief of the time as to the punishments awaiting the guilty in a future existence.

[^348]: 109:1 That is to say, in the north-easterly direction. Prof. Weber seems to take it in the sense of the northern one of the two regions intermediate between the two (regions) first referred to. This, however, makes no sense.

[^349]: 109:2 I think, with Prof. Delbrück, Altind. Syntax, p. 404, that the instrumental ‘purushai<i>h</i>’ stands in lieu of the accusative; this construction being adopted in order to avoid the double accusative and consequent ambiguity.

[^350]: 110:1 According to Sâya<i>n</i>a ‘ati-kalyâ<i>n</i>î’ means ‘not beautiful (a<i>s</i>obhanâ), ugly.’ Perhaps its real meaning is ‘one of past beauty,’ one whose beauty has faded.

[^351]: 111:1 See II, 3, 1, 16.

[^352]: 112:1 Or, driving about (and officiating at sacrifices); see [XI, 4, 1, 1](../Book_5_11_4#v11_4_1_1). For a translation of this story see Max Müller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 421 seqq.

[^353]: 112:2 Âditya<i>m</i> sâya<i>m</i>kâle agnâv anupravish<i>t</i>a<i>m</i> <i>g</i>uhomi havishâ tarpayâmi; athâgnir api gharma<i>h</i>, sa prâtar âdityam anupravi<i>s</i>ati, tam agni<i>m</i> prâta<i>h</i>kâle âditye sthita<i>m</i> havishâ prî<i>n</i>ayâmi, Sây.—At II, 3, 1, 36, instead of—‘In the evening he offers Sûrya in Agni, and in the morning he offers Agni in Sûrya’—we ought probably to translate,—‘In the evening he makes offering to Sûrya in Agni, and in the morning he makes offering to Agni in Sûrya.’ The commentary there would admit of either rendering:—Agnir <i>g</i>yotir, iti mantre<i>n</i>a <i>g</i>uhvad agnâv eva santa<i>m</i> sûrya<i>m</i> <i>g</i>uhoti, tathâ <i>k</i>a gyoti<i>h</i><i>s</i>abda<i>h</i> sûryava<i>k</i>ana<i>h</i>; prâta<i>h</i>kâle tu sûrye santam agni<i>m</i> <i>g</i>uhoti.

[^354]: 113:1 Yad yadâ âhavanîya<i>m</i> gârhapatyâd aham uddharâmi tat tadânî<i>m</i> k<i>ri</i>tsnam aṅgopâṅgasahitam agnihotram eva udya<i>k</i><i>kh</i>âmi udvahâmi, Sây.

[^355]: 115:1 One might also construe,—These are yours, O Brâhma<i>n</i>as: he who is the most learned in sacred writ shall drive (them) away. Cf. Delbrück, Altind. Syntax, pp. 251, 363.

[^356]: 115:2 Gokâmâ eva kevala<i>m</i> vaya<i>m</i> sma<i>h</i> bhavâma<i>h</i>, Sây.

[^357]: 115:3 See XIV, 6, 9, 1 seqq (There is no such location—JBH).

[^358]: 116:1 Sâya<i>n</i>a takes ‘stanayitnu’ in the sense of ‘thunder-cloud,’—stanayitnu<i>h</i> stanana<i>s</i>îlo gar<i>g</i>an par<i>g</i>anya ity artha<i>h</i>.

[^359]: 117:1 XIV, 6, 9, 10, the use of ‘adhyardha (having one half over)’ in connection with the wind is accounted for by a fanciful etymology, viz. because the wind succeeds (or prevails) over (adhy-ardh) everything here.

[^360]: 117:2 That is, as would seem, Pra<i>g</i>âpati, cf. XIV, 6, 6, 1 (There is no such location—JBH), where Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya tells Gârgî how one world is ‘woven and rewoven’ on another, the last being that of Pra<i>g</i>âpati, which was woven on that of the Brahman; and when Gârgî asks him as to what world the Brahman-world was woven on, he gives the same reply as here, viz. that there must be no questioning beyond that deity (Pra<i>g</i>âpati).

[^361]: 117:3 Prof. Weber, Ind. Streifen, I, p. 23, connects this feature with the belief in a strictly personal existence after death prevailing at the time of the Brâhma<i>n</i>a, which involved, as a matter of great moment, the careful collection of the bones after the corpse had been burnt, with a view to their being placed in an earthen vessel and buried.—Cf. Â<i>s</i>val. G<i>ri</i>hyas. IV, 5, 1 seqq.; Kâty. <i>S</i>r. XXI, 3, 7 seqq. See also J. Muir, Orig. Sanskrit Texts, vol. v, p. 316.

[^362]: 117:4 That is, mistaking them for gold or some other valuable substance, comm.,—anyan manyamânâ<i>h</i> suvar<i>n</i>âdidravyatvena <i>g</i>ânanta<i>h</i>.

[^363]: 117:5 Or, ‘revile,’ as the St. Petersb. Dict. takes it. Possibly, however, ‘upa-vad’ has here the sense of ‘to speak to,’ i.e. ‘to question or lecture some one.’

[^364]: 117:6 The commentary is partly corrupt and not very intelligible:—p. 118 Yasmâd eva<i>m</i> tasmâd iti goshu kathârûpe<i>n</i>a tattvanik<i>ri</i>(ti)m upetya vâdî na bhavet, sva (? svayam) api tu eva<i>m</i>vit paro bhavati, uktaprakâre<i>n</i>a ya<i>h</i> prâ<i>n</i>asvarûpa<i>m</i> <i>g</i>ânâti ta<i>m</i> vidvâ<i>m</i>sam upetya tâtparye<i>n</i>â savâ (? âtmanâ) yukto bhaved ity artha<i>h</i>, Sây. Cf. Weber, Ind. Stud. V, p. 36.1, note.—Prof. Delbrück, Altind. Syntax, p. 528, takes ‘paro bhavati’ in the sense of ‘he becomes one of the other side, or shore,’ i.e. he dies.