---
title: "Book IV — X, 6. Sixth Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_10_5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book IV — X, 5. Fifth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_Corrections">
          <span class="pr-2">Book IV — Corrections</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="v10_6_1"><sup><small>10:6:1</small></sup></span>

## SIXTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_6_1_11"><sup><small>10:6:1:11.</small></sup></span>  Now at the house of Aru<i>n</i>a Aupave<i>s</i>i [^796] these came once together,—Satyaya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>a Paulushi, Mahâ<i>s</i>âla <i>G</i>âbâla, Bu<i>d</i>ila Â<i>s</i>vatarâ<i>s</i>vi, Indradyumna Bhâllaveya, and <i>G</i>ana<i>s</i>ârkarâkshya. They took counsel together regarding (Agni) Vai<i>s</i>vânara, but did not agree as to Vai<i>s</i>vânara [^797].

<span id="v10_6_1_22"><sup><small>10:6:1:22.</small></sup></span>  They said, ‘There is that A<i>s</i>vapati Kaikeya who knows Vai<i>s</i>vânara thoroughly [^798]: let us go to him!’ They went to A<i>s</i>vapati Kaikeya. He ordered for them separate dwellings, separate honours, separate Soma-sacrifices each with a thousand gifts. In the morning, still at variance with one another, they <span id="p394"><sup><small>[ p. 394 ]</small></sup></span> came again to him, with fuel in their hands [^799], saying, ‘We want to become thy pupils.’

<span id="v10_6_1_33"><sup><small>10:6:1:33.</small></sup></span>  He said, ‘How is this, venerable sirs, when ye are learned in the scriptures, and sons of men learned in the scriptures?’ They replied, ‘Venerable sir, thou knowest Vai<i>s</i>vânara thoroughly: teach us him!’ He said, ‘I do indeed know Vai<i>s</i>vânara thoroughly: put your fuel on (the fire), ye are become my pupils [^800].’

<span id="v10_6_1_44"><sup><small>10:6:1:44.</small></sup></span>  He then said to Aru<i>n</i>a Aupave<i>s</i>i, ‘O Gautama, as whom knowest thou Vai<i>s</i>vânara [^801]?’—‘As Earth only, O king;’ he replied.—‘Yea,’ he said, ‘that indeed is Vai<i>s</i>vânara, the foundation; and because thou knowest the Vai<i>s</i>vânara Foundation (pratish<i>th</i>â) therefore thou art firmly established (pratish<i>th</i>ita) with offspring and cattle; and, verily, he who knows that Vai<i>s</i>vânara Foundation, repels Death and attains all life. But, in truth, these are only the feet [^802] of Vai<i>s</i>vânara, and thy feet would have withered away, hadst thou not come hither; or the feet would be unknown to thee, hadst thou not come hither [^803].’

<span id="v10_6_1_55"><sup><small>10:6:1:55.</small></sup></span>  He then said to Satyaya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>a Paulushi, ‘O Prâ<i>k</i>înayogya, as whom knowest thou Vai<i>s</i>vânara?’ <span id="p395"><sup><small>[ p. 395 ]</small></sup></span> —‘As Water only, O king;’ he replied.—‘Yea,’ he said, ‘that indeed is the Vai<i>s</i>vânara Wealth; and because thou knowest that Vai<i>s</i>vânara Wealth, therefore thou art wealthy and prosperous; and, verily, he who knows that Vai<i>s</i>vânara Wealth, repels death and attains all life. But, in truth, this is only the bladder of Vai<i>s</i>vânara, and thy bladder would have failed thee, hadst thou not come hither; or the bladder would be unknown to thee, hadst thou not come hither.’

<span id="v10_6_1_66"><sup><small>10:6:1:66.</small></sup></span>  He then said to Mahâ<i>s</i>âla <i>G</i>âbâla, ‘O Aupamanyava, as whom knowest thou Vai<i>s</i>vânara?’—‘As Ether only, O king,’ he replied.—‘Yea,’ he said, ‘that, indeed, is the Vai<i>s</i>vânara Plenteous; and because thou knowest Vai<i>s</i>vânara Plenteous, therefore thou art plentiful in offspring and cattle; and, verily, he who knows that Vai<i>s</i>vânara Plenteous, repels death and attains all life. But, in truth, this is only the trunk of Vai<i>s</i>vânara, and thy trunk would have failed thee, hadst thou not come hither; or the body would be unknown to thee, hadst thou not come hither.’

<span id="v10_6_1_77"><sup><small>10:6:1:77.</small></sup></span>  He then said to Budila Â<i>s</i>vatarâ<i>s</i>vi, ‘O Vaiyâghrapadya, as whom knowest thou Vai<i>s</i>vânara?’—‘As Air (wind) only, O king;’ he replied.—‘Yea,’ he <span id="p396"><sup><small>[ p. 396 ]</small></sup></span> said, ‘that indeed is the Vai<i>s</i>vânara of divers courses; and because thou knowest that Vai<i>s</i>vânara of divers courses, therefore divers rows of cars follow thee; and, verily, he who knows that Vai<i>s</i>vânara of divers courses, repels death, and attains all life. But, in truth, this is only the breath of Vai<i>s</i>vânara, and thy breath would have failed thee, hadst thou not come hither; or the breath would be unknown to thee, hadst thou not come hither.’

<span id="v10_6_1_88"><sup><small>10:6:1:88.</small></sup></span>  He then said to Indradyumna Bhâllaveya, ‘O Vaiyâghrapadya, as whom knowest thou Vai<i>s</i>vânara?’—‘As Sun only, O king,’ he replied.—‘Yea,’ he said, 'that indeed is the Vai<i>s</i>vânara of Soma's splendour [^804]; and because thou knowest the Vai<i>s</i>vânara of Soma's splendour, therefore that Soma-juice never fails to be consumed and cooked [^805] in thy house; and, verily, he who knows that Vai<i>s</i>vânara of Soma's splendour, repels death, and attains all life. But, indeed, this is only the eye of Vai<i>s</i>vânara, and thine eye would have failed thee, hadst thou not come hither; or the eye would be unknown to thee, hadst thou not come hither.’

<span id="v10_6_1_99"><sup><small>10:6:1:99.</small></sup></span>  He then said to <i>G</i>ana <i>S</i>arkarâkshya, ‘O Sâyavasa, as whom knowest thou Vai<i>s</i>vânara?’—‘As Heaven only, O king,’ he replied.—‘Yea,’ he said, ‘that indeed is Vai<i>s</i>vânara Pre-eminence; and because thou knowest the Vai<i>s</i>vânara Pre-eminence, therefore thou art pre-eminent among thine equals; and, verily, he who knows that Vai<i>s</i>vânara Preeminence <span id="p397"><sup><small>[ p. 397 ]</small></sup></span> repels death, and attains all life. But, indeed, this is only the head of Vai<i>s</i>vânara, and thy head would have failed thee, hadst thou not come hither; or the head would have been unknown to thee, hadst thou not come hither.’

<span id="v10_6_1_1010"><sup><small>10:6:1:1010.</small></sup></span>  He said to them, ‘Ye then, knowing different Vai<i>s</i>vânaras, have been feeding on different kinds of food; but verily, the well-beknown gods have attained, as it were, the measure of a span [^806]; but I will so tell them unto you that I shall make them attain no more nor less than the measure of a span.’

<span id="v10_6_1_1111"><sup><small>10:6:1:1111.</small></sup></span>  Pointing at the head he said, ‘This, indeed, is the Vai<i>s</i>vânara Pre-eminence;’—pointing at the eyes he said, 'This, indeed, is the Vai<i>s</i>vânara of Soma's splendour;'—pointing at the nostrils he said, ‘This, indeed, is the Vai<i>s</i>vânara of divers courses;’—pointing at the space in the mouth he said, ‘This, indeed, is the Vai<i>s</i>vânara Plenteous;’—pointing at the water in the mouth he said, ‘This, indeed, is the Vai<i>s</i>vânara Wealth;’—pointing at the chin he said, ‘This, indeed, is the Vai<i>s</i>vânara Foundation.’ <span id="p398"><sup><small>[ p. 398 ]</small></sup></span> This Agni Vai<i>s</i>vânara is no other than the Purusha; and, verily, whosoever thus knows that Agni Vai<i>s</i>vânara as Purusha-like, as established within the Purusha, repels death, and attains all life; and, verily, Vai<i>s</i>vânara does no harm to him that speaks of him.


<span id="v10_6_2"><sup><small>10:6:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_6_2_11"><sup><small>10:6:2:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, indeed, there is this twofold thing, to wit, the eater and that which is eaten [^807]; and when this pair meets it is called the eater, and not the eaten.

<span id="v10_6_2_22"><sup><small>10:6:2:22.</small></sup></span>  Now that eater is the same as this Agni (the fire and fire-altar); and whatever they assign to him is his assignments; and these assignments (âhiti) are mystically called oblations (âhuti), for the gods love the mystic.

<span id="v10_6_2_33"><sup><small>10:6:2:33.</small></sup></span>  And the eater, doubtless, is the sun, and his assignments (offerings) are the moon, for the moon is assigned to the sun [^808]. Thus much as to the deity.

<span id="v10_6_2_44"><sup><small>10:6:2:44.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the body. The eater, doubtless, is the breath, and its assignments are food, for the food is consigned to (the channel of) the breath. Thus much as to Agni.

<span id="v10_6_2_55"><sup><small>10:6:2:55.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the Arka (flame). The Arka, doubtless, is Agni; and his joy are the oblations, for the oblations are a joy [^809] to Agni. <span id="p399"><sup><small>[ p. 399 ]</small></sup></span> 10:6:2:66\. And the Arka, doubtless, is the sun; and his joy is the moon, for the moon is a joy to the sun. Thus much as to the deity.

<span id="v10_6_2_77"><sup><small>10:6:2:77.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the body. The Arka, doubtless, is the breath, and his joy is food, for food is a joy to (the channel of) the breath. Thus much as to the Arka.

<span id="v10_6_2_88"><sup><small>10:6:2:88.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the Uktha (song of praise). The ‘uk,’ doubtless, is Agni, and his ‘tham’ is oblations, for by oblations Agni rises (ut-thâ, i. e. blazes up).

<span id="v10_6_2_99"><sup><small>10:6:2:99.</small></sup></span>  And the ‘uk,’ doubtless, is the sun, and his ‘tham’ is the moon, for by the moon the sun rises. Thus much as to the deity.

<span id="v10_6_2_1010"><sup><small>10:6:2:1010.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the body. The ‘uk,’ doubtless, is the breath, and the ‘tham’ is food, for by food the breath rises (increases). Thus much as to the Uktha. That Agni-like, Arka-like, Uktha-like one is the same as the Purusha; and, verily, the enemy withers away of whosoever, knowing this, thus serves that Agni-like, Arka-like, Uktha-like Purusha.

<span id="v10_6_2_1111"><sup><small>10:6:2:1111.</small></sup></span>  The fire, indeed, is kindled by the breath, the wind by the fire, the sun by the wind, the moon by the sun, the stars by the moon, and the lightning by the stars [^810]:—so great, indeed, is the kindling both in this and in yonder world; and, verily, whosoever knows this is enkindled to that full extent both in this and in yonder world.


<span id="v10_6_3"><sup><small>10:6:3</small></sup></span>

<span id="p400"><sup><small>[ p. 400 ]</small></sup></span>

## THIRD BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_6_3_11"><sup><small>10:6:3:11.</small></sup></span>  Let him meditate upon the ‘true Brahman.’ Now, man here, indeed, is possessed of understanding [^811], and according to how great his understanding is when he departs this world, so does he, on passing away, enter yonder world.

<span id="v10_6_3_22"><sup><small>10:6:3:22.</small></sup></span>  Let him meditate on the Self, which is made up of intelligence, and endowed with a body of spirit, with a form of light, and with an etherial nature, which changes its shape at will, is swift as thought, of true resolve, and true purpose, which consists of all sweet odours and tastes, which holds sway over all the regions and pervades this whole universe, which is speechless and indifferent [^812];even as a grain of rice, or a grain of barley, or a grain of millet, or the smallest granule of millet, so is this golden [^813] Purusha in the heart; even as a smokeless light, it is greater than the sky, greater than the ether, greater than the earth, greater than all existing things;—that self of the spirit (breath) is my self: on passing away from hence I shall obtain that self. Verily, whosoever has this trust [^814], for him there is no uncertainty. Thus spake Sâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ilya, and so it is [^815].


<span id="v10_6_4"><sup><small>10:6:4</small></sup></span>

<span id="p401"><sup><small>[ p. 401 ]</small></sup></span>

## FOURTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_6_4_11"><sup><small>10:6:4:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, the dawn is the head of the sacrificial horse [^816], the sun its eye, the wind its breath, Agni Vai<i>s</i>vânara (the fire belonging to all men) its open mouth. The year is the body of the sacrificial horse, the sky its back, the air its belly, the earth the under part of its belly, the quarters its flanks, the intermediate quarters its ribs, the seasons its limbs, the months and half-months its joints, the days and nights its feet, the stars its bones, the welkin its flesh, the sand its intestinal food, the rivers its bowels, the mountains its liver and lungs, the herbs and trees its hair, the rising sun the forepart, and the setting sun the hindpart of its body, the lightning its yawning, the thundering its whinnying, the raining its voiding urine, and speech its voice. The day, indeed, was produced as the Mahiman [^817] (cup) before the horse, and its birthplace is in the eastern sea. The night was produced as the Mahiman (cup) behind (or after) it, and its birth-place was in the western sea: these two Mahiman (cups), indeed, came to be on both sides of the horse. As Haya (steed) it carried the gods, as Va<i>g</i>in (racer) the Gandharvas, as Aryan (courser) the Asuras, as A<i>s</i>va (horse) men. The sea, indeed, is its kindred, the sea its birth-place.


<span id="v10_6_5"><sup><small>10:6:5</small></sup></span>

<span id="p402"><sup><small>[ p. 402 ]</small></sup></span>

## FIFTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_6_5_11"><sup><small>10:6:5:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, there was nothing here in the beginning: by Death this (universe) was covered, by hunger, for Death is hunger. He created for himself this mind, thinking, ‘May I have a soul.’ He went on worshipping. Whilst he was worshipping the waters were produced. ‘Verily, to me worshipping (ar<i>k</i>) water (kam) has been produced,’ thus (he thought): this, indeed, is the Arka-nature of the Arkya [^818]; and, verily, there is joy (kam) for him who thus knows the Arka-nature of the Arkya.

<span id="v10_6_5_22"><sup><small>10:6:5:22.</small></sup></span>  The Arka, doubtless, is the waters; and the cream (froth) which was on the waters was compacted, and became this earth. Thereon he wearied himself, and the glow and essence (sweat) of him thus wearied and heated developed into Fire.

<span id="v10_6_5_33"><sup><small>10:6:5:33.</small></sup></span>  He made himself threefold—(Agni being one-third), Âditya one-third, and Vâyu one-third: that is this threefold breath. The eastern quarter was his head, this and that (intermediate quarters) are his fore-feet, the western quarter his tail, this and that (intermediate quarters) his thighs, the southern and northern quarters his flanks; the sky his back, the air his belly, and this (earth) his chest:—on the waters he was established any and everywhere, and so indeed is he established who knows this.

<span id="v10_6_5_44"><sup><small>10:6:5:44.</small></sup></span>  He desired, ‘May a second self be produced for me.’ By his mind he entered into union with speech,—(to wit) Death with hunger: the seed which was produced became the year, for theretofore there was no year. For as long as the year he (Death) carried him (within him), and at the end of <span id="p403"><sup><small>[ p. 403 ]</small></sup></span> that time he produced him [^819]. He opened his mouth (to devour) the new-born one, and he (the child) cried ‘bhâ<i>n</i>’; thus speech was produced.

<span id="v10_6_5_55"><sup><small>10:6:5:55.</small></sup></span>  He bethought him, ‘Surely, if I kill him, I shall gain but little food [^820].’ By that speech and that soul of his he created all this (universe) whatsoever there is,—<i>Ri</i><i>k</i> (hymn-verses), Ya<i>g</i>us (formulas), Sâman (hymn-tunes), metres, sacrifices, men, and beasts. And whatsoever he created he set about devouring; and because he eats (ad) everything, hence the name ‘Aditi’; and, verily, he who thus knows the nature of Aditi becomes an eater of everything, and all food becomes his.

<span id="v10_6_5_66"><sup><small>10:6:5:66.</small></sup></span>  He desired, ‘May I again sacrifice by yet another sacrifice.’ He wearied himself and practised austerity. From him, thus wearied and heated, glory and vigour departed; and glory and vigour, indeed, are the vital airs. The vital airs having departed, that body of his began to swell. The mind was yet in the body;—

<span id="v10_6_5_77"><sup><small>10:6:5:77.</small></sup></span>  He desired, ‘May this (body) of mine be sacrificially pure: may I thereby be possessed of a self!’ Thereupon the horse (a<i>s</i>va) was produced; and because that which was swelling [^821] (a<i>s</i>vat) became pure (medhya) therefore the name A<i>s</i>vamedha (belongs to that sacrifice). He, indeed, knows the A<i>s</i>vamedha who thus knows him [^822]. <span id="p404"><sup><small>[ p. 404 ]</small></sup></span> 10:6:5:88\. He bethought him of leaving it unrestrained [^823]. At the end of a year he slaughtered it for his own self, and made over the (sacrificial) animals to the deities: therefore they slaughter the consecrated (victim) as one that, in its nature as Pra<i>g</i>âpati, represents all the deities. But the A<i>s</i>vamedha, in truth, is he that shines yonder (the sun), and the year is his body. The Arka is this Fire, and these worlds are his bodies. These two are the Arka and A<i>s</i>vamedha; but these, indeed, become again one deity, to wit, Death. And, verily, whosoever knows this, conquers recurrent Death, and Death has no hold on him: Death is his own self; he attains all life, and becomes one of those deities.

<span id="v10_6_5_99"><sup><small>10:6:5:99.</small></sup></span>  Now the line of succession (of teachers). The same as far as Sâ<i>m</i><i>g</i>îvîputra. Sâ<i>m</i><i>g</i>îvîputra (received it) from Mâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ûkâyani, Mâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ûkâyani from Mâ<i>n</i>davya, Mâ<i>n</i>davya from Kautsa, Kautsa from Mâhitthi, Mâhitthi from Vâmakakshâya<i>n</i>a, Vâmakakshâya<i>n</i>a from Vâtsya, Vâtsya from <i>S</i>â<i>n</i><i>d</i>ilya, <i>S</i>â<i>n</i><i>d</i>ilya from Ku<i>s</i>ri, Ku<i>s</i>ri from Yag<i>ñ</i>ava<i>k</i>as Râ<i>g</i>astambâyana, Ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>ava<i>k</i>as Râ<i>g</i>astambâyana from Tura Kâvasheya, Tura Kâvasheya from Pra<i>g</i>âpati, Pra<i>g</i>âpati from Brahman (n.). Brahman is the self-existent: reverence be to Brahman!



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_10_5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book IV — X, 5. Fifth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_Corrections">
          <span class="pr-2">Book IV — Corrections</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^809]: 393:1 <i>Kh</i>ândogyop. V, 11, where another version of this story occurs, has here the name of Aru<i>n</i>a's son, Uddâlaka Âru<i>n</i>i; and, instead of Mahâ<i>s</i>âla <i>G</i>âbâla, it has Prâ<i>k</i>îna<i>s</i>âla Aupamanya.

[^810]: 393:2 Sâya<i>n</i>a takes this to mean, ‘he (Aru<i>n</i>a) was unable to instruct them in regard to Vai<i>s</i>vânara,’—soऽru<i>n</i>as teshâ<i>m</i> satyaya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âdînâ<i>m</i> pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ânâ<i>m</i> vai<i>s</i>vânaravidyâ<i>m</i> bodhayitu<i>m</i> na samiyâya sa<i>m</i>gata<i>h</i> <i>s</i>akto nâbhavat,—probably, however, ‘samiyâya’ is better taken impersonally (‘there was no agreement between them’), as is done by the St. Petersb. Dict.; though <i>Kh</i>ând. XI, 3 favours Sâya<i>n</i>a's view.

[^811]: 393:3 Sâya<i>n</i>a takes ‘samprati’ in its ordinary sense of ‘now.’ The knowledge of Vai<i>s</i>vânara implied here, according to Sâya<i>n</i>a, means the knowledge of the supreme deity (parame<i>s</i>vara).

[^812]: 394:1 That is, in the way in which pupils approach their teacher.

[^813]: 394:2 Literally, ‘Ye have entered (my tuition);’ upetâ stha upâsînâ bhavatha. Sây.

[^814]: 394:3 Or, perhaps, ‘what Vai<i>s</i>vânara knowest thou?’

[^815]: 394:4 ‘Pratish<i>th</i>â’ (rest, foundation) also commonly means ‘the feet.’

[^816]: 394:5 It is not quite clear whether the words ‘or the feet, &c.’ really (as Sâya<i>n</i>a takes them) form part of the king's speech, or whether they are merely meant as explanatory of the latter part of the king's remarks. If Sâya<i>n</i>a be right, the words ‘the feet would be unknown by thee,’ seem to admit of a double meaning, viz. ‘thou wouldst p. 395 have become footless,’ or 'not even Vai<i>s</i>vânara's feet would have been known by thee;' though in the latter sense some particle such as ‘eva’ might have been expected. Sâya<i>n</i>a, however, seems to take these words in yet another sense (if, indeed, he had not another reading before him),—vai<i>s</i>vânarasyâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>ânât pâdau te tava viparîtagrâhi<i>n</i>o amlâsyatâm amlânau gamanâsamarthâv abhavishyatâ<i>m</i> yadi mâ<i>m</i> nâgamishya<i>h</i>; ittha<i>m</i> doshaparyavasânayuktam ekade<i>s</i>a<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>ânam eva nâva<i>s</i>esha ity âha, pâdau to viditâv iti vai<i>s</i>vânarasya pâdamâtra<i>m</i> tvayâ vidita<i>m</i> na tu k<i>ri</i>tsno vai<i>s</i>vânara<i>h</i>; ata<i>h</i> sâdhv akârshîr yat tvam âgatoऽsîty abhiprâya<i>h</i>.

[^817]: 396:1 Or, perhaps better, 'of Soma's fire.' The <i>Kh</i>ândogya-upanishad has ‘Sute<i>g</i>as (of beautiful splendour, or light),’ instead of ‘sutate<i>g</i>as.’

[^818]: 396:2 According to Sâya<i>n</i>a, this refers to the cooking, or baking, of the cakes (puro<i>d</i>â<i>s</i>a) connected with the Soma-sacrifice.

[^819]: 397:1 Sâya<i>n</i>a apparently takes this thus: but the gods, knowing well that (essential element) which is merely of the space of a span, have become successful;—yat tv eva<i>m</i> yathoktâvayavai<i>h</i> p<i>ri</i>thivîpâdâdibhir dyumûrdhântair avayavair vi<i>s</i>ish<i>t</i>am eka<i>m</i> vastu tat prâde<i>s</i>amâtra<i>m</i> prâde<i>s</i>apramâ<i>n</i>am iva devâ<i>h</i> suvidita<i>h</i> samyag <i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âtavantoऽbhisampannâ<i>h</i> prâptaphalâ babhûvur ity artha<i>h</i>. Though this interpretation looks very plausible, the accent of ‘súvidita’ would scarcely admit of the word being taken as a bahuvrîhi compound. In the words which follow, Sâya<i>n</i>a takes ‘them (enân)’ to refer to the bodily parts of Vai<i>s</i>vânara, identified with the imperfect doctrines of the king's disciples. It is, indeed, quite possible that ‘the gods’ are here identified with the special Vai<i>s</i>vânaras, the unity of whom, in the one Purusha, or Atman (self), the Brâhma<i>n</i>a endeavours to inculcate.

[^820]: 398:1 Or, as Sâya<i>n</i>a takes it,—this (world) is twofold, the eater and the eaten.

[^821]: 398:2 The moon here would seem to be considered as serving for food to the sun, as it does to the gods. The commentary is not very explicit on this point,—tas<i>k</i>yâhutaya<i>s</i> (!) <i>k</i>andramâ<i>h</i> <i>k</i>andramasa<i>m</i> hy âditya âdadhatîty anena <i>k</i>andramasa âditye âdhânâd âdhititva<i>m</i> pratipâditam.

[^822]: 398:3 ‘Kam’ is used adverbially ‘well,’—they do him good, they please him.

[^823]: 399:1 Agnir prâ<i>n</i>ena dîpyate, prâ<i>n</i>avâyor abhâve alpatve agner dîpana<i>m</i> nâsti; agninâ vâyur dîpyate vâyunâdityoऽvash<i>t</i>ambhamâtre<i>n</i>a tad dipanam; âdityena <i>k</i>andramâ<i>h</i> prabhâ<i>m</i><i>s</i>o <i>g</i>yoti<i>h</i><i>s</i>âstrasiddha<i>h</i>; râtrau nakshatrâ<i>n</i>i <i>k</i>andramasâ prakâ<i>s</i>ante divâ hi mahattare<i>n</i>a sûryaprakâ<i>s</i>ena tirobhûtatvân na tadâ prakâ<i>s</i>a<i>h</i>; nakshatrair vidyut prakâ<i>s</i>yate. Sây.

[^824]: 400:1 Or, will, purpose,—kratumaya<i>h</i>, kratur ni<i>s</i><i>k</i>ayoऽdhyavasâya evam eva nânyathety avivakshitapratyaya<i>h</i>, tadâtmakoऽya<i>m</i> purusho <i>g</i>îva<i>h</i>. For this chapter (the <i>S</i>â<i>n</i><i>d</i>ilyavidyâ) see <i>Kh</i>ândogyop. III, 14 (‘man is a creature of will,’ Prof. Max Müller).

[^825]: 400:2 Anâdaram asambhramam (without mental affects). Sây.

[^826]: 400:3 That is, of the brilliance of gold (suvar<i>n</i>asamânate<i>g</i>â<i>h</i>). Sây.

[^827]: 400:4 Or, thought, knowledge (buddhi<i>h</i>), as Sâya<i>n</i>a supplies.

[^828]: 400:5 Sâya<i>n</i>a takes this along with ‘so spake Sâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ilya,’—ity evam etad âha sma uktavân <i>s</i>â<i>n</i><i>d</i>ilyo nâmarshir iti. The final ‘iti’ seems to be intended to indicate that <i>S</i>â<i>n</i><i>d</i>ilya's opinion is adopted by the Brâhma<i>n</i>a.

[^829]: 401:1 That is, of Pra<i>g</i>âpati, in the form of a horse. For this and the next chapters see the beginning of the Kâ<i>n</i>va recension of the B<i>ri</i>had-âra<i>n</i>yakopanishad.

[^830]: 401:2 This is the name of two gold cups used at the A<i>s</i>vamedha; cf. XIII, 2, 11, I seq.; 5, 2, 23.

[^831]: 402:1 See [X, 3, 4, 3](../Book_4_10_3#v10_3_4_3) seq.; [4, 1, 4](../Book_4_10_4#v10_4_1_4). [15](../Book_4_10_4#v10_4_1_15). [21](../Book_4_10_4#v10_4_1_21) seq.

[^832]: 403:1 Viz. Pra<i>g</i>âpati, the year; Agni, the Purusha, the Self.

[^833]: 403:2 Or, I shall lessen my food (which would have become more abundant if the child had been allowed to live and grow).

[^834]: 403:3 The commentaries on the B<i>ri</i>had-âra<i>n</i>yakop. take this together with the preceding clause,—and because that (body) was swelling (a<i>s</i>vat), therefore the horse (a<i>s</i>va) was produced.

[^835]: 403:4 Viz. Agni-Pra<i>g</i>âpati, or Death, in the form of the horse.

[^836]: 404:1 For the construction, see [IX, 5, 1, 35](../Book_4_9_5#v9_5_1_35); on the negative form of the gerund (tam anavarudhyaivâmanyata) with a direct object, see Delbrück, Altindische Syntax, § 264.