---
title: "Book V — XI, 5. Fifth Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_4">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XI, 4. Fourth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_6">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XI, 6. Sixth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="v11_5_1"><sup><small>11:5:1</small></sup></span>

## FIFTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_5_1_11"><sup><small>11:5:1:11.</small></sup></span>  The nymph Urva<i>s</i>î loved Purûravas [^228], the son of I<i>d</i>â. When she wedded him, she said, <span id="p69"><sup><small>[ p. 69 ]</small></sup></span> ‘Thrice a day shalt thou embrace [^229] me; but do not lie with me against my will [^230], and let me not see thee naked, for such is the way to behave to us women.’

<span id="v11_5_1_22"><sup><small>11:5:1:22.</small></sup></span>  She then dwelt with him a long time, and was even with child of him, so long did she dwell with him. Then the Gandharvas [^231] said to one another, ‘For a long time, indeed, has this Urva<i>s</i>î dwelt among men: devise ye some means how she may come back to us.’ Now, a ewe with two lambs was tied to her couch: the Gandharvas then carried off one of the lambs.

<span id="v11_5_1_33"><sup><small>11:5:1:33.</small></sup></span>  ‘Alas,’ she cried, ‘they are taking away my darling [^232], as if I were where there is no hero and no man!’ They carried off the second, and she spake in the selfsame manner.

<span id="v11_5_1_44"><sup><small>11:5:1:44.</small></sup></span>  He then thought within himself, ‘How can that be (a place) without a hero and without a man where I am?’ And naked, as he was, he sprang <span id="p70"><sup><small>[ p. 70 ]</small></sup></span> up after them: too long he deemed it that he should put on his garment. Then the Gandharvas produced a flash of lightning, and she beheld him naked even as by daylight. Then, indeed, she vanished: ‘Here I am back,’ he said, and lo! she had vanished [^233]. Wailing with sorrow he wandered all over Kurukshetra. Now there is a lotus-lake there, called Anyata<i>h</i>plakshâ: He walked along its bank; and there nymphs were swimming about in the shape of swans [^234].

<span id="v11_5_1_55"><sup><small>11:5:1:55.</small></sup></span>  And she (Urva<i>s</i>î), recognising him, said, ‘This is the man with whom I have dwelt.’ They then said, ‘Let us appear to him!’—‘So be it!’ she replied; and they appeared to him [^235].

<span id="v11_5_1_66"><sup><small>11:5:1:66.</small></sup></span>  He then recognised her and implored her (<i>Ri</i>g-veda X, 95, I), ‘Oh, my wife, stay thou, cruel in mind [^236]: let us now exchange words! Untold, these secrets of ours will not bring us joy in days to <span id="p71"><sup><small>[ p. 71 ]</small></sup></span> come;’—‘Stop, pray, let us speak together!’ this is what he meant to say to her.

<span id="v11_5_1_77"><sup><small>11:5:1:77.</small></sup></span>  She replied (X, 95, 2), ‘What concern have I with speaking to thee? I have passed away like the first of the dawns. Purûravas, go home again: I am like the wind, difficult to catch;’—‘Thou didst not do what I had told thee; hard to catch I am for thee, go to thy home again!’ this is what she meant to say.

<span id="v11_5_1_88"><sup><small>11:5:1:88.</small></sup></span>  He then said sorrowing (X, 95, 14), 'Then will thy friend [^237] rush away [^238] this day never to come back, to go to the farthest distance: then will he lie in Nir<i>ri</i>ti's [^239] lap, or the fierce wolves will devour him; Thy friend will either hang himself, or start forth; or the wolves, or dogs, will devour him!' this is what he meant to say.

<span id="v11_5_1_99"><sup><small>11:5:1:99.</small></sup></span>  She replied (X, 95, 15), ‘Purûravas, do not die! do not rush away! let not the cruel wolves devour thee! Truly, there is no friendship with women, and theirs are the hearts of hyenas [^240];’— <span id="p72"><sup><small>[ p. 72 ]</small></sup></span> ‘Do not take this to heart! there is no friendship with women: return home!’ this is what she meant to say.

<span id="v11_5_1_1010"><sup><small>11:5:1:1010.</small></sup></span>  (<i>Ri</i>g-veda X, 95, 16), ‘When changed in form, I walked among mortals, and passed the nights there during four autumns [^241] ate a little ghee, once a day, and even now I feel satisfied therewith [^242].’—This discourse in fifteen verses has been handed down by the Bahv<i>ri</i><i>k</i>as [^243]. Then her heart took pity on him [^244].

<span id="v11_5_1_1111"><sup><small>11:5:1:1111.</small></sup></span>  She said, ‘Come here the last night of the year from now [^245]: then shalt thou lie with me for one night, and then this son of thine will have been born.’ He came there on the last night of the year, and lo, there stood a golden palace [^246]! They then <span id="p73"><sup><small>[ p. 73 ]</small></sup></span> said to him only this (word) [^247], ‘Enter!’ and then they bade her go to him.

<span id="v11_5_1_1212"><sup><small>11:5:1:1212.</small></sup></span>  She then said, ‘To-morrow morning the Gandharvas will grant thee a boon, and thou must make thy choice.’ He said, ‘Choose thou for me!’—She replied, ‘Say, Let me be one of yourselves!’ In the morning the Gandharvas granted him a boon; and he said, ‘Let me be one of yourselves!’

<span id="v11_5_1_1313"><sup><small>11:5:1:1313.</small></sup></span>  They said, ‘Surely, there is not among men that holy form of fire by sacrificing wherewith one would become one of ourselves.’ They put fire into a pan, and gave it to him saying, ‘By sacrificing therewith thou shalt become one of ourselves.’ He took it (the fire) and his boy, and went on his way home. He then deposited the fire in the forest, and went to the village with the boy alone. \[He came back and thought\] ‘Here I am back;’ and lo! it had disappeared [^248]: what had been the fire was an A<i>s</i>vattha tree (ficus religiosa), and what had been the pan was a <i>S</i>amî tree (mimosa suma). He then returned to the Gandharvas.

<span id="v11_5_1_1414"><sup><small>11:5:1:1414.</small></sup></span>  They said, ‘Cook for a whole year a mess of rice sufficient for four persons; and taking each time three logs from this A<i>s</i>vattha tree, anoint them with ghee, and put them on the fire with <span id="p74"><sup><small>[ p. 74 ]</small></sup></span> verses containing the words “log” and “ghee”: the fire which shall result therefrom will be that very fire (which is required).’

<span id="v11_5_1_1515"><sup><small>11:5:1:1515.</small></sup></span>  They said, ‘But that is recondite (esoteric), as it were. Make thyself rather an upper ara<i>n</i>i [^249] of A<i>s</i>vattha wood, and a lower ara<i>n</i>i of Sami wood: the fire which shall result therefrom will be that very fire.’

<span id="v11_5_1_1616"><sup><small>11:5:1:1616.</small></sup></span>  They said, ‘But that also is, as it were, recondite. Make thyself rather an upper ara<i>n</i>i of A<i>s</i>vattha wood, and a lower ara<i>n</i>i of A<i>s</i>vattha wood: the fire which shall result therefrom will be that very fire.’

<span id="v11_5_1_1717"><sup><small>11:5:1:1717.</small></sup></span>  He then made himself an upper ara<i>n</i>i of A<i>s</i>vattha wood, and a lower ara<i>n</i>i of A<i>s</i>vattha wood; and the fire which resulted therefrom was that very fire: by offering therewith he became one of the Gandharvas. Let him therefore make himself an upper and a lower ara<i>n</i>i of A<i>s</i>vattha wood, and the fire which results therefrom will be that very fire: by offering therewith he becomes one of the Gandharvas.


<span id="v11_5_2"><sup><small>11:5:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### THE SEASONAL SACRIFICES (<i>K</i>âturmâsya).

<span id="v11_5_2_11"><sup><small>11:5:2:11.</small></sup></span>  By means of the Seasonal sacrifices, Pra<i>g</i>âpati fashioned for himself a body. The sacrificial food for the Vai<i>s</i>vadeva [^250] sacrifice he made to be this <span id="p75"><sup><small>[ p. 75 ]</small></sup></span> right arm of his; the oblation to Agni thereof this thumb; that to Soma this (fore-finger); and that to Savit<i>ri</i> this (middle finger).

<span id="v11_5_2_22"><sup><small>11:5:2:22.</small></sup></span>  That cake (to Savit<i>ri</i>), doubtless, is the largest, and hence this (middle finger) is the largest of these (fingers). That (oblation) to Sarasvatî is this (third) finger; and that to Pûshan this (little finger). And that (oblation) to the Maruts is this joint above the hand (the wrist); and that to the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i> is this (elbow [^251]); and that to Heaven and Earth is this arm: this (oblation) is indistinct [^252], whence that limb also is indistinct [^253].

<span id="v11_5_2_33"><sup><small>11:5:2:33.</small></sup></span>  The Varu<i>n</i>apraghâsa [^254] offerings are this right leg,—the five oblations which this has in common (with the other Seasonal offerings) are these five toes; and the oblation to Indra and Agni is the knuckles: this (oblation) belongs to two deities <span id="p76"><sup><small>[ p. 76 ]</small></sup></span> whence there are these two knuckles. That (oblation) to Varu<i>n</i>a is this (shank); that to the Maruts this (thigh); and that (cake) to Ka is this back-bone: this (oblation) is indistinct, whence that (back-bone) is indistinct.

<span id="v11_5_2_44"><sup><small>11:5:2:44.</small></sup></span>  The offering to (Agni) Anîkavat (of the Sâkamedhâ<i>h</i> [^255]), doubtless, is his (Pra<i>g</i>âpati's) mouth, for the mouth is the extreme end (anîka) of the vital airs; the Sâ<i>m</i>tapanîyâ (pap) is the chest, for by the chest one is, as it were, confined [^256] (sa<i>m</i>\-tap); the G<i>ri</i>hamedhîyâ (pap) is the belly—to serve as a foundation, for the belly is a foundation; the Krai<i>d</i>ina oblation is the male organ, for it is therewith that (man) sports (krî<i>d</i>), as it were; and the offering to Aditi [^257] is this downward breathing.

<span id="v11_5_2_55"><sup><small>11:5:2:55.</small></sup></span>  The Great Oblation, indeed, is this left leg,—the five oblations which it has in common (with the other Seasonal offerings) are these five toes; and the oblation to Indra and Agni is the knuckles: this (oblation) belongs to two deities whence there are <span id="p77"><sup><small>[ p. 77 ]</small></sup></span> these two knuckles. The (oblation) to Mahendra is this (shank); that to Vi<i>s</i>vakarman this (thigh): this (oblation) is indistinct, whence this (thigh) also is indistinct.

<span id="v11_5_2_66"><sup><small>11:5:2:66.</small></sup></span>  The <i>S</i>unâsîrîya [^258], doubtless, is this left arm,—the five oblations which it has in common (with the other Seasonal offerings) are these five fingers; the <i>S</i>unâsîrîya is that joint of his above the hand; that (oblation) to Vâyu is this (elbow); that to Sûrya this arm: this (oblation) is indistinct, whence this (limb) also is indistinct.

<span id="v11_5_2_77"><sup><small>11:5:2:77.</small></sup></span>  Now these Seasonal offerings are tripartite and furnished with two joints [^259], whence these limbs of man are tripartite and furnished with two joints. Two of these four (sacrifices) have each three indistinct (low-voiced) oblations; and two of them have two each [^260].

<span id="v11_5_2_88"><sup><small>11:5:2:88.</small></sup></span>  At all four of them they churn out the fire, <span id="p78"><sup><small>[ p. 78 ]</small></sup></span> whence (the draught animal) pulls with all four limbs. At two of them they lead (the fire) forward [^261], whence it (the animal) walks on two (feet at a time) [^262]. Thus, then, Pra<i>g</i>âpati fashioned for himself a body by means of the Seasonal sacrifices; and in like manner does the Sacrificer who knows this fashion for himself a (divine) body by means of the Seasonal sacrifices.

<span id="v11_5_2_99"><sup><small>11:5:2:99.</small></sup></span>  As to this they say, ‘The Vai<i>s</i>vadeva oblation (should have) all (its formulas) in the Gâyatrî, the Varu<i>n</i>apraghâsâ<i>h</i> all in the Trish<i>t</i>ubh, the Great Oblation all in the <i>G</i>agatî, and the <i>S</i>unâsîrîya all in the Anush<i>t</i>ubh metre, so as to yield a Katush<i>t</i>oma [^263].’ But let him not do this, for inasmuch as (his formulas) amount to these (metres) even thereby that wish is obtained.

<span id="v11_5_2_1010"><sup><small>11:5:2:1010.</small></sup></span>  Now, indeed, (the formulas of) these Seasonal offerings. amount to three hundred and sixty-two B<i>ri</i>hatî verses [^264]: he thereby obtains both the year [^265] <span id="p79"><sup><small>[ p. 79 ]</small></sup></span> and the Mahâvrata [^266]; and thus, indeed, this Sacrificer also has a twofold [^267] foundation, and he thus makes the Sacrificer reach the heavenly world, and establishes him therein.


<span id="v11_5_3"><sup><small>11:5:3</small></sup></span>

## THIRD BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_5_3_11"><sup><small>11:5:3:11.</small></sup></span>  <i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya Prâ<i>k</i>înayogya came to Uddâlaka Âru<i>n</i>i for a disputation on spiritual matters [^268], thinking, ‘I desire to know the Agnihotra.’

<span id="v11_5_3_22"><sup><small>11:5:3:22.</small></sup></span>  He said, 'Gautama, what like is thy Agnihotra cow? what like the calf? what like the cow joined by the calf? what like their meeting? what like (the milk) when being milked? what like when it has been milked? what like when brought (from the stable)? what like when put on the fire? what like when the light is thrown on it [^269]; what like when water is poured thereto? what like when being taken off (the fire)? what like when taken off? what like when <span id="p80"><sup><small>[ p. 80 ]</small></sup></span> being ladled out [^270]? what like when ladled out? what like when lifted up (to be taken to the Âhavanîya)? what like when being taken there? what like when held down [^271]?

<span id="v11_5_3_33"><sup><small>11:5:3:33.</small></sup></span>  'What like is the log thou puttest on? what like the first libation? why didst thou put it down (on the Vedi [^272])? why didst thou look away (towards the Gârhapatya [^273])? what like is the second libation?

<span id="v11_5_3_44"><sup><small>11:5:3:44.</small></sup></span>  ‘Why, having offered, dost thou shake it (the spoon)? why, having cleansed the spoon all round (the spout), didst thou wipe it on the grass-bunch? why, having cleansed it a second time all over, didst thou place thy hand on the south (part of the Vedi)? why didst thou eat (of the milk) the first time, and why the second time? why, on creeping away (from the Vedi), didst thou drink (water)? why, having poured water into the spoon, didst thou sprinkle therewith? why didst thou sprinkle it away a second time, and why a third time in that (northerly) direction? why didst thou pour down water behind the Âhavanîya? why didst thou bring (the offering) to a close? If thou hast offered the Agnihotra knowing this, then it has indeed been offered by thee; <span id="p81"><sup><small>[ p. 81 ]</small></sup></span> but if (thou hast offered it) not knowing this, then it has not been offered by thee.’

<span id="v11_5_3_55"><sup><small>11:5:3:55.</small></sup></span>  He (Uddâlaka) said, 'My Agnihotra cow is I<i>d</i>â, Manu's daughter [^274]; my calf is of Vâyu's nature; the (cow) joined by the calf is in conjunction therewith [^275]; their meeting is the Virâ<i>g</i>; (the milk) when being milked belongs to the A<i>s</i>vins, and when it has been milked, to the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>; when brought (from the stable) it belongs to Vâyu; when put on (the fire), to Agni; when the light is thrown on it, it belongs to Indra and Agni; when water is poured thereto it belongs to Varu<i>n</i>a; when being taken off (the fire), to Vâyu; when it has been taken off, to Heaven and Earth; when being ladled out, to the A<i>s</i>vins; when it has been ladled out, to the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>; when lifted up, to Mahâdeva; when being taken (to the Âhavanîya), to Vâyu; when held down, to Vish<i>n</i>u.

<span id="v11_5_3_66"><sup><small>11:5:3:66.</small></sup></span>  'And the log I put on (the fire) is the resting-place of the libations; and as to the first libation, I therewith gratified the gods; and when I laid down (the spoon with the milk), that belongs to B<i>ri</i>haspati; and when I looked away, then I joined together this and yonder world; and as to the second libation, I thereby settled myself in the heavenly world.

<span id="v11_5_3_77"><sup><small>11:5:3:77.</small></sup></span>  ‘And when, having offered, I shake (the spoon), that belongs to Vâyu; and when, having cleansed the spoon all round (the spout), I wiped it on the grass-bunch, then I gratified the herbs and trees; <span id="p82"><sup><small>[ p. 82 ]</small></sup></span> and when, having cleansed it a second time all over, I placed my hand on the south (part of the altar-ground), then I gratified the Fathers [^276]; and when I ate (of the milk) the first time, then I gratified myself; and when (I ate) a second time, then I gratified my offspring; and when, having crept away (from the altar-ground), I drank (water), then I gratified the cattle; and when, having poured water into the spoon, I sprinkled therewith, then I gratified the snake-deities; and when (I sprinkled) a second time, then (I gratified) the Gandharvas and Apsaras; and when, a third time, I sprinkled it away in that (northerly) direction, then I opened the gate of heaven; and when I poured down water behind the altar, then I bestowed rain on this world; and when I brought (the sacrifice) to a close, then I filled up whatever there is deficient in the earth.’—‘This much, then, reverend sir, we two (know) in common [^277],’ said (<i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya).

<span id="v11_5_3_88"><sup><small>11:5:3:88.</small></sup></span>  <i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya, thus instructed, said, ‘I would yet ask thee a question, reverend sir.’—‘Ask then, Prâ<i>k</i>înayogya!’ he replied. He (<i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya) said, ‘If, at the time when thy fires are taken out, and the sacrificial vessels brought down, thou wert going to offer, and the offering-fire were then to go out, dost thou know what danger there is in that case for him who offers?’ ‘I know,’ he replied; ‘before long the eldest son would die in the case of him who would <span id="p83"><sup><small>[ p. 83 ]</small></sup></span> not know this; but by dint of knowledge I myself have prevailed.’—‘What is that knowledge, and what the atonement?’ he asked.—‘The breath of the mouth has entered the upward breathing—such (is the knowledge); and I should make the offering in the Gârhapatya fire—that would be the atonement, and I should not be committing that sin.’—‘This much, then, reverend sir, we two (know) in common,’ said (<i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya).

<span id="v11_5_3_99"><sup><small>11:5:3:99.</small></sup></span>  <i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya, thus instructed, said, ‘I would yet ask thee a question, reverend sir.’—‘Ask then, Prâ<i>k</i>înayogya!’ he replied. He said, ‘If, at that very time, the Gârhapatya fire were to go out, dost thou know what danger there is in that case for him who offers? I know it,’ he replied; ‘before long the master of the house [^278] would die in the case of him who would not know this; but by dint of knowledge I myself have prevailed.’—‘What is that knowledge, and what the atonement?’ he asked.—‘The upward breathing has entered the breath of the mouth—this (is the knowledge); and I would make the offering on the Âhavanîya—this would be the atonement, and I should not be committing that sin.’—‘This much, then, reverend sir, we two (know) in common,’ said (<i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya).

<span id="v11_5_3_1010"><sup><small>11:5:3:1010.</small></sup></span>  <i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya, thus instructed, said, ‘I would yet ask thee a question, reverend sir.’—‘Ask then, Prâ<i>k</i>înayogya!’ he replied. He said, ‘If, at that very time, the Anvâhâryapa<i>k</i>ana fire were to go out, dost thou know what danger there is in that case for him who offers?’—‘I know it,’ he replied; ‘before long all the cattle would die in the case of him who would <span id="p84"><sup><small>[ p. 84 ]</small></sup></span> not know this; but by dint of knowledge I myself have prevailed.’—‘What is that knowledge, and what the atonement?’ he asked.—-‘The through-breathing has entered the upward breathing—this (is the knowledge); and I would make the offering on the Gârhapatya fire—this is the atonement; and I should not be committing that sin.’—‘This much, then, reverend sir, we two (know) in common,’ said (<i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya).

<span id="v11_5_3_1111"><sup><small>11:5:3:1111.</small></sup></span>  <i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya, thus instructed, said, ‘I would yet ask thee a question, reverend sir.’—‘Ask, then, Prâ<i>k</i>înayogya!’ he replied. He said, ‘If, at that very time, all the fires were to go out, dost thou know what danger there is in that case for him who offers?’—‘I know it,’ he replied; ‘before long the family would be without heirs in the case of him who would not know this; but by dint of knowledge I myself have prevailed.’—‘What is that knowledge, and what the atonement?’ he asked.—‘Having, without delay, churned out fire, and taken out an offering-fire in whatever direction the wind might be blowing, I would perform an offering to Vâyu (the wind): I would then know that my Agnihotra would be successful, belonging as it would to all deities; for all beings, indeed, pass over into the wind, and from out of the wind they are again produced [^279]. This would be the atonement, and I should not be committing that sin.’—‘This much, then, reverend sir, we two (know) in common,’ said (<i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya).

<span id="v11_5_3_1212"><sup><small>11:5:3:1212.</small></sup></span>  <i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya, thus instructed, said, ‘I would yet ask thee a question, reverend sir.’—‘Ask then, Prâ<i>k</i>înayogya!’ <span id="p85"><sup><small>[ p. 85 ]</small></sup></span> he replied. He said, ‘If at that very time all the fires were to go out, when there should be no wind blowing, dost thou know what danger there would be for him who offers?’—‘I know it,’ he replied; ‘unpleasant things, indeed, he would see in this world, and unpleasant things in yonder world, were he not to know this; but by dint of knowledge I myself have prevailed.’—‘What is that knowledge, and what the atonement?’ he asked.—‘Having, without delay, churned out fire, and taken out an offering-fire towards the east, and sat down behind it, I myself would drink (the Agnihotra milk): I should then know that my Agnihotra would be successful, belonging as it would to all deities, for all beings, indeed, pass into the Brâhma<i>n</i>a [^280], and from the Brâhma<i>n</i>a they are again produced. That would be the atonement; and I should not be committing that sin.’—‘And, verily, I did not know this,’ said (<i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya).

<span id="v11_5_3_1313"><sup><small>11:5:3:1313.</small></sup></span>  <i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eya, thus instructed, said, ‘Here are logs for fuel: I will become thy pupil, reverend sir.’ He replied, ‘If thou hadst not spoken thus, thy head would have flown off [^281]: come, enter as my pupil!’—‘So be it,’ he said. He then initiated him, and taught him that pain-conquering utterance, Truth: therefore let man speak naught but truth [^282].


<span id="p86"><sup><small>[ p. 86 ]</small></sup></span>

<span id="v11_5_4"><sup><small>11:5:4</small></sup></span>

## FOURTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### THE UPANAYANA, OR INITIATION OF THE BRÂHMA<i>N</i>ICAL STUDENT [^283].

<span id="v11_5_4_11"><sup><small>11:5:4:11.</small></sup></span>  He says, ‘I have come for Brahma<i>k</i>arya [^284]:’ he thereby reports himself to the Brahman. He says, ‘Let me be a Brahma<i>k</i>ârin (student):’ he thereby makes himself over to the Brahman. He (the teacher) then says, ‘What (ka) is thy name?’—now Ka is Pra<i>g</i>âpati: he thus initiates him after making him one belonging to Pra<i>g</i>âpati.

<span id="v11_5_4_22"><sup><small>11:5:4:22.</small></sup></span>  He then takes his (right) hand with, 'Indra's disciple thou art; Agni is thy teacher, I am thy teacher, O N.N.!'—now these are two most high and most powerful deities: it is to these two most high and most powerful deities he commits him; and thus his disciple suffers no harm of any kind, nor does he who knows this [^285].

<span id="v11_5_4_33"><sup><small>11:5:4:33.</small></sup></span>  He then commits him to the beings:—‘To Pra<i>g</i>âpati I commit thee, to the god Savit<i>ri</i> I commit thee;’—now these are two most high and most important deities: it is to these two most high and most important deities he commits him; and thus his disciple suffers no harm of any kind, nor does he who knows this. <span id="p87"><sup><small>[ p. 87 ]</small></sup></span> 11:5:4:44\. ‘To the waters, to the plants I commit thee,’—he thus commits him to the waters and plants.—‘To Heaven and Earth I commit thee,’—he thus commits him to these two, heaven and earth, within which all this universe is contained.—‘To all beings I commit thee for security from injury,’—he thus commits him to all beings for security from injury; and thus his disciple suffers no harm of any kind, nor does he who knows this.

<span id="v11_5_4_55"><sup><small>11:5:4:55.</small></sup></span>  ‘Thou art a Brahma<i>k</i>ârin,’ he says, and thus commits him to the Brahman;—‘sip water!’—water, doubtless, means ambrosia: ‘sip ambrosia’ is thus what he tells him;—‘do thy work!’—work, doubtless, means vigour: ‘exert vigour’ is thus what he tells him;—‘put on fuel!’—‘enkindle thy mind with fire, with holy lustre!’ is what he thereby tells him;—‘do not sleep [^286]!’—‘do not die’ is what he thereby says to him;—‘sip water!’—water means ambrosia: ‘sip ambrosia’ is what he thus tells him. He thus encloses him on both sides with ambrosia (the drink of immortality), and thus the Brahma<i>k</i>ârin suffers no harm of any kind, nor does he who knows this.

<span id="v11_5_4_66"><sup><small>11:5:4:66.</small></sup></span>  He then recites to him (teaches him) the Sâvitrî [^287];—formerly, indeed, they taught this (verse) at the end of a year [^288], thinking, ‘Children, indeed, are <span id="p88"><sup><small>[ p. 88 ]</small></sup></span> born after being fashioned for a year [^289]: thus we lay speech (voice) into this one as soon as he has been born.’

<span id="v11_5_4_77"><sup><small>11:5:4:77.</small></sup></span>  Or after six months, thinking, ‘There are six seasons in the year, and children are born after being fashioned for a year: we thus lay speech into this one as soon as he has been born.’

<span id="v11_5_4_88"><sup><small>11:5:4:88.</small></sup></span>  Or after twenty-four days, thinking, ‘There are twenty-four half-months in the year, and children are born when fashioned for a year: we thus lay speech into this one as soon as he has been born.’

<span id="v11_5_4_99"><sup><small>11:5:4:99.</small></sup></span>  Or after twelve days, thinking, ‘There are twelve months in the year, and children are born when fashioned for a year: we thus lay speech into this one as soon as he has been born.’

<span id="v11_5_4_1010"><sup><small>11:5:4:1010.</small></sup></span>  Or after six days, thinking, ‘There are six seasons in the year, and children are born when fashioned for a year: we thus lay speech into this one as soon as he has been born.’

<span id="v11_5_4_1111"><sup><small>11:5:4:1111.</small></sup></span>  Or after three days, thinking, ‘There are three seasons in the year, and children are born when fashioned for a year: we thus lay speech into this one as soon as he has been born.’

<span id="v11_5_4_1212"><sup><small>11:5:4:1212.</small></sup></span>  Concerning this they also sing the verse,—‘By laying his right hand on (the pupil), the teacher becomes pregnant (with him): in the third (night) he is born as a Brâhma<i>n</i>a with the Sâvitrî [^290].’ Let him, <span id="p89"><sup><small>[ p. 89 ]</small></sup></span> however, teach a Brâhma<i>n</i>a (the Sâvitrî) at once, for the Brâhma<i>n</i>a belongs to Agni, and Agni is born at once [^291]: therefore, he should teach the Brâhma<i>n</i>a at once.

<span id="v11_5_4_1313"><sup><small>11:5:4:1313.</small></sup></span>  Now some teach an Anush<i>t</i>ubh Sâvitrî, saying, ‘The Anush<i>t</i>ubh is speech: we thus lay speech into him.’ But let him not do so; for if, in that case, any one were to say of him, 'Surely, this (student) has taken away his (the teacher's) speech: he will become dumb;' then that would indeed be likely to come to pass: let him therefore teach him that Gâyatrî Sâvitrî.

<span id="v11_5_4_1414"><sup><small>11:5:4:1414.</small></sup></span>  And some recite it to him while he (the student) is standing or sitting on (the teacher's) right side; but let him not do this; for if, in that case, any one were to say of him, ‘Surely, this (teacher) has born this (student) sideways, he will become averse to him;’ then that would indeed be likely to come to pass: let him therefore recite it in a forward (easterly) direction to (the student) looking at him towards the west.

<span id="v11_5_4_1515"><sup><small>11:5:4:1515.</small></sup></span>  He (first) recites it by pâdas [^292]: there being three breathings, the out-breathing, the up-breathing and the through-breathing; it is these he thus lays into him;—then by half-verses: there being these <span id="p90"><sup><small>[ p. 90 ]</small></sup></span> two (principal) breathings, the out-breathing and the up-breathing [^293], it is the out-breathing and the up-breathing he thus lays into him;—then the whole (verse): there being this one vital air (in man), he thus lays the whole vital air into the whole of him.

<span id="v11_5_4_1616"><sup><small>11:5:4:1616.</small></sup></span>  As to this they say, ‘When one has admitted a Brâhma<i>n</i>a to a term of studentship, he should not carry on sexual intercourse, lest he should generate this Brâhma<i>n</i>a from shed seed; for, indeed, he who enters on a term of studentship becomes an embryo.’

<span id="v11_5_4_1717"><sup><small>11:5:4:1717.</small></sup></span>  And concerning this they also say, ‘He may nevertheless do so, if he chooses; for these creatures are of two kinds, divine and human,—these human creatures are born from the womb, and the divine creatures, being the metres (verses of scripture), are born from the month: it is therefrom he (the teacher) produces him, and therefore he may do so (have intercourse) if he chooses.’

<span id="v11_5_4_1818"><sup><small>11:5:4:1818.</small></sup></span>  And they also say, ‘He who is a Brahma<i>k</i>ârin should not eat honey, lest he should reach the end of food, for honey, doubtless, is the utmost (supreme) essence of plants.’ But <i>S</i>vetaketu Âru<i>n</i>eya, when eating honey, whilst he was a student, said, ‘This honey, in truth, is the remainder (essential part) of the triple science (the Vedas), and he, indeed, who has such a remainder, is an essence.’ And, indeed, if a Brahma<i>k</i>ârin, knowing this, eats honey, it is just as if he were to utter either a <i>Ri</i>k-verse, or Ya<i>g</i>us-formula, or a Sâman-tune: let him therefore eat freely of it.


<span id="p91"><sup><small>[ p. 91 ]</small></sup></span>

<span id="v11_5_5"><sup><small>11:5:5</small></sup></span>

## FIFTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### THE <i>S</i>ATÂTIRÂ<i>T</i>RAM, OR SACRIFICIAL SESSION OF A HUNDRED ATIRÂTRA-SACRIFICES.

<span id="v11_5_5_11"><sup><small>11:5:5:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, when the gods were passing upwards to the world of heaven, the Asuras enveloped them in darkness. They spake, ‘Verily, by nothing else save a sacrificial session is there any way of dispelling this (darkness): well, then, let us perform a sacrificial session!’

<span id="v11_5_5_22"><sup><small>11:5:5:22.</small></sup></span>  They entered upon a sacrificial session of a hundred Agnish<i>t</i>oma (days), and dispelled the darkness as far as one may see whilst sitting; and in like manner did they, by (a session of) a hundred Ukthya (days), dispel the darkness as far as one may see whilst standing.

<span id="v11_5_5_33"><sup><small>11:5:5:33.</small></sup></span>  They spake, ‘We do indeed dispel the darkness, but not the whole of it: come, let us resort to Father Pra<i>g</i>âpati.’ Having come to Father Pra<i>g</i>âpati, they spake, ‘Reverend sir, when we were passing upwards to the world of heaven the Asuras enveloped us in darkness.’

<span id="v11_5_5_44"><sup><small>11:5:5:44.</small></sup></span>  ‘We entered upon a sacrificial session of a hundred Agnish<i>t</i>omas, and dispelled the darkness as far as one may see whilst sitting; and in like manner did we dispel the darkness as far as one may see whilst standing: do thou teach us, reverend sir, how, by dispelling the Asuras and darkness, and all evil, we shall find (the way to) the world of heaven!’

<span id="v11_5_5_55"><sup><small>11:5:5:55.</small></sup></span>  He spake, ‘Surely, ye proceeded by means of two sacrifices, the Agnish<i>t</i>oma and Ukthya, which do not contain all Soma-rites [^294];—enter ye upon <span id="p92"><sup><small>[ p. 92 ]</small></sup></span> a sacrificial session of a hundred Atirâtras: when ye have thereby repelled the Asuras and darkness, and all evil, ye shall find the world of heaven.’

<span id="v11_5_5_66"><sup><small>11:5:5:66.</small></sup></span>  They entered upon a sacrificial session of a hundred Atirâtras; and, having thereby repelled the Asuras and darkness, and all evil, they found (the way to) the world of heaven. In their first fifty days [^295] the night-hymns reached into the day, and the day-hymns into the night.

<span id="v11_5_5_77"><sup><small>11:5:5:77.</small></sup></span>  They spake, ‘Verily, we have got into confusion and know not what to do: come, let us resort to Father Pra<i>g</i>âpati!’ Having come to Father Pra<i>g</i>âpati, they spake (the verses), ‘Our night-hymns are (chanted) in daytime, and those of the day at night: O sage, being learned and wise, teach thou us who are ignorant (how to perform) the sacrifices!’

<span id="v11_5_5_88"><sup><small>11:5:5:88.</small></sup></span>  He then recited to them as follows, ‘A stronger, pursuing, has, as it were, driven a great snake from its own place, the lake: therefore the sacrificial session is not carried through.’

<span id="v11_5_5_99"><sup><small>11:5:5:99.</small></sup></span>  ‘For your Â<i>s</i>vina (<i>s</i>astra), being recited, has indeed driven the morning-litany from its place [^296].’— <span id="p93"><sup><small>[ p. 93 ]</small></sup></span> ‘What ye, being wise, have unwise-like driven from its place, take ye up that gently through the Pra<i>s</i>âst<i>ri</i>, reciting so as not to disturb [^297] (the Hot<i>ri</i>).’

<span id="v11_5_5_1010"><sup><small>11:5:5:1010.</small></sup></span>  They spake, ‘How, then, reverend sir, is (the Â<i>s</i>vina-<i>s</i>astra properly) recited and how is the recitation not disturbed?’ He spake, 'When the Hot<i>ri</i>, in reciting the Â<i>s</i>vina-<i>s</i>astra, reaches the end of the Gâyatra metre of the Âgneya-kratu [^298], the Pratiprasthât<i>ri</i> [^299] should carry round the Vasatîvarî water [^300], and bespeak the Prâtar-anuvâka for the Maitrâvaru<i>n</i>a (seated) between the two Havirdhâna (carts containing the offering-material). The Hot<i>ri</i> recites (the Â<i>s</i>vina-<i>s</i>astra) in a loud voice, and the other (the Maitrâvaru<i>n</i>a) repeats (the morning-litany) in a low voice, only just muttering it: in this <span id="p94"><sup><small>[ p. 94 ]</small></sup></span> way he does not run counter to (the Hot<i>ri</i>'s) speech by (his own) speech, nor metre by metre.

<span id="v11_5_5_1111"><sup><small>11:5:5:1111.</small></sup></span>  ‘When the Prâtar-anuvâka has been completed, he (the Pratiprasthât<i>ri</i>), having offered, at their proper time [^301], the Upâ<i>m</i><i>s</i>u and Antaryâma cups [^302], presses out the straining-cloth and puts it in the Dro<i>n</i>akala<i>s</i>a [^303]. And when ye have performed the (offering of the cups of) fermented Soma [^304], and returned (to the Sadas), ye should drink the fermented Soma (remaining in those cups). Having then, in the proper form, completed the “tail of the sacrifice,” and taken up the cups of Soma (drawn) subsequent to the Antaryâma [^305], and offered the oblation of drops [^306], as well as the Santani-oblation [^307], ye should perform the Bahishpavamâna chant, and enter upon the day (-performance).’

<span id="v11_5_5_1212"><sup><small>11:5:5:1212.</small></sup></span>  Concerning this there are these verses:—With four harnessed Saindhava (steeds) the sages left behind them the gloom—the wise gods who spun out the session of a hundred sacrifices.’

<span id="v11_5_5_1313"><sup><small>11:5:5:1313.</small></sup></span>  In this (sacrificial session) there are, indeed, four harnessed (steeds),—to wit, two Hot<i>ri</i>s and two Adhvaryus.—‘Like unto the artificer contriving spikes to the spear, the sages coupled the ends of <span id="p95"><sup><small>[ p. 95 ]</small></sup></span> two days: now the Dânavas, we know [^308], will not disorder the sacrificial thread of them stretched out by us.—They leave undone the work of the previous day, and carry it through on the following day,—difficult to be understood. is the wisdom of the deities: streams of Soma flow, interlinked with streams of Soma!—Even as they constantly sprinkle the equal prize-winning [^309] steeds, so (they pour out) the cups full of fiery liquor in the palace of <i>G</i>aname<i>g</i>aya.’ Then the Asura-Rakshas went away.


<span id="v11_5_6"><sup><small>11:5:6</small></sup></span>

## SIXTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### THE STUDY OF THE VEDA.

<span id="v11_5_6_11"><sup><small>11:5:6:11.</small></sup></span>  There are five great sacrifices, and they, indeed, are great sacrificial sessions,—to wit, the sacrifice to beings, the sacrifice to men, the sacrifice to the Fathers, the sacrifice to the gods, and the sacrifice to the Brahman.

<span id="v11_5_6_22"><sup><small>11:5:6:22.</small></sup></span>  Day by day one should offer an oblation to beings: thus he performs that sacrifice to beings. Day by day one should offer (presents to guests) up to the cupful of water [^310]: thus he performs that <span id="p96"><sup><small>[ p. 96 ]</small></sup></span> sacrifice to men. Day by day one should offer with Svadhâ up to the cupful of water [^311]: thus he performs that sacrifice to the Fathers. Day by day one should perform with Svâhâ up to the log of firewood [^312]: thus he performs that sacrifice to the gods.

<span id="v11_5_6_33"><sup><small>11:5:6:33.</small></sup></span>  Then as to the sacrifice to the Brahman. The sacrifice to the Brahman is one's own (daily) study (of the Veda). The <i>g</i>uhû-spoon of this same sacrifice to the Brahman is speech, its upabh<i>ri</i>t the mind, its dhruvâ the eye, its sruva mental power, its purificatory bath truth, its conclusion heaven. And, verily, however great the world he gains by giving away (to the priests) this earth replete with wealth, thrice that and more—an imperishable world does he gain, whosoever, knowing this, studies day by day his lesson (of the Veda): therefore let him study his daily lesson.

<span id="v11_5_6_44"><sup><small>11:5:6:44.</small></sup></span>  Verily, the <i>Ri</i>k-texts are milk-offerings to the gods; and whosoever, knowing this, studies day by day the <i>Ri</i>k-texts for his lesson, thereby satisfies the gods with milk-offerings; and, being satisfied, they satisfy him by (granting him) security of <span id="p97"><sup><small>[ p. 97 ]</small></sup></span> possession [^313], by life-breath, by seed, by his whole self, and by all auspicious blessings; and rivers of ghee and rivers of honey flow for his (departed) Fathers, as their accustomed draughts.

<span id="v11_5_6_55"><sup><small>11:5:6:55.</small></sup></span>  And, verily, the Ya<i>g</i>us-texts are ghee-offerings to the gods; and whosoever, knowing this, studies day by day the Ya<i>g</i>us-texts for his lesson thereby satisfies the gods with ghee-offerings; and, being satisfied, they satisfy him by security of possession, by life-breath, by seed, by his whole self, and by all auspicious blessings; and rivers of ghee and rivers of honey flow for his Fathers, as their accustomed draughts.

<span id="v11_5_6_66"><sup><small>11:5:6:66.</small></sup></span>  And, verily, the Sâman-texts are Soma-offerings to the gods; and whosoever, knowing this, studies day by day the Sâman-texts for his lesson thereby satisfies the gods with Soma-offerings; and, being satisfied, they satisfy him by security of possession, by life-breath, by seed, by his whole self, and by all auspicious blessings; and rivers of ghee and rivers of honey flow for his Fathers, as their accustomed draughts.

<span id="v11_5_6_77"><sup><small>11:5:6:77.</small></sup></span>  And, verily, the (texts of the) Atharvâṅgiras are fat-offerings to the gods; and whosoever, knowing this, studies day by day the (texts of the) Atharvâṅgiras for his lesson, satisfies the gods with fat-offerings; and, being satisfied, they satisfy him by security of possession, by life-breath, by seed, by his whole self, and by all auspicious blessings; and rivers of ghee and rivers of honey flow for his Fathers, as their accustomed draughts. <span id="p98"><sup><small>[ p. 98 ]</small></sup></span> 11:5:6:88\. And, verily, the precepts [^314], the sciences [^315], the dialogue [^316], the traditional myths and legends [^317], and the Nârâ<i>s</i>a<i>m</i>sî Gâthâs [^318] are honey-offerings to the gods; and whosoever, knowing this, studies day by day the precepts, the sciences, the dialogue, the traditional myths and legends, and the Nârâ<i>s</i>a<i>m</i>sî Gâthâs, for his lesson, satisfies the gods with honey-offerings; and, being satisfied, they satisfy him by (granting him) security of possession, by life-breath, by seed, by his whole self, and by all auspicious blessings; and rivers of ghee and rivers of honey flow for his Fathers, as their accustomed draughts. <span id="p99"><sup><small>[ p. 99 ]</small></sup></span> 11:5:6:99\. Now, for this, sacrifice to the Brahman there are four Vasha<i>t</i>\-calls [^319],—to wit, when the wind blows, when it lightens, when it thunders, and when it rumbles [^320] whence he who knows this should certainly study [^321] when the wind is blowing, and when it lightens, or thunders, or rumbles, so as not to lose his Vasha<i>t</i>\-calls; and verily he is freed from recurring death, and attains to community of nature (or, being) with the Brahman. And should he be altogether unable (to study), let him at least read a single divine word; and thus he is not shut out from beings [^322].


<span id="v11_5_7"><sup><small>11:5:7</small></sup></span>

## SEVENTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_5_7_11"><sup><small>11:5:7:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, then, the praise of the study (of the scriptures). The study and teaching (of the Veda) are a source of pleasure to him, he becomes ready-minded [^323], and independent of others, and day by day he acquires wealth. He sleeps peacefully; he is the best physician for himself; and (peculiar) to him are restraint of the senses, delight in the one thing [^324], growth of intelligence, fame, and the (task of) perfecting the people [^325]. The growing <span id="p100"><sup><small>[ p. 100 ]</small></sup></span> intelligence gives rise to four duties attaching to the Brâhma<i>n</i>a—Brâhma<i>n</i>ical descent, a befitting deportment, fame, and the perfecting of the people; and the people that are being perfected guard the Brâhma<i>n</i>a by four duties—by (showing him) respect, and liberality, (and by granting him) security against oppression, and security against capital punishment.

<span id="v11_5_7_22"><sup><small>11:5:7:22.</small></sup></span>  And, truly, whatever may be the toils here between heaven and earth, the study (of the scriptures) is their last stage, their goal (limit) for him who, knowing this, studies his lesson: therefore one's (daily) lesson should be studied.

<span id="v11_5_7_33"><sup><small>11:5:7:33.</small></sup></span>  And, verily, whatever portion of the sacred poetry (<i>kh</i>andas) he studies for his lesson with that sacrificial rite [^326], offering is made by him who, knowing this, studies his lesson: therefore one's (daily) lesson should be studied.

<span id="v11_5_7_44"><sup><small>11:5:7:44.</small></sup></span>  And, verily, if he studies his lesson, even though lying on a soft couch, anointed, adorned and completely satisfied, he is burned (with holy fire [^327]) up to the tips of his nails, whosoever, knowing this, studies his lesson: therefore one's (daily) lesson should be studied.

<span id="v11_5_7_55"><sup><small>11:5:7:55.</small></sup></span>  The <i>Ri</i>k-texts, truly, are honey, the Sâman-texts ghee, and the Ya<i>g</i>us-texts ambrosia; and, indeed, when he studies the dialogue that (speech and reply) is a mess of milk and a mess of meat. <span id="p101"><sup><small>[ p. 101 ]</small></sup></span> 11:5:7:66\. And, indeed, he who, knowing this, studies day by day the <i>Ri</i>k-texts for his lesson, satisfies the gods with honey, and, thus satisfied, they satisfy him by every object of desire, by every kind of enjoyment.

<span id="v11_5_7_77"><sup><small>11:5:7:77.</small></sup></span>  And he who, knowing this, studies day by day the Sâman-texts for his lesson, satisfies the gods with ghee; and, being satisfied, they satisfy him by every object of desire, by every kind of enjoyment.

<span id="v11_5_7_88"><sup><small>11:5:7:88.</small></sup></span>  And he who, knowing this, studies day by day the Ya<i>g</i>us-texts for his lesson, satisfies the gods with ambrosia; and, being satisfied, they satisfy him by every object of desire, by every kind of enjoyment.

<span id="v11_5_7_99"><sup><small>11:5:7:99.</small></sup></span>  And he who, knowing this, studies day by day the dialogue, the traditional myths and legends, for his lesson, satisfies the gods by messes of milk and meat; and, being satisfied, they satisfy him by every object of desire, by every kind of enjoyment.

<span id="v11_5_7_1010"><sup><small>11:5:7:1010.</small></sup></span>  Moving, indeed, are the waters, moving is the sun, moving the moon, and moving the stars; and, verily, as if these deities did not move and act, even so will the Brâhma<i>n</i>a be on that day on which he does not study his lesson: therefore one's (daily) lesson should be studied. And hence let him at least pronounce either a <i>Ri</i>k-verse or a Ya<i>g</i>us-formula, or a Sâman-verse, or a Gâthâ, or a Kumbyâ [^328], to ensure continuity of the Vrata [^329].


<span id="p102"><sup><small>[ p. 102 ]</small></sup></span>

<span id="v11_5_8"><sup><small>11:5:8</small></sup></span>

## EIGHTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v11_5_8_11"><sup><small>11:5:8:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, in the beginning, Pra<i>g</i>âpati alone was here. He desired, ‘May I exist, may I be generated.’ He wearied himself and performed fervid devotions: from him, thus wearied and heated, the three worlds were created—the earth, the air, and the sky.

<span id="v11_5_8_22"><sup><small>11:5:8:22.</small></sup></span>  He heated these three worlds, and from them, thus heated, three lights (<i>g</i>yotis) were produced—Agni (the fire), he who blows here (Vâyu), and Sûrya (the sun).

<span id="v11_5_8_33"><sup><small>11:5:8:33.</small></sup></span>  He heated these three lights, and from them, thus heated, the three Vedas were produced—the <i>Ri</i>g-veda from Agni, the Ya<i>g</i>ur-veda from Vâyu, and the Sâma-veda from Sûrya.

<span id="v11_5_8_44"><sup><small>11:5:8:44.</small></sup></span>  He heated these three Vedas, and from them, thus heated, three luminous essences [^330] were produced— <span id="p103"><sup><small>[ p. 103 ]</small></sup></span> ‘bhû<i>h</i>’ from the <i>Ri</i>g-veda, ‘bhuva<i>h</i>’ from the Ya<i>g</i>ur-veda, and ‘svar’ from the Sâma-veda. And with the <i>Ri</i>g-veda they then performed the work of the Hot<i>ri</i> priest, with the Ya<i>g</i>ur-veda the work of the Adhvaryu, and with the Sâma-veda the work of the Udgât<i>ri</i>; and what luminous essence [^331] there was in the threefold science, therewith the work of the Brahman priest then proceeded.

<span id="v11_5_8_55"><sup><small>11:5:8:55.</small></sup></span>  The gods spake unto Pra<i>g</i>âpati, ‘If our sacrifice were to fail in respect of either the <i>Ri</i><i>k</i>, or the Ya<i>g</i>us, or the Sâman, whereby should we heal it?’

<span id="v11_5_8_66"><sup><small>11:5:8:66.</small></sup></span>  He spake, ‘If (it were to fail) in respect of the <i>Ri</i><i>k</i>, ye should take ghee by four ladlings and offer it in the Gârhapatya fire with ‘Bhû<i>h</i>!’ and if in respect of the Ya<i>g</i>us, ye should take ghee by four ladlings and offer it in the Âgnîdhrîya—or in the Anvâhâryapa<i>k</i>ana [^332] in the case of a Havirya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>a—with ‘Bhuva<i>h</i>!’ and if in respect of the Sâman, ye should take ghee by four ladlings and offer it in the Âhavanîya with ‘Svar!’ But if it should not be known (where the mistake has occurred), ye should make offering in the Âhavanîya after uttering <span id="p104"><sup><small>[ p. 104 ]</small></sup></span> rapidly all (the three sacred words [^333]): thus one heals the <i>Ri</i>g-veda by the <i>Ri</i>g-veda [^334], the Ya<i>g</i>ur-veda by the Ya<i>g</i>ur-veda, and the Sâma-veda by the Sâma-veda;—even as one would put together joint with joint [^335], so does he put together (the broken part of the sacrifice) whoever heals it by means of these (three sacred words). But if he heals it in any other way than this, it would be just as if one tried to put together something that is broken with something else that is broken, or as if one were to apply some poison as lotion to a broken part [^336]. Let him therefore appoint only one who knows this (to officiate as) his Brahman, and not one who does not know this.

<span id="v11_5_8_77"><sup><small>11:5:8:77.</small></sup></span>  As to this they say, ‘Seeing that the work of the Hot<i>ri</i> is performed with the <i>Ri</i>g-veda, that of the Adhvaryu with the Ya<i>g</i>ur-veda, and that of the Udgât<i>ri</i> with the Sâma-veda, wherewith then is the work of the Brahman (performed)?’ Let him reply, ‘With that threefold science.’


<span id="p105"><sup><small>[ p. 105 ]</small></sup></span>

<span id="v11_5_9"><sup><small>11:5:9</small></sup></span>

## NINTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### THE ADÂBHYA-GRAHA.

<span id="v11_5_9_11"><sup><small>11:5:9:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, the A<i>m</i><i>s</i>u (cup of Soma) [^337], indeed, is no other than Pra<i>g</i>âpati; and it is the body of this (sacrifice), for Pra<i>g</i>âpati, indeed, is the body. And the Adâbhya [^338] (cup of Soma) is no other than speech. When he draws the A<i>m</i><i>s</i>u-cup, and then the Adâbhya-cup, he thereby constructs the body of this (sacrifice) and then establishes that speech therein.

<span id="v11_5_9_22"><sup><small>11:5:9:22.</small></sup></span>  And, indeed, the A<i>m</i><i>s</i>u is also the mind, and the Adâbhya speech; and the A<i>m</i><i>s</i>u is the out-breathing, and the Adâbhya the up-breathing; and the A<i>m</i><i>s</i>u is the eye, and the Adâbhya the ear: these two cups they draw for the sake of wholeness and completeness.

<span id="v11_5_9_33"><sup><small>11:5:9:33.</small></sup></span>  Now, the gods and the Asuras, both of them sprung from Pra<i>g</i>âpati, were contending,—it was for this very sacrifice, for Pra<i>g</i>âpati, that they were contending, saying, ‘Ours he shall be! ours he shall be!’

<span id="v11_5_9_44"><sup><small>11:5:9:44.</small></sup></span>  The gods then went on singing praises, and toiling. They saw this cup of Soma, this Adâbhya, and drew it: they seized upon the (three) Soma-services, and possessed themselves of the whole sacrifice, and excluded the Asuras from the sacrifice.

<span id="v11_5_9_55"><sup><small>11:5:9:55.</small></sup></span>  They spake, ‘Surely, we have destroyed (adabhâma) them;’ whence (the cup is called) Adâbhya;—‘they have not destroyed (dabh) us;’ whence also (it is called) Adâbhya. And the Adâbhya <span id="p106"><sup><small>[ p. 106 ]</small></sup></span> being speech, this speech is indestructible, whence also it is (called) Adâbhya; and, verily, in like manner does he who knows this possess himself of the whole sacrifice of his spiteful enemy, and exclude and shut out his spiteful enemy from all participation in the sacrifice.

<span id="v11_5_9_66"><sup><small>11:5:9:66.</small></sup></span>  Into the same vessel with which he draws the A<i>m</i><i>s</i>u [^339] he pours water from the Nigrâbhyâ<i>h</i> [^340], and therein puts those Soma-plants [^341] with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. VIII, 47),—

<span id="v11_5_9_77"><sup><small>11:5:9:77.</small></sup></span>  ‘Thou art taken with a support [^342]: for Agni I take thee, possessed of the Gâyatrî metre!’—the morning-service is of Gâyatrî nature: he thus possesses himself of the morning-service;—‘For Indra I take thee, possessed of the Trish<i>t</i>ubh metre!’—the midday-service is of Trish<i>t</i>ubh nature: he thus possesses himself of the midday-service;—‘For the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i> I take thee, possessed of the <i>G</i>agatî metre!’—the evening-service is of <i>G</i>agatî nature: he thus possesses himself of the evening-service;—‘The Anush<i>t</i>ubh is thy song of praise;’—whatever is subsequent to the (three) services [^343], that is of Anush<i>t</i>ubh nature: it is thereof he thus possesses <span id="p107"><sup><small>[ p. 107 ]</small></sup></span> himself. He does not press this (batch of Soma-plants) lest he should injure speech (or, the voice of the sacrifice), for the press-stone is a thunderbolt, and the Adâbhya is speech.

<span id="v11_5_9_88"><sup><small>11:5:9:88.</small></sup></span>  He merely shakes the (cup with the) plants with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. VIII, 48), ‘In the flow of the streaming (waters) I waft thee! in the flow of the gurgling I waft thee! in the flow of the jubilant I waft thee! in the flow of the most delightsome I waft thee! in the flow of the most sweet I waft thee!’ These doubtless are the divine waters: he thus bestows sap on him (Pra<i>g</i>âpati, the sacrifice) by means of both the divine and the human waters which there are.

<span id="v11_5_9_99"><sup><small>11:5:9:99.</small></sup></span>  ‘Thee, the bright, I waft in the bright,’—for he indeed wafts the bright one in the bright;—‘in the form of the day, in the rays of the sun;’—he thus wafts it both in the form of the day and in the rays of the sun.

<span id="v11_5_9_1010"><sup><small>11:5:9:1010.</small></sup></span>  \[Vâ<i>g</i>. S. VIII, 41\], ‘Mightily shineth the towering form of the ball,’—for mightily indeed shines that towering form of the ball, to wit, yonder burning (sun);—‘the bright one, the leader of the bright one, Soma, the leader of Soma,’—he thereby makes that bright (sun) the leader of the bright (Soma), and Soma the leader of the Soma;—‘what indestructible, watchful name there is of thine, for that do I take thee;’—for this, to wit, speech, is indeed his (Soma's) indestructible (adâbhya), watchful name: it is thus speech he thereby takes for speech.

<span id="v11_5_9_1111"><sup><small>11:5:9:1111.</small></sup></span>  Then, stepping out (from the Havirdhâna shed [^344]) to (the Âhavanîya), he offers with, ‘O <span id="p108"><sup><small>[ p. 108 ]</small></sup></span> Soma, to this thy Soma, hail!’—he thus offers Soma to Soma, and so does not throw speech into the fire [^345]. He breathes over gold [^346]: the meaning of this is the same as there (on the occasion of the A<i>m</i><i>s</i>u). He gives as many presents (to the priests) as for the A<i>m</i><i>s</i>u-graha.

<span id="v11_5_9_1212"><sup><small>11:5:9:1212.</small></sup></span>  He then puts the Soma-plants back (on the heap of plants in the Havirdhâna) with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. VIII, 50), 'Enter thou gladly Agni's dear seat, O divine Soma!—Enter thou willingly Indra's dear seat, O divine Soma!—As our friend enter thou, O divine Soma, the dear seat of the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>!' On that former occasion he possessed himself of the (three) Soma services; he now restores them again, and causes them to be no longer used up; and with them thus restored they perform the sacrifice.



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_4">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XI, 4. Fourth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_6">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XI, 6. Sixth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^228]: 68:3 King Purûravas, of the lunar race of kings, is considered the p. 69 son of Budha (the planet Mercury, and son of Soma). On this myth (based on the hymn <i>Ri</i>g-veda S. X, 95) see Prof. Max Müller, Oxford Essays (1856), p. 61 seqq.; (reprinted in Chips from a German Workshop, II, p. 102 seqq.); A. Kuhn, Herabkunft des Feuers and des Göttertranks, p. 81 seqq. (2nd ed. p. 73 seqq.); Weber, Ind. Streifen I, p. 16 seqq.; K. F. Geldner, in Pischel and Geldner's Vedische Studien I, p. 244 seqq.; cf. H. Oldenberg, Religion des Veda, p. 213.

[^229]: 69:1 Vaitasena da<i>n</i><i>d</i>ena hatâd,—vaitaso da<i>n</i><i>d</i>a<i>h</i> pu<i>m</i>vya<i>ñ</i><i>g</i>anasya nâma; ukta<i>m</i> hi Yâskena, <i>s</i>epo vaitasa iti pu<i>m</i>spra<i>g</i>ananasyeti (Nir. III, 22), Sây.

[^230]: 69:2 Akâmâ<i>m</i> kâmarahitâ<i>m</i> suratâbhilâsharahitâ<i>m</i> <i>k</i>a mâ<i>m</i> mâ sma nipadyâsai nig<i>ri</i>hya mâ<i>m</i> prâpnuyâ<i>h</i>, Sây.

[^231]: 69:3 The Gandharvas are the natural companions and mates of the Apsaras, or nymphs.

[^232]: 69:4 Literally, ‘my son,’—madîya<i>m</i> putratvena svîk<i>ri</i>tam ura<i>n</i>advayam, Sây.

[^233]: 70:1 Cf. C. Gaedicke, Der Accusativ im Veda (1880), p. 211. Previous translators had assigned the words ‘punar emi’ (I come back) to Urva<i>s</i>î; and in view of the corresponding passage in [paragraph 13](../Book_5_11_5#v11_5_1_13), the new interpretation is just a little doubtful.

[^234]: 70:2 The text has ‘âti,’ some kind of water-bird—<i>g</i>ala<i>k</i>arapakshivi<i>s</i>esha<i>h</i>, Sây.—(probably Gr. νῆσσα; Lat. anas, anat-is; Anglo-S. æned, Germ. Ente).

[^235]: 70:3 That is, they became visible, or rather recognisable to him by showing themselves in their real forms,—pakshirûpa<i>m</i> vihâya svakîyena rûpe<i>n</i>a prâdur babhûvu<i>h</i>, Sây.—In Kâlidâsa's plays, both Urva<i>s</i>î and <i>S</i>akuntalâ become invisible by means of a magic veil (tiraskari<i>n</i>î, ‘making invisible’) with which has been compared the magic veil by which the swan-maidens change their form. A. Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 197; A. Kuhn, Herabkunft, p. 91.

[^236]: 70:4 Manasâ tish<i>th</i>a ghore,—possibly it may mean, ‘O cruel one, be thou constant in (thy) mind;’ or, as Kuhn takes it, ‘pay attention, O cruel one.’ Sâya<i>n</i>a, however, takes it as above.

[^237]: 71:1 This is a doubtful rendering (Max Müller; Gespiele, A. Weber) of ‘sudeva,’—Göttergenoss (the companion of the gods), Kuhn; ‘dem die Götter einst hold waren’ (he who was formerly favoured by the gods), Grassmann; Sudeva, Ludwig.

[^238]: 71:2 Or, will fall down (Max Müller, Weber); sich in’s Verderben stürzen (will rush to his destruction), Kuhn;—forteilen (hasten away), Grassmann; verloren gehen (get lost), Ludwig; sich in den Abgrund stürzen, Geldner;—‘mahâprasthâna<i>m</i> kuryât’ (he will set out on the great journey, i.e. die), Sâya<i>n</i>a. The Brâhma<i>n</i>a seems to propose two different renderings,—to throw oneself down (hang oneself), or, to start forth.

[^239]: 71:3 Nir<i>ri</i>ti is the goddess of decay or death.

[^240]: 71:4 The meaning of ‘sâlâv<i>ri</i>ka,’ also spelled ‘<i>s</i>âlâv<i>ri</i>ka’ (? house-wolves), is doubtful; cf. H. Zimmer, Altindisches Leben, p. 8. Prof. Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 413, makes the suggestion that ‘wehrwolves’ may be intended.

[^241]: 72:1 The words ‘râtrî<i>h</i> <i>s</i>arada<i>s</i> <i>k</i>atasra<i>h</i>’ may also be taken in the sense of ‘four nights of the autumn’ (Max Müller, A. Kuhn). It needs hardly to be remarked that ‘nights’ means days and nights, and ‘autumns’ years.—Sâya<i>n</i>a takes the passage in the sense of ‘four delightful (râtrî<i>h</i> ramayitrî<i>h</i>) autumns or years.’

[^242]: 72:2 Literally, I walk (or go on, keep) being satisfied therewith. Prof. Geldner, however, takes it in an ironical sense, ‘das Bischen liegt mir jetzt noch schwer im Magen’ (‘even now I have quite enough of that little’).

[^243]: 72:3 That is, the theologians of the <i>Ri</i>g-veda. As Prof. Weber points out, the hymn referred to, in the received version, consists not of fifteen but of eighteen verses, three of which would therefore seem to be of later origin (though they might, of course, belong to a different recension from that referred to by the Brâhma<i>n</i>a).

[^244]: 72:4 Or, according to Prof. Geldner, ‘Then he touched her heart (excited her pity).’

[^245]: 72:5 Literally, the yearliest night, i.e. the 360th night, the last night of a year from now, or, this night next year: it is the night that completes the year, just as ‘the fifth’ completes the number ‘five;’—sa<i>m</i>vatsaratamî<i>m</i> sa<i>m</i>vatsarapûra<i>n</i>îm antimâ<i>m</i> râtrim, Sây. Cf. Delbrück, Altind. Syntax, p. 195.

[^246]: 72:6 Hira<i>n</i>yavimitâni hira<i>n</i>yanirmitâni saudhâni, Sây.

[^247]: 73:1 Thus also A. Kuhn, and Sâya<i>n</i>a, tato hainam ekam û<i>k</i>ur etat, prapadyasveti,—enam Purûravasa<i>m</i> tatratyâ <i>g</i>anâ idam ekam û<i>k</i>u<i>h</i>, Sây.—The word ‘ekam’ might also be taken along with ‘enam’ (Max Müller, Weber, Geldner),—‘they said this to him alone’ (? they bade him enter alone without his attendants).

[^248]: 73:2 See above, [paragraph 4](../Book_5_11_5#v11_5_1_4) and note on [p. 70](#p70). According to the other interpretation we should have to translate:—He then deposited the fire in the forest, and went to the village with the boy alone, thinking, ‘I (shall) come back.’ \[He came back\] and lo! it had disappeared.

[^249]: 74:1 That is, a churning-stick used for producing fire; see part i, p. 275; p. 294, note 3.

[^250]: 74:2 The Vai<i>s</i>vadeva, or first of the four seasonal sacrifices, requires the following oblations:—1. a cake on eight potsherds to Agni; 2. a pap to Soma; 3. a cake on twelve or eight potsherds to p. 75 Savit<i>ri</i>; 4. a pap to Sarasvatî; 5. a pap to Pûshan—these first five oblations recur at all seasonal offerings;—6. a cake on seven potsherds to the Maruts; 7. a dish of clotted curds to the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>; 8. a cake on one potsherd to Heaven and Earth.

[^251]: 75:1 It would rather seem that what is intended here by ‘sa<i>m</i>dhi’ is not the joints themselves, but the limbs (in the anatomical sense) between the articulations. Similarly in ‘trishandhi’ in [parag. 7](../Book_5_11_5#v11_5_2_7).

[^252]: 75:2 That is to say, it is a low-voiced offering, the two formulas, with the exception of the final Om and Vausha<i>t</i>, being pronounced in a low voice. All cakes on one potsherd are (except those to Varu<i>n</i>a) of this description; Kâty. <i>S</i>r. IV, 5, 3; Â<i>s</i>v. <i>S</i>r. II, 15, 5; cf. <i>S</i>at. Br. II, 4, 3, 8.

[^253]: 75:3 That is, not clearly defined; the word ‘dos,’ which is more usually restricted to the fore-arm, being also used for the whole arm, and even the upper arm.

[^254]: 75:4 The Varu<i>n</i>apraghâsâ<i>h</i>, or second seasonal sacrifice, has the following oblations:—1-5. the common oblations; 6. a cake on twelve potsherds to Indra and Agni; 7. 8. two dishes of clotted curds for Varu<i>n</i>a and the Maruts respectively; 9. a cake on one potsherd for Ka (Pra<i>g</i>âpati).

[^255]: 76:1 The Sâkamedhâ<i>h</i>, or third seasonal sacrifice, consists of the following oblations:—1. a cake on eight potsherds to Agni Anîkavat; 2. 3. paps to the Maruta<i>h</i> Sâ<i>m</i>tapanâ<i>h</i> and Maruta<i>h</i> G<i>ri</i>hamedhina<i>h</i>; 4. a cake on seven potsherds to the Maruta<i>h</i> Krî<i>d</i>ina<i>h</i>; 5. a pap to Aditi. Then follows the Great Oblation consisting of 6-10, the five common oblations; 11. a cake on twelve potsherds to Indra and Agni; 12. a pap to Mahendra; and 13. a cake on one potsherd to Vi<i>s</i>vakarman. Then follows the Pit<i>ri</i>ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>a.

[^256]: 76:2 Or, according to Sâya<i>n</i>a, one gets oppressed or heated on account of the close proximity of the heart and the digestive fire,—urasâ h<i>ri</i>daya-sambandhâ<i>g</i> <i>g</i>a<i>th</i>arasannive<i>s</i>â<i>k</i> <i>k</i>a sa<i>m</i>tâpana-vishayatvam.

[^257]: 76:3 This offering of a cake to Aditi, mentioned in Kâty. Sr. V, 7, 2, is not referred to in the Brâhma<i>n</i>a's account of the Sâkamedhâ<i>h</i>, see II, 5, 3, 20.

[^258]: 77:1 The Sunâsîrîya, or last Seasonal offering, consists of—1-5. the common oblations; 6. the <i>S</i>unâsîrîya cake on twelve potsherds; 7. a milk oblation to Vâyu; 8. a cake on one potsherd to Sûrya.

[^259]: 77:2 The Seasonal offerings are performed so as to leave an interval of four months between them; the fourth falling exactly a year after the first; hence the whole performance consists, as it were, of three periods of four months each, with two joints between them;—corresponding to the formation of the arms and legs.

[^260]: 77:3 Of the five oblations common to the four sacrifices, one—viz. the cake to Savit<i>ri</i>\—is a low-voiced offering (Kâty. Sr. IV, 5, 5; Â<i>s</i>v. <i>S</i>r. II, 15, 7), as are also the one-kapâla cakes of which there is one in each sacrifice. According to Sâya<i>n</i>a the first and last Seasonal sacrifices have only these two Upâm<i>s</i>uyâ<i>g</i>as, whilst the second and third have each one additional low-voiced oblation, but he does not specify them. This is, however, a mistake, as Kâtyâyana, <i>S</i>r. IV, 5, 6. 7, states distinctly, that the two additional low-voiced oblations are the Vai<i>s</i>vadevî payasyâ in the first, and the oblation to Vâyu in the last, <i>K</i>âturmâsya.

[^261]: 78:1 According to Sâya<i>n</i>a this refers to the first and last Seasonal sacrifices, inasmuch as there is no uttaravedi required for these, and hence only the simple leading forward of the fire to the Âhavanîya hearth; whilst the commentary on Katy. V, 4, 6, on the contrary, refers it just to the other two, because a double leading forth takes place there.

[^262]: 78:2 Or, as Sâya<i>n</i>a takes it, man walks on two feet.

[^263]: 78:3 The <i>K</i>atush<i>t</i>oma, properly speaking, is the technical term for such an arrangement of the Stotras of a Soma-sacrifice by which they are chanted on stomas, or hymn-forms, increasing successively by four verses. Two such arrangements (of four and six different stomas respectively) are mentioned, one for an Agnish<i>t</i>oma sacrifice, and the other for a Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in. See note on [XIII, 3, 1, 4](../Book_5_13_3#v13_3_1_4).

[^264]: 78:4 These 362 B<i>ri</i>hatî verses (of 36 syllables each) would amount to 13,032 syllables; and, verses of the four metres referred to amounting together to 148 syllables, this amount is contained in the former 88 times, leaving only eight over; so slight a discrepancy being considered of no account in such calculations.

[^265]: 78:5 That is, a year of 360 days; and if, as is done by Sâya<i>n</i>a (in p. 79 accordance with the calculations in Book X), the year is identified with the fire-altar, a mahâvedi containing 360 Ya<i>g</i>ushmatî bricks.

[^266]: 79:1 Sâya<i>n</i>a reminds us that the Mahâvrata-sâman consists of five parts in five different stomas (Triv<i>ri</i>t, &c., see part iv, p. 282, note 4), the verses of which, added up (9, 15, 17, 25, 21), make 87, which amount is apparently, in a rough way, to be taken as identical with that of 88 obtained in note [^264] of last page.

[^267]: 79:2 Viz. inasmuch as the total amount of B<i>ri</i>hatîs (362) exceeds by two the number of days in the year.

[^268]: 79:3 Sâya<i>n</i>a takes ‘brahmodyam agnihotram’ together, in the sense ‘the sacred truth’ regarding (or, in the form of) the Agnihotra,—agnihotravishaya<i>m</i> brahmodya<i>m</i> brahmatattvasya rûpa<i>m</i> pratipâdyate yena tad vividishâmi tadvishaya<i>m</i> vedane<i>k</i>_kh<i>â</i>m_ karishyâmîtyâdinâbhiprâye<i>n</i>âgata<i>h</i>. Unless ‘brahmodyam’ could be taken as an adjective, I do not see how it is possible to adopt Sâya<i>n</i>a's interpretation.

[^269]: 79:4 For letting the light of a burning straw fall on the milk to see whether it is done, see II, 3, 1, 16.

[^270]: 80:1 Viz. by the dipping-spoon (sruva) into the ladle (agnihotrahavanî), see II, 3, 1, 17.

[^271]: 80:2 Whilst taking the oblation to the Âhavanîya, he holds the spoon level with his mouth, except when he is in a line between the two fires, when for a moment he lowers the spoon so as to be level with his navel.

[^272]: 80:3 This refers to the putting down of the spoon containing the milk on the grass-bunch prior to the second libation; cf. II, 3, 1, 17. One might also translate, ‘what is that (or does it mean) that thou didst put it down?’

[^273]: 80:4 Thus Sâya<i>n</i>a,—apaikshish_th<i>â</i>h_ gârhapatasyaiksha<i>n</i>am k<i>ri</i>tavân asi.

[^274]: 81:1 See the legend, I, 8, 1, 1 seqq.

[^275]: 81:2 That is, according to Sâya<i>n</i>a, ‘the sky allied with Vâyu, the wind,’—vâyunâ sa<i>m</i>s<i>ri</i>sh<i>t</i>â dyau<i>h</i>.

[^276]: 82:1 The departed ancestors are supposed to reside in the southern region.

[^277]: 82:2 He bhagavann Uddâlaka bhavatoktam etat sava (? saha) nâv âvayo<i>h</i> saha sahita<i>m</i> samânam ekarûpam iti <i>S</i>au<i>k</i>eyo ha bhuktavân (? hy uktavân) anyapra<i>s</i>na<i>m</i> dar<i>s</i>ayita<i>m</i> prastauti, Sau<i>k</i>eyo <i>g</i><i>ñ</i>apta iti, Sây.

[^278]: 83:1 That is, the Sacrificer himself.

[^279]: 84:1 At the time of dissolution (layakâle) they pass into the wind; and at the time of creation (s<i>ri</i>sh<i>t</i>ikâle) they are again created, Sây.

[^280]: 85:1 Viz. as the representative of the Brahman, or world-spirit.

[^281]: 85:2 Yadaiva<i>m</i> nâvakshya<i>h</i> yadaivam a<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âna<i>m</i> nâvishkaroshi to mûrdhâ vyapatishyat, mûrdhâ(va)patana<i>m</i> sva<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>ânapraka<i>t</i>anenâtrabhavata<i>h</i> parih<i>ri</i>tam iti, Sây.—Prof. Delbrück, Altind. Syntax, p. 366, takes ‘vi-pat’ in the sense of—(thy head would have) flown asunder, or burst; which is indeed possible; cf. XI, 4, I, 9.

[^282]: 85:3 Cf. F. Max Müller, ‘India, what can it teach us?’ p. 65 seqq.

[^283]: 86:1 With this chapter compare Pâraskara G<i>ri</i>hyasûtra II, 2, 17 seqq.; Â<i>s</i>valâyana G<i>ri</i>hyasûtra I, 20 seqq.; <i>S</i>âṅkhâyana G<i>ri</i>hyasûtra II, 1 seqq.

[^284]: 86:2 That is, for religious (theological) studentship: ‘I have come to be a student.’—Sâya<i>n</i>a takes the aorist ‘âgâm’ in an optative sense ‘may I enter (or obtain),’—brahma<i>k</i>âri<i>n</i>o bhâvo brahma<i>k</i>arya<i>m</i> tad âgâ<i>m</i> prâpnuyâm.

[^285]: 86:3 Vidushoऽpy etat phalam âha, na sa iti, evam uktârtha<i>m</i> yo veda <i>g</i>ânâti soऽpy ârti<i>m</i> na prâpnotîty artha<i>h</i>, Sây.

[^286]: 87:1 ‘Do not sleep in the daytime!’ Pâr., Â<i>s</i>v.

[^287]: 87:2 For this verse, also called the Gâyatrî (<i>Ri</i>g-veda S. III, 62, 10), see II, 3, 4, 39.

[^288]: 87:3 Sâya<i>n</i>a takes this in the sense of ‘some only teach this (formula) a year after (or, after the first year),’—purâ pûrvasminn upanayanâd ûrdhvabhâvini sa<i>m</i>vatsarakâleऽtî<i>t</i>e sati tam etâ<i>m</i> gâyatrim anvâhu<i>h</i>, ke<i>k</i>id â<i>k</i>âryâ upadi<i>s</i>anti.

[^289]: 88:1 Literally, made equal, or corresponding, to a year,—Sa<i>m</i>vatsarâtmanâ kâlena samyakpari<i>k</i><i>kh</i>innâ<i>h</i> khalu garbhâ vyaktâvayavâ<i>h</i> santa<i>h</i> pra<i>g</i>âyante utpadyante; ata upanayanânantaram â<i>k</i>âryasamîpe garbhavad ava<i>k</i><i>kh</i>innas taduktaniyamanât sa<i>m</i>vatsarakâla eva punar <i>g</i>âyate, Sây.

[^290]: 88:2 Â<i>k</i>âryo mâ<i>n</i>avakam upanîya samîpavartinâ tena garbhî bhavati garbhavân bhavati, ki<i>m</i> k<i>ri</i>tvâ, âtmîya<i>m</i> dakshi<i>n</i>a<i>m</i> hasta<i>m</i> <i>s</i>ishyamastaka p. 89 âdhâya nikshipya; sa garbharûpo mâ<i>n</i>avakas t<i>ri</i>tîyasyâ<i>m</i> râtrau vyatîtâyâ<i>m</i> <i>g</i>âyate â<i>k</i>âryâd utpadyate, <i>g</i>âta<i>s</i> <i>k</i>a â<i>k</i>ârye<i>n</i>opadish<i>t</i>ayâ sâvitryâ sahita san brâhma<i>n</i>o bhavati sâvitrîrûpa<i>m</i> <i>k</i>a brahmâdhîta iti brâhma<i>n</i>a iti vyutpatti<i>h</i>, brâhma<i>n</i>a<i>g</i>âtitvam asya sampannam ity artha<i>h</i>, Sây.

[^291]: 89:1 Viz. immediately on the ‘churning-sticks’ being set in motion.

[^292]: 89:2 The Gâyatrî (Sâvitrî) consists of three octosyllabic pâdas, forming two half-verses of two and one pâda respectively; whilst an Anush<i>t</i>ubh (Sâvitrî) would consist of four octosyllabic pâdas, two of which make a half-verse.

[^293]: 90:1 That is, the breath of the mouth, and that of the nostrils.

[^294]: 91:1 Viz. neither the Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in which, to (the twelve stotras, and p. 92<i>s</i>astras of the Agnish<i>t</i>oma, and) the fifteen chants, of the Ukthya, adds a sixteenth; and the Atirâtra which has thirteen additional chants (and recitations), viz. three nocturnal rounds of four chants each, and one twilight-chant, followed by the Â<i>s</i>vina-<i>s</i>astra, recited by the Hot<i>ri</i>. No account is here taken of either the Atyagnish<i>t</i>oma of thirteen chants, or the Aptoryâma, which, to those of the Atirâtra, adds four more chants. Cf. part ii, p. 397, note 2.

[^295]: 92:1 Or, perhaps, rather, in their days prior to the fiftieth (arvâkpâ<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>â<i>s</i>eshv aha<i>h</i>su), St. Petersb. Dict.

[^296]: 92:2 The Â<i>s</i>vina-<i>s</i>astra, with the recitation of which, by the Hot<i>ri</i>, the Atirâtra concludes, takes the place, and is, indeed, p. 93 merely a modification, of the Prâtar-anuvâka, or morning-litany (see part ii, p. 229, note 2), by which an ordinary Soma-sacrifice is ushered in. Like it, its chief portion consists of three sections, termed kratu, of hymns and detached verses addressed to the ‘early-coming’ deities, Agni, Ushas and the two A<i>s</i>vins. The whole is to consist of not less than a thousand B<i>ri</i>hatîs, that is to say, the whole matter is to amount to at least 36,000 syllables. For a full account of this <i>S</i>astra, see Haug's Transl. of Ait. Br., p. 268.

[^297]: 93:1 Whilst the Hot<i>ri</i> is reciting the Â<i>s</i>vina-sastra, his first assistant, the Pra<i>s</i>âst<i>ri</i> (or, as he is more commonly called, the Maitrâvaru<i>n</i>a), is to repeat the Prâtar-anuvâka in a low voice.

[^298]: 93:2 The hymns and detached verses of each of the three sections—the Âgneya-, Ushasya- and Â<i>s</i>vina-kratu—of the Â<i>s</i>vina-<i>s</i>astra (as of the Prâtar-anuvâka) are arranged according to the seven principal metres—gâyatrî, anush<i>t</i>ubh, trish<i>t</i>ubh, b<i>ri</i>hatî, ush<i>n</i>ih, <i>g</i>agatî, and paṅkti—forming as many subdivisions of the three sections.

[^299]: 93:3 That is, the first assistant of the Adhvaryu priest; the latter having to respond (pratigara) to the Hot<i>ri</i>'s calls (see part ii, p. 326, note 1) at the beginning and end of the <i>S</i>astra, and to sit through the recitations (III, 9, 3, 11).

[^300]: 93:4 See III, 9, 2, 13 seqq.

[^301]: 94:1 Yathâyatanam eva prak<i>ri</i>tau yasmin kâle hûyeta tathaiva hutvâ, Sây.

[^302]: 94:2 See IV, 1, 1, 22 seqq.; 1, 2, 21 seqq.

[^303]: 94:3 See II, 1, 2, 3, with note thereon.

[^304]: 94:4 That is, having, after the completion of the Â<i>s</i>vina-<i>s</i>astra, offered to the A<i>s</i>vins some of the Soma that has been standing ‘over the previous day.’

[^305]: 94:5 Viz. the Aindravâyava, Maitrâvaru<i>n</i>a, &c., see IV, I, 3, 1 seqq.

[^306]: 94:6 See IV, 2, 5, 1 seqq.

[^307]: 94:7 Called ‘savanasantani’ (? i.e. continuity of pressing) by Kâty., XXIV, 4, 1.

[^308]: 95:1 Sâya<i>n</i>a construes,—we know the extended sacrificial thread of these (days); and the Dânavas (Asuras) do not henceforth confound us. In that case the order of words would be extremely irregular.

[^309]: 95:2 Kâsh<i>th</i>abh<i>ri</i>ta<i>h</i>, â<i>g</i>yantâ (!) kâsh<i>th</i>âni tâni bihhratîti kâsh<i>th</i>abh<i>ri</i>ta<i>h</i> svâdasa<i>m</i> (? <i>kh</i>ândasa<i>m</i>) pûrvapadasya hrasvatvam, â<i>g</i>idhâvana<i>m</i> k<i>ri</i>tavato hayân a<i>s</i>vân, Sây. According to this authority the general meaning of the verse is that even as the (king's) horses, when they have performed their task, have sweet drinks poured out on (? to) them, and thus obtain their hearts’ desire, so the gods, by performing a sacrificial session of a hundred Atirâtras, in accordance with Pra<i>g</i>âpati's directions, dispel the darkness and gain the world of heaven.

[^310]: 95:3 Or perhaps, from a cupful of water onwards,—aharahar dadyâd p. 96 iti manushyân uddi<i>s</i>ya odapâtrât udakapûritam pâtram udapâtram udakapâtrâvadhi yad odanâdika<i>m</i> dadyât sa manushyaya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>a ity artha<i>h</i>, Sây.—Cf. J. Muir, Orig. Sanskrit Texts, vol. iii, p. 18 seqq.

[^311]: 96:1 In making offering to the (three immediately preceding) departed ancestors, water is poured our for them (to wash themselves with) both at the beginning and at the end of the ceremony; see II, 4, 2, 16; 23; II, 6, 1, 34; 41, where each time it is said that this is done ‘even as one would pour out water for (a guest) who is to take (or has taken) food with him;’—pit<i>rî</i>n uddi<i>s</i>ya pratyaha<i>m</i> svadhâkâre<i>n</i>a annâdikam udapâtraparyanta<i>m</i> dadyât, Sây.

[^312]: 96:2 Apparently the log of wood placed on the Gârhapatya after the completion of the offering.

[^313]: 97:1 Aprâptasya phalasya prâptir yoga<i>h</i> tasya paripâlana<i>m</i> kshema<i>h</i>, Sây.

[^314]: 98:1 The Anu<i>s</i>âsanâni, according to Sâya<i>n</i>a, are the six Vedâṅgas, or rules of grammar, etymology, &c.

[^315]: 98:2 By vidyâ<i>h</i>, according to Sâya<i>n</i>a, the philosophical systems, Nyâya, Mîmâ<i>m</i>sa, &c., are to be understood. More likely, however, such special sciences as the ‘sarpavidyâ’ (science of snakes) are referred to; cf. [XIII, 4, 3, 9](../Book_5_13_4#v13_4_3_9) seqq.

[^316]: 98:3 Vâkovâkyam, apparently some special theological discourse, or discourses, similar to (if not identical with) the numerous Brahmodya, or disputations on spiritual matters. As an example of such a dialogue, Sâya<i>n</i>a refers to the dialogue between Uddâlaka Âru<i>n</i>i and Svaidâya<i>n</i>a Gautama, [XI, 4, 1, 4](../Book_5_11_4#v11_4_1_4) seqq.

[^317]: 98:4 Itihâsa-purâ<i>n</i>a: the Itihâsa, according to Sâya<i>n</i>a, are cosmological myths or accounts, such as ‘In the beginning this universe was nothing but water,’ &c.; whilst as an instance of the Purâ<i>n</i>a (stories of olden times, purâtanapurushav<i>ri</i>ttânta) he refers to the story of Purûravas and Urva<i>s</i>î. Cf. Max Müller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 40.

[^318]: 98:5 Or, the Gâthâs and Nârâ<i>s</i>a<i>m</i>sîs. Sâya<i>n</i>a, in the first place, takes the two as one, meaning ‘stanzas (or verses) telling about men;’ but he then refers to the interpretation by others, according to which the Gâthâs are such verses as that about ‘the great snake driven from the lake’ ([XI, 5, 5, 8](../Book_5_11_5#v11_5_5_8)); whilst the Nârâ<i>s</i>a<i>m</i>sîs would be (verses ‘telling about men’) such as that regarding <i>G</i>aname<i>g</i>aya and his horses ([XI, 5, 5, 12](../Book_5_11_5#v11_5_5_12)). On Aitareyâr. II, 3, 6, 8, Sâya<i>n</i>a quotes ‘prâta<i>h</i> prâtar an<i>ri</i>ta<i>m</i> to vadanti’ as an instance of a Gâthâ.

[^319]: 99:1 That is, the call ‘Vausha<i>t</i>!’ with which, at the end of the offering-formula, the oblation is poured into the fire.

[^320]: 99:2 That is, when the rumbling of distant thunder is heard; or, perhaps, when there is a rattling sound, as from hail-stones.

[^321]: 99:3 Hardly, should only study,—adhîyîtaiva.

[^322]: 99:4 Or, from (the world of) spirits (?).

[^323]: 99:5 Or, as Sâya<i>n</i>a takes it to mean, of intent, undistracted mind,—yuktam avikshiptam ekâgra<i>m</i> mano yasya sa yuktamanâ<i>h</i>.

[^324]: 99:6 Sâya<i>n</i>a seems to take ‘ekârâmatâ’ in the sense of ‘remaining always the same,’—eka eva sann â samantâd bhavatîty ekârâmas tasya bhâva<i>h</i>.

[^325]: 99:7 Or, perfecting the world,—tadyukto yo lokas tasya pakti<i>h</i> paripâko bhavati, Sây.

[^326]: 100:1 The study of the Veda being ‘the sacrifice of the Brahman,’ the reading of a portion is, as it were, a special rite, or form of offering, belonging to that sacrifice. Sâya<i>n</i>a, on the other hand, takes it to mean that the student performs, as it were, the particular rite, or offering, to which the portion he reads may refer. It may, indeed, be implied, though it certainly is not expressed in the text.

[^327]: 100:2 Thus A. Weber, Ind. Stud. X, p. 122;—<i>s</i>arîrapî<i>d</i>anena tapastapto bhavati, Sây.

[^328]: 101:1 A ‘Kumbyâ,’ according to Sâya<i>n</i>a, is a Brâhma<i>n</i>a-passage explanatory of some sacrificial precept or rite (vidhyarthavâdâtmaka<i>m</i> brâhma<i>n</i>a-vâkyam); whilst, on Aitareyâr. II, 3, 6, 8, the same commentator explains it as a verse (<i>ri</i>g-vi<i>s</i>esha) conveying some precept of conduct (â<i>k</i>âra<i>s</i>ikshârûpa), such as ‘brahma<i>k</i>âryasyâpo<i>s</i>âna<i>m</i> karma kuru, divâ mâ svâpsî<i>h</i>,’ &c. Cf. Prof. F. Max Müller's transl., Upanishads I, p. 230, note 2.

[^329]: 101:2 This is in keeping with the mystic representation of this and p. 102 the preceding chapters which represent the daily study of the scriptural lesson as a sacrifice continued day by day. The student, as the sacrificer, has accordingly, during the sacrifice (that is, during the period of his study of the Vedas, or for life), as it were, to limit his daily food to the drinking of the Vrata-milk, which rule he obeys symbolically by reciting such a verse or formula.

[^330]: 102:1 ? Sâya<i>n</i>a takes ‘<i>s</i>ukra’ here in the sense of ‘flame, light’ (vyâh<i>ri</i>tirûpâ<i>n</i>i te<i>g</i>â<i>m</i>si); whilst the St. Petersb. Dict. assigns to it the meaning of ‘sap, juice’ (Saft, Seim, cf. next note). Ait. Br. V, 32, contains a very similar passage in which the same process of evolution is set forth:—Pra<i>g</i>âpati first creates the three worlds, earth, air, and heaven. From them, being heated by him, three lights (<i>g</i>yotis) are produced—Agni from the earth, Vâyu from the air, and Âditya from the sky (or heaven). From them, being heated, the three Vedas are produced—the <i>Ri</i>g-veda from Agni, the Ya<i>g</i>ur-veda from Vâyu, and the Sâma-veda from Âditya. From the Vedas, being heated, three flames (<i>s</i>ukra, luminaries, Haug) are produced—Bhû<i>h</i> from the <i>Ri</i>g-veda, Bhuva<i>h</i> from the Ya<i>g</i>ur-veda, p. 103 and Svar from the Sâma-veda. From these in the same way are produced three sounds (or letters, var<i>n</i>a), â, u and m, which being combined yield the syllable ‘Om.’ Cp. J. Muir, Original Sanskrit Texts, vol. iii, p. 4.

[^331]: 103:1 Here Sâya<i>n</i>a also seems to take ‘<i>s</i>ukra’ in the sense of ‘pure, essential part’—nirmala<i>m</i> rûpa<i>m</i> sâratvatâ<i>m</i><i>s</i>a<i>h</i> (!).

[^332]: 103:2 That is, the Dakshi<i>n</i>âgni. At the Havirya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>a (of which class of sacrifices, performed in the Prâ<i>k</i>înava<i>m</i><i>s</i>a hall, the full and new moon serves as model) there is no Âgnîdhrîya, which is, however, required for the Soma-sacrifice. See the plan in part ii, p. 475.

[^333]: 104:1 According to Sâya<i>n</i>a, offering would be used with the formula ‘Bhûr bhuva<i>h</i> sva<i>h</i>, svâhâ!’

[^334]: 104:2 Viz. by the word ‘bhû<i>h</i>,’ representing that Veda.

[^335]: 104:3 Yathâ khalu loke bhagna<i>m</i> hastapâdâdiparva tatsannihitenânyena parva<i>n</i>â purushâya sa<i>m</i>dadhyât sa<i>m</i><i>s</i>leshayet, evam evânena vyâh<i>ri</i>ti<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>ânena tat tad avedokta<i>m</i> prabh<i>ri</i>sh<i>t</i>am aṅga<i>m</i> puna<i>h</i> sahita<i>m</i> bhavati, Sây.

[^336]: 104:4 ? Or, as if one were to put some fluid into some broken (vessel; or, on some broken part),—yathâ <i>s</i>îr<i>n</i>ena bhagnena anya<i>k</i> <i>kh</i>îr<i>n</i>a<i>m</i> bhagna<i>m</i> vastu sa<i>m</i>dhitset sa<i>m</i>dhâtum i<i>k</i><i>kh</i>et; yathâ vâ <i>s</i>îr<i>n</i>e gara<i>m</i> bhaktâvayave garam abhinidadhyât pra<i>h</i>dattipeta (? prakshipet), Sây.

[^337]: 105:1 See IV, 1, 1, 2; 6, 1, 1.

[^338]: 105:2 See part ii, p. 424, note 1.

[^339]: 106:1 See IV, 6, 1, 3 seq.

[^340]: 106:2 That is, the water originally taken from the Pra<i>n</i>îtâ water, and poured into the (square) Hot<i>ri</i>'s cup (made of Udumbara wood), to be used for moistening the Soma-plants.

[^341]: 106:3 For the Adâbhya he puts three Soma-plants into the Hot<i>ri</i>'s cup.

[^342]: 106:4 According to Kâty. XII, 6, 15, this portion of the formula—the ‘upayâma,’ or support—is repeated before the formulas of each of the three plants, hence also before ‘For Indra . . .,’ and ‘For the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i> . . .’

[^343]: 106:5 Viz. the Ukthyas, Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in, &c., in forms of Soma-sacrifice other than the Agnish<i>t</i>oma.

[^344]: 107:1 It is there that the Soma-plants are kept.

[^345]: 108:1 Though the Adâbhya-graha, that is, the water in which the three Soma-plants are contained, and which alone is offered, has been identified with speech, the wording of the formula is such as to protect (the faculty of) speech from being burned in the fire.

[^346]: 108:2 Just as, after the offering of the A<i>m</i><i>s</i>u-graha, he smelled at (or breathed over) a piece of gold fastened to (? or contained in) the spoon, see IV, 6, 1, 6 seqq.