---
title: "Book V — XIII, 7. Seventh Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_6">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XIII, 6. Sixth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_8">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XIII, 8. Eighth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="v13_7_1"><sup><small>13:7:1</small></sup></span>

## SEVENTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### THE SARVAMEDHA, OR ALL-SACRIFICE.

<span id="v13_7_1_11"><sup><small>13:7:1:11.</small></sup></span>  Brahman Svayambhu (the self-existent, n.) was performing austerities [^1100]. He said this much,— <span id="p418"><sup><small>[ p. 418 ]</small></sup></span> ‘Verily, there is no perpetuity in austerities; well, then, I will offer up mine own self in the creatures, and the creatures in mine own self.’ And, accordingly, by offering up his own self in the creatures, and the creatures in his own self, he compassed the supremacy, the sovereignty, and the lordship over all creatures; and in like manner does the Sacrificer, by thus offering all sacrificial essences [^1101] in the Sarvamedha, compass all beings, and supremacy, sovereignty, and lordship.

<span id="v13_7_1_22"><sup><small>13:7:1:22.</small></sup></span>  Now this Sarvamedha is a ten-days’ (Soma-) sacrifice, for the sake of his gaining and winning every kind of food, for the Virâ<i>g</i> consists of ten syllables, and the Virâ<i>g</i> is all food. At this (sacrifice) he builds the greatest possible fire-altar, for this—to wit, the Sarvamedha—is supreme amongst all sacrificial performances: by means of the supreme (sacrifice) he thus causes him (the Sacrificer) to attain supremacy.

<span id="v13_7_1_33"><sup><small>13:7:1:33.</small></sup></span>  The first day thereof is an Agnish<i>t</i>ut Agnish<i>t</i>oma [^1102], for the sake of his gaining and winning all the gods, for the Agnish<i>t</i>ut Agnish<i>t</i>oma is Agni; and all the gods have Agni (the sacrificial fire) for their mouth, The cups of Soma thereat pertain to Agni, and so do the Puroru<i>k</i> [^1103] formulas pertain to Agni, in order that everything should pertain to Agni. <span id="p419"><sup><small>[ p. 419 ]</small></sup></span> 13:7:1:44\. The second day is an Indrastut Ukthya, for the sake of his gaining and winning all the gods, for Indra is all the gods. The cups of Soma thereat pertain to Indra, and so do the Puroru<i>k</i> formulas pertain to Indra, in order that everything should pertain to Indra.

<span id="v13_7_1_55"><sup><small>13:7:1:55.</small></sup></span>  The third day is a Sûryastut, Ukthya, for the sake of his gaining and winning all the gods, for Sûrya is all the gods. The cups of Soma pertain to Sûrya, and so do the Puroru<i>k</i> formulas pertain to Sûrya, in order that everything should pertain to Sûrya.

<span id="v13_7_1_66"><sup><small>13:7:1:66.</small></sup></span>  The fourth day is a Vai<i>s</i>vadeva, for the sake of his gaining and winning all the gods, for the All-gods (Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>) are all the gods. The cups of Soma pertain to the All-gods, and so do the Puroru<i>k</i> formulas pertain to the All-gods, in order that everything should pertain to the All-gods.

<span id="v13_7_1_77"><sup><small>13:7:1:77.</small></sup></span>  The fifth day is a central Â<i>s</i>vamedhika [^1104] one: at this (sacrifice) he seizes a horse meet for sacrifice, for the sake of his gaining the sacrificial essence of the horse.

<span id="v13_7_1_88"><sup><small>13:7:1:88.</small></sup></span>  The sixth day is a central Paurushamedhika [^1105] one: at this (sacrifice) he seizes men meet for sacrifice, for the sake of his gaining the sacrificial essence of man.

<span id="v13_7_1_99"><sup><small>13:7:1:99.</small></sup></span>  The seventh day is an Aptoryâma, for the sake of his gaining all kinds of Soma-sacrifices: at this (sacrifice) he seizes all kinds of (victims) meet for sacrifice, both what is animate and what is <span id="p420"><sup><small>[ p. 420 ]</small></sup></span> inanimate. Of those with omenta he offers the omenta, and of those without omenta they throw down pieces cut out of the skin [^1106], and of herbs and trees they do so after cutting them up,—every kind of food of both the dry and the fresh he offers, in order to gain every kind of food. Everything he offers; and, to every one he offers in order to gain and to win everything. The omenta having been offered at the morning-service, and in the same way the oblations at the evening-service,—

<span id="v13_7_1_1010"><sup><small>13:7:1:1010.</small></sup></span>  The eighth day is a Tri<i>n</i>ava one [^1107], for the Tri<i>n</i>ava (stoma) is the thunderbolt, and by means of the thunderbolt, indeed, lordship (kshatra) is gained: by means of the thunderbolt he thus gains lordship.

<span id="v13_7_1_1111"><sup><small>13:7:1:1111.</small></sup></span>  The ninth day is a Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a one [^1108], for the sake of his gaining a foothold, for the Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (stoma) is a foothold.

<span id="v13_7_1_1212"><sup><small>13:7:1:1212.</small></sup></span>  The tenth day is a Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it Atirâtra with all the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as [^1109], for the sake of his gaining and winning everything, for the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it Atirâtra with all the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as is everything, and the Sarvamedha is everything.

<span id="v13_7_1_1313"><sup><small>13:7:1:1313.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the sacrificial fees: whatever there is towards the middle of the kingdom other than the property of the Brâhma<i>n</i>a, but including land and <span id="p421"><sup><small>[ p. 421 ]</small></sup></span> men, of that the eastern quarter belongs to the Hot<i>ri</i>, the southern to the Brahman, the western to the Adhvaryu, and the northern to the Udgât<i>ri</i>; and the Hot<i>ri</i>kas share this along with them.

<span id="v13_7_1_1414"><sup><small>13:7:1:1414.</small></sup></span>  Vi<i>s</i>vakarman Bhauvana once performed this sacrifice, and having performed it he overpassed all beings, and became everything here; and verily he who, knowing this, performs the Sarvamedha, or who even knows this, overpasses all beings, and becomes everything here.

<span id="v13_7_1_1515"><sup><small>13:7:1:1515.</small></sup></span>  It was Ka<i>s</i>yapa who officiated in his sacrifice, and it was concerning this that the Earth [^1110] also sang the stanza;—‘No mortal must give me away; thou wast foolish, Vi<i>s</i>vakarman Bhauvana: she (the earth) will sink into the midst of the water; vain is this thy promise unto Ka<i>s</i>yapa.’



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_6">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XIII, 6. Sixth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_8">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XIII, 8. Eighth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^1107]: 417:3 Cf. J. Muir, Orig. Sanskrit Texts, vol. v, p. 372.

[^1108]: 418:1 Or, all kinds of victims (medha).

[^1109]: 418:2 That is, a one-day's Soma-sacrifice (ekâha) of the Agnish<i>t</i>oma order, arranged so as specially to promote the praise of Agni, In the same way the next three ekâhas are intended to honour special deities.

[^1110]: 418:3 That is, the formulas preceding the ‘upayâma’ (‘Thou art taken with a support, &c.,’ cf. part ii, p. 259, note s) or formula with which the cup of Soma is drawn.

[^1111]: 419:1 That is, an Ukthya sacrifice, cf. [p. 259](../Book_5_12_8#p259), note [2](../Book_5_12_8#fn652); [XIII, 5, 1, 5](../Book_5_13_5#v13_5_1_5) seqq.

[^1112]: 419:2 That is, an Atirâtra, cf. [XIII, 6, 1, 9](../Book_5_13_6#v13_6_1_9).

[^1113]: 420:1 Lit., ‘after cutting (pieces) out of the skin they throw down.’

[^1114]: 420:2 That is, one on which the Tri<i>n</i>ava (thrice-nine-versed) Stoma is used in chanting.

[^1115]: 420:3 That is, one on which the thirty-three-versed hymn-form is used.

[^1116]: 420:4 For a Soma-sacrifice with all the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-sâmans, see part iii, introd. p. xx seqq. On the two kinds of Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it ekâhas, the Agnish<i>t</i>oma and the Atirâtra Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it, see part iv, p. 320, note 2.

[^1117]: 421:1 Or, the ground, which Vi<i>s</i>vakarman Bhauvana gave away as sacrificial fee. On this legend cp. Ait. Br. VIII, 21; J. Muir, Orig. Sanskrit Texts, vol. i, p. 456; vol. iv, p. 369.