---
title: "Book V — XIV, 2. Second Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_14_1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XIV, 1. First Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_14_3">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XIV, 3. Third Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="v14_2_1"><sup><small>14:2:1</small></sup></span>

## SECOND ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### THE BOILING OF THE GHARMA, AND THE. OFFERINGS.

<span id="v14_2_1_11"><sup><small>14:2:1:11.</small></sup></span>  He now offers (the first of) the two Rauhi<i>n</i>a (cakes) [^1248]:—(Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVII, 21), ‘May the day <span id="p473">[<sup><small>p. 473</small></sup>]</span> be pleased with its brightness, the well-lighted with its light, hail!’ with this text both (cakes are offered) in the morning;—‘May the night be pleased with its brightness, the well-lighted with its light, hail!’ with this text both (cakes are offered) in the evening.

<span id="v14_2_1_22"><sup><small>14:2:1:22.</small></sup></span>  And as to why he offers two Rauhi<i>n</i>a (cakes),—the two Rauhi<i>n</i>as doubtless are Agni and Âditya (the sun), for by means of these two deities sacrificers ascend (ruh) to heaven.

<span id="v14_2_1_33"><sup><small>14:2:1:33.</small></sup></span>  And, indeed, the Rauhi<i>n</i>as are also day and night, and the Pravargya is the sun: he thus encompasses yonder sun by the day and the night, whence he is encompassed by the day and the night.

<span id="v14_2_1_44"><sup><small>14:2:1:44.</small></sup></span>  And, indeed, the Rauhi<i>n</i>as are also these two <span id="p474">[<sup><small>p. 474</small></sup>]</span> worlds, and the Pravargya is the sun: he thus encompasses yonder sun by these two worlds, whence he is encompassed by these two worlds.

<span id="v14_2_1_55"><sup><small>14:2:1:55.</small></sup></span>  And, indeed, the Rauhi<i>n</i>as are also the two eyes, and the Pravargya is the head: he thus places the eye in the head.

<span id="v14_2_1_66"><sup><small>14:2:1:66.</small></sup></span>  He now takes a rope, with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 1), 'At the impulse of the divine Savit<i>ri</i>, I take thee, with the arms of the A<i>s</i>vins, with the hands of Pûshan: Aditi's [^1249] zone thou art;'—the mystic import of this is the same as before [^1250].

<span id="v14_2_1_77"><sup><small>14:2:1:77.</small></sup></span>  He then calls the cow, whilst stepping behind the Gârhapatya (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 2), ‘I<i>d</i>â, come hither! Aditi, come hither! Sarasvatî, come hither!’ for the cow is I<i>d</i>â, and the cow is Aditi, and the cow is Sarasvatî. And he also calls her by her (real) name, with these (formulas), ‘N.N. [^1251], come hither!’ thus thrice.

<span id="v14_2_1_88"><sup><small>14:2:1:88.</small></sup></span>  When she comes, he lays (the rope) round her (horns), with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 3), 'Aditi's zone thou art, Indrâ<i>n</i>î's head-band;'—for Indrâ<i>n</i>î is Indra's beloved wife, and she has a most variegated head-band: ‘that thou art’ he thereby means to say, and that he indeed thereby makes it to be.

<span id="v14_2_1_99"><sup><small>14:2:1:99.</small></sup></span>  He then lets the calf to it (to suck), with, ‘Pûshan thou art,’—Pûshan, doubtless, is he that blows here (the wind), for that one supports [^1252] <span id="p475">[<sup><small>p. 475</small></sup>]</span> (push) all this (universe); and the Pravargya also is that (wind): it is him he thus pleases, and therefore he says, ‘Pûshan thou art.’

<span id="v14_2_1_1010"><sup><small>14:2:1:1010.</small></sup></span>  He then leads it (the calf) away [^1253] with, ‘Afford (milk) for the Gharma!’ for the Gharma, doubtless, is that fluid which this (cow) lets flow: he thus means to say thereby, ‘Allow her a share!’

<span id="v14_2_1_1111"><sup><small>14:2:1:1111.</small></sup></span>  He then causes it to flow into the milking-bowl, with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XX XVIII, 4), ‘Flow for the A<i>s</i>vins!’—with regard to the A<i>s</i>vins he thus says this, for it was the A<i>s</i>vins who restored the head of the sacrifice: it is them he thus pleases, and therefore he says, ‘Flow for the A<i>s</i>vins!’

14:2:1:1212, ‘Flow for Sarasvatî!’—Sarasvatî, doubtless, is Speech, and with speech the A<i>s</i>vins then restored the head of the Sacrifice: it is those (A<i>s</i>vins) he thus pleases, and therefore he says, ‘Flow for Sarasvatî!’

<span id="v14_2_1_1313"><sup><small>14:2:1:1313.</small></sup></span>  ‘Flow for Indra!’—for Indra is the deity of the sacrifice, and it was indeed by him who is the deity of the sacrifice that the A<i>s</i>vins then restored the head of the sacrifice: it is them he thus pleases, and therefore he says, ‘Flow for Indra!’

<span id="v14_2_1_1414"><sup><small>14:2:1:1414.</small></sup></span>  The (spilt) drops he then consecrates with, ‘Hail, possessed of Indra! hail, possessed of Indra!’ for Indra is the deity of the sacrifice: he thus pleases him who is the deity of the sacrifice, and therefore he says, ‘Hail, possessed of Indra! hail, possessed of Indra!’ Thrice he says it, for threefold is the sacrifice. The call of ‘hail!’ he places first, and the deity last: the significance of this is the same as before. <span id="p476">[<sup><small>p. 476</small></sup>]</span> 14:2:1:1515\. He then touches her udder [^1254], with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 5; <i>Ri</i>g-v. I, 164, 49), ‘This ever-flowing, grateful udder of thine,’—that is to say, ‘This udder of thine placed in secret [^1255];’—‘treasure-giving, wealth-granting, bountiful,’—that is to say, ‘which is a giver of treasures, a granter of wealth, and precious;’—‘whereby thou furtherest all desirable things,’—that is to say, ‘whereby thou supportest all the gods and all creatures;’—‘O Sarasvatî, move that hither for us to suck,’—Sarasvatî, doubtless, is Speech, and so is this (cow) which yields the Gharma milk; and Speech is worship: thus he means to say, ‘Grant us worship whereby we may please the gods.’ He then steps up to the site of the Gârhapatya with, ‘I pass along the wide aerial realm,’—the mystic import of this is the same as before [^1256].

<span id="v14_2_1_1616"><sup><small>14:2:1:1616.</small></sup></span>  He then takes the two lifting-sticks [^1257], with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 6), ‘The Gâyatrî metre thou art,—the Trish<i>t</i>ubh metre thou art,’—he thus takes them with both the Gâyatrî and the Trish<i>t</i>ubh metres;—‘with heaven and earth I encompass thee,’—for the two lifting-sticks are indeed these two, heaven and earth; and the <span id="p477">[<sup><small>p. 477</small></sup>]</span> Pravargya is the sun: he thus encompasses yonder sun within these two, heaven and earth. Thereupon (having lifted up the pot) he sweeps it clean with a branch of reed grass: the mystic import of this is the same as before.

<span id="v14_2_1_1717"><sup><small>14:2:1:1717.</small></sup></span>  He then puts it on the ‘supporting’ tray [^1258] with, ‘By the air I support thee,’—for the ‘supporting’ tray is the air, since everything here is supported by the air; and the ‘supporting’ tray also is the belly, for all food and drink here is supported (held) by the belly: therefore he says, ‘By the air I support thee.’

<span id="v14_2_1_1818"><sup><small>14:2:1:1818.</small></sup></span>  He then pours in the goat's milk [^1259]; for that (Mahâvîra pot) when heated, becomes glowing: he thus soothes it, and when soothed he pours the cow's milk into it—

<span id="v14_2_1_1919"><sup><small>14:2:1:1919.</small></sup></span>  With, ‘O Indra and ye A<i>s</i>vins!’—for Indra is the deity of the sacrifice, and he thus pleases him who is the deity of the sacrifice; and ‘Ye A<i>s</i>vins’ he says, because the A<i>s</i>vins at that time restored the head of the sacrifice, and it is them he thus pleases: therefore he says, ‘O Indra and ye A<i>s</i>vins!’

<span id="v14_2_1_2020"><sup><small>14:2:1:2020.</small></sup></span>  ‘Of bees’ honey’—this is indeed honey;—‘drink ye the Gharma (hot draught),’—that is to say, drink ye the liquor;'—‘ye true ones,’—those (deities) are indeed true (vasu), for it is <span id="p478">[<sup><small>p. 478</small></sup>]</span> they that maintain (vâsaya) all this (universe);—‘worship ye, vâ<i>t</i>!’ thus this comes to be for him as if it were offered with the Vasha<i>t</i>\-call.

<span id="v14_2_1_2121"><sup><small>14:2:1:2121.</small></sup></span>  'Hail to Sûrya's ray, the rain-winner [^1260]!'—for one of the sun's rays is called ‘rain-winner,’ whereby he supports all these creatures: it is that one he thus pleases, and therefore he says, 'Hail to Sûrya's ray, the rain-winner!' The call of hail he places first, and the deity last: the significance of this is the same as before [^1261].

<span id="v14_2_1_2222"><sup><small>14:2:1:2222.</small></sup></span>  And, verily, whosoever either teaches, or partakes of, this (Pravargya) enters that life, and that light: the observance thereof is the same as at the creation [^1262].


<span id="v14_2_2"><sup><small>14:2:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v14_2_2_11"><sup><small>14:2:2:11.</small></sup></span>  And when the Hot<i>ri</i> recites this (verse), ‘Let Brahma<i>n</i>aspati go forward, let the goddess Sûn<i>ri</i>tâ go forward,’—the Adhvaryu, stepping forward, makes offering (by muttering) the wind-names. For at this time the gods were afraid lest the Rakshas, the fiends, might injure that (Pravargya) of theirs in the middle (of the sacrifice): they offered it with the Svâhâ-call before (its being taken to) the Âhavanîya, being thus offered they offered it (again) in the fire; and in like manner does this one now offer it with the Svâhâ-call before <span id="p479">[<sup><small>p. 479</small></sup>]</span> (its being taken to) the Âhavanîya, and being thus offered he offers it (again) in the fire.

<span id="v14_2_2_22"><sup><small>14:2:2:22.</small></sup></span>  \[Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 7,\] ‘To the wind Ocean (I offer) thee, hail!’—the (aerial) ocean (samudra) indeed is he who blows here, for from out of that ocean all the gods and all the beings issue forth (samud-dru): it is to him (Vâyu, the wind) he thus offers it, and therefore he says, ‘To the wind Ocean (I consecrate) thee, hail!’

<span id="v14_2_2_33"><sup><small>14:2:2:33.</small></sup></span>  ‘To the wind Flood—thee, hail!’—the flood (sarira) indeed is he who blows here, for from out of that flood all the gods and all the creatures come forth together (saha irate): it is to him he thus offers it, and therefore he says, ‘To the wind Flood—thee, hail!’

<span id="v14_2_2_44"><sup><small>14:2:2:44.</small></sup></span>  ‘To the wind Unassailable—thee, hail! To the wind Irresistible—thee, hail!’—unassailable and irresistible indeed is he who blows here: it is to him he thus offers it, and therefore he says, ‘To the wind Unassailable—thee, hail! To the wind Irresistible—thee, hail!’

<span id="v14_2_2_55"><sup><small>14:2:2:55.</small></sup></span>  ‘To the wind Favourable—thee, hail! To the wind Ogress-ridder—thee, hail!’—favourable and an ogress-ridder indeed is he who blows here: it is to him he thus offers it, and therefore he says, ‘To the wind Favourable—thee, hail! To the wind Ogress-ridder—thee, hail!’

<span id="v14_2_2_66"><sup><small>14:2:2:66.</small></sup></span>  \[Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 8,\] ‘To Indra, accompanied by the Vasus and Rudras, (I offer) thee, hail!’—Indra indeed is he who blows here: it is to him he thus offers it, and therefore he says, ‘To Indra—thee;’ and when he says, ‘accompanied by the Vasus and Rudras,’ thereby he allows a share to the Vasus and Rudras along with Indra; and, <span id="p480">[<sup><small>p. 480</small></sup>]</span> moreover, it is thereby made to be like the morning Soma-pressing, and the midday-pressing [^1263].

<span id="v14_2_2_77"><sup><small>14:2:2:77.</small></sup></span>  ‘To Indra, accompanied by the Âdityas,—thee, hail!’—Indra indeed is he who blows here: it is to him he thus offers it, and therefore he says, ‘To Indra—thee;’ and when he says, ‘accompanied by the Âdityas,’ thereby he allows a share to the Âdityas along with Indra; and, moreover, it is made like the evening-pressing [^1263].

<span id="v14_2_2_88"><sup><small>14:2:2:88.</small></sup></span>  ‘To Indra, the slayer of the evil-minded,—thee, hail!’—Indra indeed is he who blows here: it is to him he thus offers it, and therefore he says, ‘To Indra—thee;’ and as to his saying, ‘to the slayer of the evil-minded,’ the evil-minded one being an enemy, he thereby means to say, ‘To Indra, the slayer of enemies,—thee!’ This is his (Indra's) special share: even as there is a share for a chief [^1264], so is this his (share) apart from the (other) gods.

<span id="v14_2_2_99"><sup><small>14:2:2:99.</small></sup></span>  ‘To Savit<i>ri</i>, accompanied by the <i>Ri</i>bhus, the Vibhus (lords), and the Vâ<i>g</i>as (powers),—thee, hail!’—Savit<i>ri</i> (the sun) indeed is he who blows here: it is to him he thus offers it, and therefore he says, ‘To Savit<i>ri</i>, accompanied by the <i>Ri</i>bhus, the Vibhus, and the Vâ<i>g</i>as,—thee!’ He thus allows a share therein to all the gods along (with Savit<i>ri</i>).

<span id="v14_2_2_1010"><sup><small>14:2:2:1010.</small></sup></span>  ‘To B<i>ri</i>haspati, accompanied by the All-gods,—thee, hail!’—B<i>ri</i>haspati indeed is he who blows here: it is to him he thus offers <span id="p481">[<sup><small>p. 481</small></sup>]</span> it, and therefore he says, ‘To B<i>ri</i>haspati—thee;’ and when he says, ‘accompanied by the All-gods,’ he thereby allows a share therein to all the gods along (with B<i>ri</i>haspati).

<span id="v14_2_2_1111"><sup><small>14:2:2:1111.</small></sup></span>  \[Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 9,\] ‘To Yama, accompanied by the Aṅgiras and the Fathers,—thee, hail!’—Yama indeed is he who blows here: it is to him he thus offers it, and therefore he says, ‘To Yama—thee;’ and as to his saying, ‘accompanied by the Aṅgiras and the Fathers,’—when the sacrifice had its head cut off, its life-sap flowed away, and went to the Fathers,—the Fathers being three in number [^1265]: thus it is to these he thereby allows a share along (with Yama).

<span id="v14_2_2_1212"><sup><small>14:2:2:1212.</small></sup></span>  These are twelve names,—twelve months are in a year, and the year is he that shines yonder, and the Pravargya also is that (sun): thus it is him he thereby pleases, and therefore there are twelve (names).

<span id="v14_2_2_1313"><sup><small>14:2:2:1313.</small></sup></span>  He then pours (the spilt milk and ghee) from the tray into the Mahâvîra (pot) with, ‘Hail to the Gharma!’—the Gharma (hot draught) is he who shines yonder, and the Pravargya also is that (sun): thus it is him he thereby pleases, and therefore he says, ‘Hail to the Gharma!’—the call of ‘hail!’ he places first, and the deity last: the significance of this is the same as before [^1266].

<span id="v14_2_2_1414"><sup><small>14:2:2:1414.</small></sup></span>  When it has been poured in, he mutters, ‘Hail, the Gharma to the Fathers!’ When the sacrifice had its head cut off, its life-sap flowed <span id="p482">[<sup><small>p. 482</small></sup>]</span> away, and went to the Fathers—the Fathers being three in number: it is these he thus pleases. The call of ‘hail!’ he places first, and the deity last: the significance of this is the same as before.

<span id="v14_2_2_1515"><sup><small>14:2:2:1515.</small></sup></span>  He recites no anuvâkyâ (invitatory) formula, for once for all the Fathers have passed away: therefore he recites no anuvâkyâ. Having stepped across [^1267], and called (on the Âgnîdhra) for the Srausha<i>t</i> [^1268], he (the Adhvaryu) says (to the Hot<i>ri</i>), ‘Pronounce the offering-formula (yâ<i>g</i>yâ) of the Gharma;’ and on the Vasha<i>t</i>\-call being uttered he offers—

<span id="v14_2_2_1616"><sup><small>14:2:2:1616.</small></sup></span>  With (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 10), ‘All regions (hath he worshipped), seated in the south,’—that is to say, ‘every region (has he worshipped), seated on the south;’—‘all gods hath he worshipped here,’—that is, ‘every god has he worshipped here;’—‘of the sweet Gharma, consecrated by Svâhâ (hail!), drink ye, O A<i>s</i>vins!’—with regard to the A<i>s</i>vins he says this; for the A<i>s</i>vins restored the head of the sacrifice: it is them he thus pleases. The call of ‘hail!’ he places first, and the deity last: the significance of this is the same as before.

<span id="v14_2_2_1717"><sup><small>14:2:2:1717.</small></sup></span>  And, having offered, he (thrice) shakes (the Mahâvîra) upwards, with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 11), ‘In heaven place thou this sacrifice! this sacrifice place thou in heaven!’—for the Gharma (hot milk-draught), the sacrifice, is yonder sun, and he indeed is ‘placed’ in the heavens, is <span id="p483">[<sup><small>p. 483</small></sup>]</span> established in the heavens: it is thus him he thereby pleases, and therefore he says, ‘In heaven place thou this sacrifice! this sacrifice place thou in heaven!’ On the repetition of the Vasha<i>t</i>, he offers—

<span id="v14_2_2_1818"><sup><small>14:2:2:1818.</small></sup></span>  With, ‘Hail to Agni, worthy of sacrifice!’—this is in lieu of the Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>t (offering), for Agni is the maker of good offering;—‘may blessing result from the sacrificial texts!’ for by the sacrificial texts that (sun) is established (as the Mahâvîra) in this world: thus it is them he thereby pleases. The call of ‘hail!’ he places first, and the deity last: the significance of this is the same as before.

<span id="v14_2_2_1919"><sup><small>14:2:2:1919.</small></sup></span>  The Brahman (priest) pronounces the anumantra<i>n</i>a (formula of consecration); for the Brahman is the best physician among the officiating priests: thus he heals this sacrifice by means of him who is the best physician among the priests.

<span id="v14_2_2_2020"><sup><small>14:2:2:2020.</small></sup></span>  \[He does so, with Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 12.\] ‘O A<i>s</i>vins, drink ye the Gharma!’—with regard to the A<i>s</i>vins he says this, for the A<i>s</i>vins restored the head of the sacrifice: it is them he thus pleases.

<span id="v14_2_2_2121"><sup><small>14:2:2:2121.</small></sup></span>  ‘The hearty [^1269] one with daily [^1270] favours,’— <span id="p484">[<sup><small>p. 484</small></sup>]</span> this is indistinct, for Pra<i>g</i>âpati is indistinct (undefined), and the sacrifice is Pra<i>g</i>âpati: Pra<i>g</i>âpati, the sacrifice, he thus heals;—

<span id="v14_2_2_2222"><sup><small>14:2:2:2222.</small></sup></span>  ‘To the web-weaver,’—the web-weaver, doubtless, is he that shines yonder, for he moves along these worlds as if along a web; and the Pravargya also is that (sun): thus it is him he thereby pleases, and therefore he says, ‘To the web-weaver’—

<span id="v14_2_2_2323"><sup><small>14:2:2:2323.</small></sup></span>  ‘To Heaven and Earth be reverence!’ he thus propitiates heaven and earth, within which everything here is contained.

<span id="v14_2_2_2424"><sup><small>14:2:2:2424.</small></sup></span>  Thereupon the Sacrificer (mutters),—the Sacrificer being the sacrifice, he thus heals the sacrifice by means of the sacrifice;—

<span id="v14_2_2_2525"><sup><small>14:2:2:2525.</small></sup></span>  \[Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 13,\] ‘The A<i>s</i>vins drank the Gharma,’—he says this with regard to the A<i>s</i>vins, for the A<i>s</i>vins restored the head of the sacrifice: it is them he thus pleases.

<span id="v14_2_2_2626"><sup><small>14:2:2:2626.</small></sup></span>  ‘Heaven and Earth have approved of it [^1271]’—he says this with regard to heaven and earth, within which everything here is contained;—‘may gifts accrue here!’—whereby he means to say, ‘may there be riches for us here.’

<span id="v14_2_2_2727"><sup><small>14:2:2:2727.</small></sup></span>  The rising (milk) he then consecrates by the anumantra<i>n</i>a [^1272], ‘For freshness swell thou!’ <span id="p485">[<sup><small>p. 485</small></sup>]</span> —whereby he means to say, ‘For rain . . .;’—‘for vigour swell thou!’—he thereby means the vigour, the life-sap, which results from the rain;—‘for the Brahman swell thou!’—-he thereby means the priesthood;—‘for the Kshatra swell thou!’—he thereby means the nobility;—‘for Heaven and Earth swell thou!’—he thereby means these two, the heaven and the earth, within which everything here is contained.

<span id="v14_2_2_2828"><sup><small>14:2:2:2828.</small></sup></span>  When it rises upwards; it rises for (the benefit of) the Sacrificer; when on the front side, it does so for the gods; when on the right (south) side, it does so for the Fathers; when at the back (west side), it does so for the cattle; when on the left (north) side, it does so for (the Sacrificer's) offspring: in any case no fault is incurred by the Sacrificer, for it always rises upwards; and in whatever direction it rises in that it rises. When the drops cease,—

<span id="v14_2_2_2929"><sup><small>14:2:2:2929.</small></sup></span>  He steps out towards the north-east with, ‘A well-supporting support thou art,’—he who shines yonder is indeed a support, for he supports everything here, and by him everything here is supported; and the Pravargya also is that (sun): thus it is him he thereby, pleases, and therefore he says, ‘A well-supporting support thou art.’

<span id="v14_2_2_3030"><sup><small>14:2:2:3030.</small></sup></span>  He then places (the Mahâvîra) on the mound with, ‘Incapable of injuring, preserve thou our powers!’—‘Not angry [^1273], preserve our wealth,’ <span id="p486">[<sup><small>p. 486</small></sup>]</span> is what he thereby means to say;—‘preserve the priesthood, preserve the nobility, preserve the people!’—‘preserve all that,’ is what he thereby means to say.

<span id="v14_2_2_3131"><sup><small>14:2:2:3131.</small></sup></span>  He then offers by means of the pieces of (split) wood [^1274],—the pieces of wood being the vital airs, it is the vital airs he thus bestows upon him;—

<span id="v14_2_2_3232"><sup><small>14:2:2:3232.</small></sup></span>  With (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 15), ‘Hail to Pûshan, to the cream!’—Pûshan, doubtless, is he who blows here, for he (the wind) supports (push) everything here; and the breath also is that (wind): it is breath he thus bestows upon him, whence he says, ‘Hail to Pûshan, to the cream!’ The call of ‘hail!’ he places first, and the deity last: the significance of this is the same as before. Having offered (by means of the first piece) he leans it against the middle enclosing-stick [^1275] (paridhi).

<span id="v14_2_2_3333"><sup><small>14:2:2:3333.</small></sup></span>  ‘Hail to the pressing-stones!’—the pressing-stones being the vital airs, it is the vital airs he thus bestows upon him. Having offered (with the second stick) he leans it against the middle enclosing-stick.

<span id="v14_2_2_3434"><sup><small>14:2:2:3434.</small></sup></span>  ‘Hail to the sounding-holes [^1276]!’—the <span id="p487">[<sup><small>p. 487</small></sup>]</span> sounding-holes (pratirava), doubtless, are the vital airs, for everything here is pleased (pratirata) with the vital airs: it is the vital airs he thus bestows upon him. Having offered (with the third stick) he leans it against the middle enclosing-stick.

<span id="v14_2_2_3535"><sup><small>14:2:2:3535.</small></sup></span>  ‘Hail to the Fathers, (seated) upon the Barhis [^1277], and drinking the Gharma!’—even without offering he secretes (this, the fourth stick) under the barhis of the south part (of the vedi [^1278]) whilst looking towards the north [^1279]. When the sacrifice had its head cut off, its life-sap flowed away, and went to the Fathers—the Fathers being three in number: it is them he thus pleases. And <span id="p488">[<sup><small>p. 488</small></sup>]</span> as to why he does not look at it,—once for all the Fathers have passed away.

<span id="v14_2_2_3636"><sup><small>14:2:2:3636.</small></sup></span>  ‘Hail to Heaven and Earth!’—heaven and earth being the out (and in)-breathing and the up-breathing, it is the out and up-breathing he thus bestows upon him. Having offered (with the fifth stick) he leans it against the middle enclosing-stick.

<span id="v14_2_2_3737"><sup><small>14:2:2:3737.</small></sup></span>  ‘Hail to the All-gods!’—the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i> being the vital airs, it is the vital airs he thus bestows upon him. Having offered (with the sixth stick) he leans it against the middle enclosing-stick.

<span id="v14_2_2_3838"><sup><small>14:2:2:3838.</small></sup></span>  \[Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVIII, 16,\] ‘Hail to Rudra, praised by the Rudras [^1280]!’—even without offering (with this, the seventh stick), he, looking southwards, hands it to the Pratiprasthât<i>ri</i>, and the latter throws it outside (the offering-ground) northwards to the north of the hall, for this is the region of that god: he thus gratifies him in his own region. And as to why he does not look at it, he does so thinking, ‘Lest Rudra should do me harm.’

<span id="v14_2_2_3939"><sup><small>14:2:2:3939.</small></sup></span>  There are seven of these oblations, for seven in number are these (channels of the) vital airs in the head: it is these he thus bestows upon him.

<span id="v14_2_2_4040"><sup><small>14:2:2:4040.</small></sup></span>  He then pours (the remaining milk and ghee) from the Mahâvîra into the supporting-tray with, ‘Hail, light with light!’—for light indeed the milk was in the one (vessel), and light it is in the other, and these two lights thus unite with each other. The call of ‘hail!’ he places first, and the deity last: the mystic import of this is the same as before. <span id="p489">[<sup><small>p. 489</small></sup>]</span> 14:2:2:4141\. He then offers (the second of) the two Rauhi<i>n</i>a [^1281] (cakes) with, ‘May the day be pleased with its brightness, the well-lighted with its light, hail!’—the mystic import of this is the same as before;—‘may the night be pleased with its brightness, the well-lighted with its light, hail!’—the mystic import of this is the same as before.

<span id="v14_2_2_4242"><sup><small>14:2:2:4242.</small></sup></span>  He then hands to the Sacrificer the remainder of the Gharma. He, having solicited an invitation [^1282] (to the meal), drinks it with, ‘Offered is the honey unto Agni, the greatest of Indras,’—‘Offered is the honey unto Agni, the most powerful,’ he thereby means to say; ‘let us eat of thee, god Gharma: reverence be unto thee, injure us not!’—a blessing he thereby invokes.

<span id="v14_2_2_4343"><sup><small>14:2:2:4343.</small></sup></span>  Now, on the south side sand has been strewn; there they cleanse themselves [^1283]: in this there is the <span id="p490">[<sup><small>p. 490</small></sup>]</span> same significance as in the Mâr<i>g</i>âlîya. The pieces of wood he throws into the fire. They then proceed with the Upasad. And thus the head of the sacrifice has been set right in the very same manner in which the A<i>s</i>vins then restored it.

<span id="v14_2_2_4444"><sup><small>14:2:2:4444.</small></sup></span>  One must not perform the Pravargya at one's first Soma-sacrifice, since that would be sinful, and lest Indra should cut off his head; but at the second or the third (Soma-sacrifice); for at first the gods went on worshipping and toiling with the headless sacrifice, therefore (he should do so) at the second or the third (sacrifice). Moreover, it will become heated and ablaze;—

<span id="v14_2_2_4545"><sup><small>14:2:2:4545.</small></sup></span>  And were he to perform the Pravargya at the first Soma-sacrifice, that (Mahâvîra) of his, when heated and ablaze, would burn up his family and cattle, and also his life, and the Sacrificer would be liable to perish: therefore (let him perform it) at the second or third (sacrifice).

<span id="v14_2_2_4646"><sup><small>14:2:2:4646.</small></sup></span>  Let him not perform the Pravargya for any and every one, lest he should do everything for every one, for the Pravargya is everything; but let him only perform it for him who is known, or to whoever may be dear to him, or who has studied sacred writ: by means of the study of sacred writ he would thus gain it.

<span id="v14_2_2_4747"><sup><small>14:2:2:4747.</small></sup></span>  One may perform the Pravargya for a thousand (head of cattle) [^1284], for a thousand means everything, and that (Pravargya) is everything. One may <span id="p491">[<sup><small>p. 491</small></sup>]</span> perform it for all (the Sacrificer's) property; for all one's property means everything, and this (Pravargya) is everything. One may perform it at a Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it with all the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as [^1285]; for the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it (all-conquering day) with all the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as means everything, and this (Pravargya) is everything One may perform it at the Vâ<i>g</i>apeya (and) Râ<i>g</i>asûya, for such (a ceremony) means everything. One may perform it at a sacrificial session, for the session means everything, and this (Pravargya) is everything. These are (the occasions for) his performances of the Pravargya, and (let him perform it) nowhere else but at these.

<span id="v14_2_2_4848"><sup><small>14:2:2:4848.</small></sup></span>  Here now they say, ‘Seeing that the Pravargya is headless, whereby, then, does the Agnihotra become possessed of a head for him?’ Let him say, ‘By the Âhavanîya.’—‘How the New and Full-moon sacrifices?’ Let him say, ‘By the ghee and the cake.’—‘How the Seasonal sacrifices?’ Let him say, ‘By the oblation of clotted curds [^1286].’—‘How the animal sacrifice?’ Let him say, ‘By the victim and the cake.’—‘How the Soma-sacrifice?’ Let him say, ‘By the Havirdhâna [^1287].’

<span id="v14_2_2_4949"><sup><small>14:2:2:4949.</small></sup></span>  And they also say,—when the sacrifice had its head cut off, the gods on that occasion restored it as the hospitable reception [^1288] (of King Soma), and verily for him who so knows this offering is not made with any headless sacrifice whatever. <span id="p492">[<sup><small>p. 492</small></sup>]</span> 14:2:2:5050\. And, again, they say, ‘Seeing that at the sacrifice they lead forward the Pra<i>n</i>îtâ [^1289] (water), wherefore do they not lead it forward on this occasion?’ Well, this—to wit, the Pra<i>n</i>îtâ (water)—being the head of the sacrifice, and the Pravargya also being its head, (he does so) thinking, ‘Lest I cause the head to be overtopped by a head.’

<span id="v14_2_2_5151"><sup><small>14:2:2:5151.</small></sup></span>  And, again, they say, ‘Seeing that elsewhere there are fore-offerings and after-offerings, wherefore are there not any on this occasion?’ Well, the fore-offerings and after-offerings being the vital airs, and so also the Avakâ<i>s</i>as [^1290], and the pieces of wood, (it is so) lest he should cause the vital airs to be overtopped by vital airs.

<span id="v14_2_2_5252"><sup><small>14:2:2:5252.</small></sup></span>  And, again, they say, ‘Seeing that elsewhere they offer two butter-portions, wherefore does he not offer them on this occasion?’ Well, those two—to wit, the butter-portions—being the eyes of the sacrifice, and so also the two Rauhi<i>n</i>a (cakes)—(it is so) lest he should overtop eye by eye.

<span id="v14_2_2_5353"><sup><small>14:2:2:5353.</small></sup></span>  And, again, they say, ‘Seeing that they make offering to the gods by means of wooden (vessels), wherefore does he offer this (Gharma) by means of one made of clay?’ When the Sacrifice had its head cut off, its life-sap flowed away and entered the heaven and the earth. Now this (earth) is clay, and yonder (sky) is water; and the Mahâvîra (vessels) are made of clay and water: thus he supplies and completes it (the Pravargya) with that life-sap.

<span id="v14_2_2_5454"><sup><small>14:2:2:5454.</small></sup></span>  But if it were made of wood, it would be <span id="p493">[<sup><small>p. 493</small></sup>]</span> burnt; and if of gold, it would dissolve; and if of copper, it would melt; and if of stone, it would burn the two handling-sticks; and that (Gharma) itself submitted to that (earthen vessel): therefore it is by means of an earthen one that he offers it.

<span id="v14_2_2_5555"><sup><small>14:2:2:5555.</small></sup></span>  And, verily, whosoever either, teaches, or partakes of, this (Pravargya) enters that life, and that light: the observance thereof is the same as at the creation [^1291].



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_14_1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XIV, 1. First Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_14_3">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XIV, 3. Third Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^1256]: 472:2 According to the Sûtras and the Taitt. Âr., the southern cake p. 473 is offered at this juncture of the performance, whilst the northern one is offered later on (see [XIV, 2, 2, 41](Book_5_14_2#v14_2_2_41)). For both cakes one and the same text is used, viz. the first of the two here mentioned at the morning performance, whilst the second is used at the afternoon performance. The cakes, being one-kapâla ones (the two ‘rauhi<i>n</i>ahavanî’ ladles serving as kapâlas), must be offered entire. Cf. Kâty. XXVI, 4, 14; 6, 18; Âpast. XV, 10, 1; 11, 5; 12, 7; Taitt. Âr. IV, 10, 4. Though our Brâhma<i>n</i>a expresses itself in a rather peculiar way, its statement, here and at [XIV, 2, 2, 41](Book_5_14_2#v14_2_2_41), is perhaps meant to imply the same mode of procedure. If this is the case, the two paragraphs would mean,—at this juncture of the two performances he offers the two southern (northern, at [XIV, 2, 2, 41](Book_5_14_2#v14_2_2_41)) cakes,—the two cakes (the southern and the northern one) of the morning performance requiring the first, and those of the afternoon performance the second, text. It is not impossible, however, that the author intends a different mode of procedure or wishes to leave it purposely vague. If we were to read ‘rauhi<i>n</i>am’ for ‘rauhi<i>n</i>au,’ the text would be more in accordance with the practice prescribed in the Sûtras. Cf. also Mahîdh. (on Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXVII, 21)—where read ‘rauhi<i>n</i>au’ instead of ‘pravargyau’—who adopts the procedure here explained.

[^1257]: 474:1 The edition omits ‘adityai,’ and reads ‘devebhyas’ for ‘devasya.’

[^1258]: 474:2 See I, 2, 4, 4; 3, 1, 15.

[^1259]: 474:3 As, for instance, Dhavalî, or Gaṅgâ.

[^1260]: 474:4 Or nourishes, makes grow, inasmuch as it brings about rain (Mahîdhara).

[^1261]: 475:1 Whilst the calf is sucking, he secures the cow by tying together her hind legs.

[^1262]: 476:1 Or, one of the teats (stanam); according to Mahîdhara, the part is used for the whole; and the Kâ<i>n</i>va recension indeed reads ‘stanân’ (the teats); cf. Kâty, XXVI, 5, 7, comm.

[^1263]: 476:2 The author apparently derives ‘<i>s</i>a<i>s</i>aya’ (? perennial, inexhaustible) from ‘<i>s</i>î,’ to lie, sleep, as does Mahîdhara.

[^1264]: 476:3 Viz. as at I, 1, 2, 4.—According to Kâty. XXVI, 5, 10 seq., the Hot<i>ri</i> says, ‘Arise, Brahma<i>n</i>aspati!’ whereupon the Adhvaryu rises; and the Hot<i>ri</i> again calling, ‘Hasten up with the milk!’ he steps up to the Gârhapatya.

[^1265]: 476:4 See [p. 458](Book_5_14_1#p458), note [1](Book_5_14_1#fn1211).

[^1266]: 477:1 The ‘upayamanî’ is apparently a kind of bowl, or hollow tray of hard (udumbara) wood, somewhat larger than the (bowls of the) spoons or ladles used on this occasion, and, indeed, also itself used as such.

[^1267]: 477:2 Whilst the Adhvaryu was milking the cow into the earthen bowl (pinvana), his assistant, the Pratiprasthât<i>ri</i>, silently milked a goat tied to the peg.

[^1268]: 478:1 According to Taitt. Âr. IV, 8, 4; Âpast. XV, 10, 2, this formula is addressed to the steam rising from the Mahâvîra pot—it being accordingly modified to 'I offer thee to Sûrya's ray, the rain-winner.’

[^1269]: 478:2 [XIV, 1, 3, 26](Book_5_14_1#v14_1_3_26).

[^1270]: 478:3 See [p. 458](Book_5_14_1#p458), note [1](Book_5_14_1#fn1211).

[^1272]: 480:1 See III, 4, 5, 1, where it is stated that the morning-pressing belongs to the Vasus, the midday-pressing to the Rudras, and the third pressing to the Âdityas.

[^1273]: 480:2 Or, for the best (or eldest brother). Cf. III, 9, 4, 9.

[^1274]: 481:1 See [p. 465](Book_5_14_1#p465), note [2](Book_5_14_1#fn1233).

[^1275]: 481:2 See [XIV, 1, 3, 26](Book_5_14_1#v14_1_3_26).

[^1276]: 482:1 Viz. past the Âhavanîya, along its back (or western) side, to the south side of the fire.

[^1277]: 482:2 See part i, p. 132, note; III, 4, 4, 11 seqq.

[^1278]: 483:1 The exact meaning of ‘hârdvânam’ is doubtful. Mahîdhara analyses it by ‘hârd’ = ‘h<i>ri</i>d’, + ‘vâna,’ blowing, going, hence ‘heart-wafting, going to the heart = dear to the heart.’ The St. Petersb. Dict. takes the word to be ‘hârd-van,’ in the sense of ‘herzstärkend’ (heart-sustaining, invigorating—? literally, ‘possessed of heartiness’). The Taitt. Âr. has ‘hârdivânam’ instead. The author of the Brâhma<i>n</i>a apparently considers the term as obscure, and uses this circumstance for his own symbolic purposes.

[^1279]: 483:2 Perhaps the author means to characterise also the epithet p. 484 ‘ahar-diva’ (lit. ‘day-daily,’ cf. Germ. tagtäglich; Aberdonian ‘daily-day’) as obscure. Mahîdhara takes it to mean ‘relating to morning and evening,’ as applying to the two performances of the Pravargya,

[^1280]: 484:1 They approved of it by saying ‘Well done’; Mahîdh.

[^1281]: 484:2 That is, as would seem, he speaks the anumantra<i>n</i>a in order to consecrate whatever milk might have been spilled in bubbling over. Possibly, however, he is to do so at the time when the pot bubbles over (though the ‘atha’ would rather be out of place in that case). The Taittirîyas differ somewhat on this point of the performance. p. 485 After the Gharma-milk has been offered, the Pratiprasthât<i>ri</i> fills the Mahâvîra pot, whilst it is held over the fire, with boiled sour curds and whey (dadhi), whilst muttering the text, ‘The A<i>s</i>vins drank the Gharma . . .,’ and with the texts; ‘For freshness swell thou,’ &c.

[^1282]: 485:1 The author apparently takes ‘ameni’ in the sense of ‘amanyu.’ p. 486 The St. Petersb. Dict. assigns to it the meaning ‘not shooting, incapable of shooting.’

[^1283]: 486:1 For these pieces of wood, or large chips, of Vikaṅkata wood (Flacourtia sapida) which were laid round the pot, see [XIV, 1, 3, 26](Book_5_14_1#v14_1_3_26). They are dipped into the remains of the hot milk and ghee, the liquid adhering to them being then offered.

[^1284]: 486:2 That is, that one of the three fresh sticks enclosing the fire which is laid down first, along the back, or west side, and forms the base of a triangle the apex of which points eastwards. Cf. I, 3, 4, 1 seqq.

[^1285]: 486:3 This meaning is, by the St. Petersb. Dict., assigned to ‘prati-rava’ p. 487 (otherwise ‘echo’), the proper term for the sounding-holes being ‘upa-rava,’ cf. III, 5, 4, 1, where they are likened to the eyes and ears, as channels of the vital airs.

[^1286]: 487:1 If this rendering (St. Petersb. Dict.) of ûrdhvabarhis' is correct—the term being apparently based on the Fathers’ epithet ‘barhishada<i>h</i>,’ ‘seated on the barhis’ (sacrificial grass-covering of the altar-ground)—the force of ‘ûrdhva’ in the compound is very peculiar. Mahîdhara takes it in the sense of ‘having their barhis pointed upwards,’ i.e. towards the east (!), the peculiar feature of the barhis in the present case—as far as the participation of the Fathers in the drinking of the Gharma is concerned—being its having the tops of the grass-stalks turned to the east instead of to the south, as is the case in all ceremonies relating to the Fathers. The term ‘ûrdhvabarhis’ might possibly mean ‘having their (special) barhis above,’ i.e. in the world of the Fathers, where they would be supposed to partake of the libations of hot milk; whilst yet another (suggested by the next paragraph) would be that of ‘having the barhis above them;’ which would, however, be more appropriate if the secreting of the stick under the barhis applied to the present, instead of the next one.

[^1287]: 487:2 The comm. on Kâty. XXVI, 6, 14 calls this part of the barhis ‘âtithyâbarhis’ (?).

[^1288]: 487:3 And accordingly, without looking at it.

[^1289]: 488:1 Or, ‘having his praises sung by the chanters,’ as Mahîdhara takes ‘rudrahûti.’

[^1290]: 489:1 Viz. [XIV, 2, 1, 1](Book_5_14_2#v14_2_1_1).

[^1291]: 489:2 Viz. at the hands of the officiating priests, by saying to each, Invite me, N.N. whereupon each of them replies, "Thou art invited.' Cf. XII, 8, 3, 30. According to Âpast. <i>S</i>r. XV, 11, 12, the priests and the Sacrificer partake of the residue in the order—Hot<i>ri</i>, Adhvaryu, Brahman, Pratiprasthât<i>ri</i>, Agnîdh, and Sacrificer; or, optionally (ib. 14), only the Sacrificer drinks of it, whilst the priests merely smell it. Cf. the eating of the whey (of clotted curds), II, 4, 4, 25, to which the present eating of the remains is stated, by Kâty. XXVI, 6, 20, to be analogous; whilst the offering is said to be on the model of the Agnihotra.

[^1292]: 489:3 The usual place to do so is over the pit (<i>k</i>âtrâla), cf. III, 8, 2, 30; XII, 8, 1, 22; whilst the utensils are cleaned in the Mâr<i>g</i>âlîya. On the present occasion a mound of sand (or covered with sand)—the so-called ‘u<i>k</i><i>kh</i>ish<i>t</i>a-khara’ (mound of remains)—is raised in the south part of the <i>s</i>âlâ, close to the mat or hurdle forming its wall, just east of the southern door. According to Kâty. XXVI, 6, 21 seqq., Âpast. XV, 12, 1 seqq., the Mahâvîra and the remaining p. 490 apparatus are then in solemn fashion (carried round in front of the Âhavanîya, and) placed on the throne-seat, and consecrated (or appeased) by being sprinkled with water.

[^1293]: 490:1 That is, at a sacrifice for which this constitutes the sacrificial fee.

[^1294]: 491:1 See [p. 139](Book_5_12_1#p139), note [1](Book_5_12_1#fn425); and [XII, 3, 3, 6](Book_5_12_3#v12_3_3_6).

[^1295]: 491:2 For the ‘payasyâ’ see part i, p. 178, note 4; p. 381, note 2.

[^1296]: 491:3 That is, the cart or carts on which the offering-material (including the Soma-plants) is contained, as also the shed in which they are placed.

[^1297]: 491:4 See III, 2, 3, 20; 4, 1, 1.

[^1298]: 492:1 See part i, p. 9, note.

[^1299]: 492:2 See [p. 469](Book_5_14_1#p469), note [1](Book_5_14_1#fn1243).

[^1300]: 493:1 See [p. 458](Book_5_14_1#p458), note [1](Book_5_14_1#fn1211).