---
title: "Book V — XII, 1. First Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_8">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XI, 8. Eighth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_12_2">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XII, 2. Second Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


<span id="p135">[<sup><small>p. 135</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v12_1_1"><sup><small>12:1:1</small></sup></span>

TWELFTH KÂ<i>N</i><i>D</i>A.

### THE SACRIFICIAL SESSION (SATTRA).

## FIRST ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v12_1_1_11"><sup><small>12:1:1:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this sacrifice is the same as this blowing (wind): it is that [^415] they wish to secure who take the vow of initiation for a year. Of them the G<i>ri</i>hapati is initiated first [^416]; for the G<i>ri</i>hapati is this (terrestrial) world, and upon this world everything here is established; and so, indeed, are his fellow-sacrificers established in the G<i>ri</i>hapati: it is thus after they have become established on a firm foundation that they are initiated.

<span id="v12_1_1_22"><sup><small>12:1:1:22.</small></sup></span>  He (the Adhvaryu) then initiates the Brahman (priest). Now the Brahman is the moon, and the moon is Soma, and plants belong to Soma [^417]: he thus connects the plants with this (terrestrial) world. Therefore no other person should be initiated between those two; for, assuredly, were any one else to be initiated between those two, he would separate (tear up) the plants from this (terrestrial) world, and they would be liable to dry up: let therefore no other person be initiated between those two.

<span id="v12_1_1_33"><sup><small>12:1:1:33.</small></sup></span>  He then initiates the Udgât<i>ri</i>. Now, the Udgât<i>ri</i> is the thunder-cloud, and from the thundercloud rain is produced: he thus connects the rain <span id="p136">[<sup><small>p. 136</small></sup>]</span> with the plants. Therefore no other person should be initiated between those two; for, assuredly, were any one else to be initiated between those two, he would separate the rain from the plants, and (the cloud) would be liable to lack rain: let therefore no other person be initiated between those two.

<span id="v12_1_1_44"><sup><small>12:1:1:44.</small></sup></span>  He then initiates the Ho tri. Now, the Hot<i>ri</i> [^418] is Agni in respect of the deity, and speech in respect of the body; and rain is food: he thus connects both Agni (fire) and speech with food. Therefore no other person should be initiated between those two; for, assuredly, were any one else to be initiated between those two, he would separate fire and speech from food, and (people) would be liable to starve: let therefore no other person be initiated between those two.

<span id="v12_1_1_55"><sup><small>12:1:1:55.</small></sup></span>  The Pratiprasthât<i>ri</i> then initiates the Adhvaryu. Now, the Adhvaryu is the mind [^419], and the Hot<i>ri</i> is speech: he thus connects mind and speech with one another. Therefore no other person should be initiated between those two; for, assuredly, were any one else to be initiated between those two, he would separate mind and speech, and (people) would be liable to perish: let therefore no other person be initiated between those two.

<span id="v12_1_1_66"><sup><small>12:1:1:66.</small></sup></span>  He then initiates the Brâhma<i>n</i>â_kh<i>a</i>m_sin for the Brahman, for under him the former is. He then initiates the Prastot<i>ri</i> for the Udgât<i>ri</i>, for under <span id="p137">[<sup><small>p. 137</small></sup>]</span> him the former is. He then initiates the Maitrâvaru<i>n</i>a for the Hot<i>ri</i>, for under him the former is. These four the Pratiprasthât<i>ri</i> initiates.

<span id="v12_1_1_77"><sup><small>12:1:1:77.</small></sup></span>  The Nesh<i>t</i><i>ri</i> then initiates the Pratiprasthât<i>ri</i> for the Adhvaryu, for under him the former is. It is after the fitting out [^420] of these nine that the others are fitted out; for there are nine vital airs: he thus lays the vital airs into them; and so they attain the full term of life, and so they do not depart this world before their (full) term of life.

<span id="v12_1_1_88"><sup><small>12:1:1:88.</small></sup></span>  He then initiates the Pot<i>ri</i> for the Brahman, for under him the former is. He then initiates the Pratihart<i>ri</i> for the Udgât<i>ri</i>, for under him the former is. He then initiates the A<i>kh</i>âvâka for the Hot<i>ri</i>, for under him the former is. These four the Nesh<i>t</i><i>ri</i> initiates.

<span id="v12_1_1_99"><sup><small>12:1:1:99.</small></sup></span>  The Unnet<i>ri</i> then initiates the Nesh<i>t</i><i>ri</i> for the Adhvaryu, for under him the former is. He then initiates the Âgnîdhra for the Brahman, for under him the former is. He then initiates the Subrahma<i>n</i>yâ for the Udgât<i>ri</i>, for under him the former is. He then initiates the Grâvastut for the Hot<i>ri</i>, for under him the former is. These four the Unnet<i>ri</i> initiates.

<span id="v12_1_1_1010"><sup><small>12:1:1:1010.</small></sup></span>  Either a Snâtaka [^421], or a Brahma<i>k</i>ârin, or some one else who is not initiated, then initiates the Unnet<i>ri</i>; for they say, ‘No pure one should purify.’ This is the regular order of initiation [^422]; <span id="p138">[<sup><small>p. 138</small></sup>]</span> and; assuredly, only when, knowing this [^423], they become initiated, they make ready the sacrifice even whilst being initiated, and along with the getting ready of the sacrifice security of property accrues to the performers of the sacrificial session (Sattra); and, along with the accruing of security of property to the performers of the session, security of property also accrues to that district in which they perform the sacrifice.

<span id="v12_1_1_1111"><sup><small>12:1:1:1111.</small></sup></span>  Now, the Unnet<i>ri</i> is initiated last of these, and when they come out from the purificatory bath it is he that comes out first; for the Unnet<i>ri</i> is the vital air: he thus lays vital air into them on both sides; and so they attain the full term of life, and so they do not depart this world before their (full) term of life. This is the regular order of initiation: and, assuredly, he should become initiated only where such as know this become initiated.


<span id="v12_1_2"><sup><small>12:1:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v12_1_2_11"><sup><small>12:1:2:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, from out of faith the gods fashioned the initiation, from out of Aditi the opening (sacrifice [^424]), from out of Soma the buying (of Soma-plants), from out of Vish<i>n</i>u the guest-offering, from out of the sun the Pravargya, from out of the Svadhâ (the food of departed ancestors) the Upasads, <span id="p139">[<sup><small>p. 139</small></sup>]</span> from out of Agni and Soma the day of fasting, and from out of this world the opening Atirâtra [^425].

<span id="v12_1_2_22"><sup><small>12:1:2:22.</small></sup></span>  From out of the year (they fashioned) the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day, from out of the priesthood the Abhiplava (sha<i>d</i>aha), from out of the nobility the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya (sha<i>d</i>aha) [^426], from out of Agni the Abhi<i>g</i>it, from out of the waters the Svarasâman days, from out of the sun the Vishuvat,—the Svarasâman days have been told;—from out of Indra the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it,—the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and Abhiplava have been told;—from out of Mitra and Varu<i>n</i>a the Go and <span id="p140">[<sup><small>p. 140</small></sup>]</span> Âyus [^427], from out of the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i> the Da<i>s</i>arâtra [^428], from out of the regions the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha of the Da<i>s</i>arâtra, from out of these worlds the <i>Kh</i>andoma days.

<span id="v12_1_2_33"><sup><small>12:1:2:33.</small></sup></span>  From out of the year (they fashioned) the tenth day, from out of Pra<i>g</i>âpati the Mahâvrata, and from out of the world of heaven the Udayanîya Atirâtra:—such was the birth of the Year; and, verily, whosoever thus knows that birth of the Year becomes more (and more) glorious to (the end of) it, he becomes possessed of a (new) body, he becomes the Year, and, as the Year [^429], he goes to the gods.


## Footnotes

[^424]: 138:2 For the Prâya<i>n</i>îyesh<i>t</i>i of the ordinary Soma-sacrifice, see part ii, p. 47 seqq. For the subsequent ceremonies, cf. the table of contents of the same part. They are here alluded to for the reason that they are essential parts of every day's performance during the year's session.

[^425]: 139:1 The Prâya<i>n</i>îya Atirâtra is the first day of the sacrificial session called Gavâm ayanam, the performance of which lasts a year, and includes the following sacrificial periods and days (cf. part ii, p, 427):—

Prâya<i>n</i>îya Atirâtra, or opening day.

<i>K</i>aturvim<i>s</i>a day, an Ukthya, all the stotras of which are in the <i>k</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a-stoma.

5 months, each consisting of 4 Abhiplava sha<i>d</i>ahas, and 1 P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya. sha<i>d</i>aha (=30 days).

3 Abhiplavas and 1 P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya.

Abhi<i>g</i>it day (performed with all the stomas).
3 Svarasâman days.

28 days which, with the two opening days, complete the sixth month.

VISHUVAT, or Divâkîrtya day (Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a-stoma).

3 Svarasâman days.
Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it day (performed with all the p<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as),
1 P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and 3 Abhiplavas.

28 days which, with the two concluding days, complete the seventh month.

4 months, each consisting of 1 P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya sha<i>d</i>aha and four Abhiplava sha<i>d</i>ahas.

3 Abhiplava sha<i>d</i>ahas (18 days).
1 Gosh<i>t</i>oma (Agnish<i>t</i>oma).
1 Âyush<i>t</i>oma (Ukthya).
1 Da<i>s</i>arâtra (10 days).

30 days (twelfth month).

Mahâvrata day (Agnish<i>t</i>oma).

Udayanîya Atirâtra, or concluding day.

[^426]: 139:2 For the difference between these two sacrificial periods of six days, see part iii, introd., p. xxi, note 2.

[^427]: 140:1 For the differences between the three modes of chanting the Stotras of the Agnish<i>t</i>oma and Ukthya Soma-sacrifices—viz. <i>G</i>yotish<i>t</i>oma, Gosh<i>t</i>oma, Âyush<i>t</i>oma—see part iv, p. 287, note 2.

[^428]: 140:2 The Da<i>s</i>arâtra, or central ten days of the Dvâda<i>s</i>âha (twelve days’ period), consists of a P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya sha<i>d</i>aha, three <i>Kh</i>andoma days (of the Ukthya order), and a final (tenth) Atyagnish<i>t</i>oma day called Avivâkya.

[^429]: 140:3 For the Sacrificer as father Time, see part iv, introd., p. xxii.










<span id="v12_1_3"><sup><small>12:1:3</small></sup></span>

## THIRD BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v12_1_3_11"><sup><small>12:1:3:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, when they are initiated they indeed offer sacrifice to the deities Agni and Vish<i>n</i>u: they become the deities Agni and Vish<i>n</i>u, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Agni and Vish<i>n</i>u.

<span id="v12_1_3_22"><sup><small>12:1:3:22.</small></sup></span>  And when they perform the opening sacrifice they indeed offer sacrifice to the deity Aditi: they become the deity Aditi, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Aditi.

<span id="v12_1_3_33"><sup><small>12:1:3:33.</small></sup></span>  And when they proceed with the buying (of Soma-plants) they indeed offer sacrifice to the deity Soma: they become the deity Soma, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Soma. <span id="p141">[<sup><small>p. 141</small></sup>]</span> 12:1:3:44\. And when they perform the guest-offering they indeed offer sacrifice to the deity Vish<i>n</i>u: they become the deity Vish<i>n</i>u, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Vish<i>n</i>u.

<span id="v12_1_3_55"><sup><small>12:1:3:55.</small></sup></span>  And when they perform the Pravargya-offering [^430] they indeed offer sacrifice to the deity Âditya: they become the deity Âditya, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Âditya (the sun).

<span id="v12_1_3_66"><sup><small>12:1:3:66.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the Upasads they indeed offer sacrifice to those very deities [^431] who (receive oblations) at the Upasads: they become those deities, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with those deities.

<span id="v12_1_3_77"><sup><small>12:1:3:77.</small></sup></span>  And when they perform the animal sacrifice to Agni and Soma [^432] they indeed offer sacrifice to the deities Agni and Soma: they become the deities Agni and Soma, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Agni and Soma.

<span id="v12_1_3_88"><sup><small>12:1:3:88.</small></sup></span>  And when they perform the opening Atirâtra (of the sacrificial session) they indeed offer sacrifice to those deities, the Day and Night [^433]: they become those deities, the Day and Night, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with the Day and Night.

<span id="v12_1_3_99"><sup><small>12:1:3:99.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day they indeed offer sacrifice to that deity, the Year [^434]: they become that deity, the Year, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with the Year. <span id="p142">[<sup><small>p. 142</small></sup>]</span> 12:1:3:1010\. And when they enter upon the Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>aha they indeed offer sacrifice to those deities, the Half-months and Months: they become those deities, the Half-months and Months, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with the Half-months and Months.

<span id="v12_1_3_1111"><sup><small>12:1:3:1111.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha they indeed offer sacrifice to those deities, the Seasons: they become those deities, the Seasons, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with the Seasons.

<span id="v12_1_3_1212"><sup><small>12:1:3:1212.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the Abhi<i>g</i>it (day) they indeed offer sacrifice to the deity Agni: they become the deity Agni, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Agni.

<span id="v12_1_3_1313"><sup><small>12:1:3:1313.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the Svarasâman (days) they indeed offer sacrifice to that deity, the Waters: they become that deity, the Waters, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with the Waters.

<span id="v12_1_3_1414"><sup><small>12:1:3:1414.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the Vishuvat (day) they indeed offer sacrifice to the deity Âditya they become the deity Âditya, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Âditya. The Svarasâmans have been told.

<span id="v12_1_3_1515"><sup><small>12:1:3:1515.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it (day) they indeed offer sacrifice to the deity Indra: they become the deity Indra, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Indra. The P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and Abhiplava (sha<i>d</i>ahas) have been told.

<span id="v12_1_3_1616"><sup><small>12:1:3:1616.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon (the performance of) the Go and Âyus (stoma) [^435] they indeed offer sacrifice to the deities Mitra and Varu<i>n</i>a: they <span id="p143">[<sup><small>p. 143</small></sup>]</span> become the deities Mitra and Varu<i>n</i>a, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Mitra and Varu<i>n</i>a.

<span id="v12_1_3_1717"><sup><small>12:1:3:1717.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the Da<i>s</i>arâtra they indeed offer sacrifice to that deity the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>: they become that deity, the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>.

<span id="v12_1_3_1818"><sup><small>12:1:3:1818.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha of the Da<i>s</i>arâtra they indeed offer sacrifice to those deities, the Regions: they become those deities, the Regions, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with the Regions.

<span id="v12_1_3_1919"><sup><small>12:1:3:1919.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the <i>Kh</i>andomas they indeed offer sacrifice to those deities, these Worlds: they become those deities, these Worlds, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with these Worlds.

<span id="v12_1_3_2020"><sup><small>12:1:3:2020.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the tenth day (of the Da<i>s</i>arâtra) they indeed offer sacrifice to that deity, the Year: they become that deity, the Year, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with the Year.

<span id="v12_1_3_2121"><sup><small>12:1:3:2121.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the Mahâvrata they indeed offer sacrifice to the deity Pra<i>g</i>âpati: they become the deity Pra<i>g</i>âpati, and attain to fellowship and co-existence with Pra<i>g</i>âpati.

<span id="v12_1_3_2222"><sup><small>12:1:3:2222.</small></sup></span>  And when they enter upon the concluding Atirâtra (of the sacrificial session), then, indeed, having gained the Year, they establish themselves in the world of heaven. And were any one to ask them, ‘To what deity are ye offering sacrifice this day? what deity are ye? with what deity do ye dwell?’ let them name of those (deities) the one to whom they may be nearest (in the performance of the Sattra). And, <span id="p144">[<sup><small>p. 144</small></sup>]</span> verily, such (sacrificers) are seated (sad) in the good [^436] (place), for they are for ever seated among the good deities; and the others are mere partakers in the sacrificial session [^437]; and if any one were, during a sacrificial session, to speak evil of such initiates as know this, let them say to him, ‘We cut thee off from those deities;’ and he becomes the worse, and they themselves become the better for it.

<span id="v12_1_3_2323"><sup><small>12:1:3:2323.</small></sup></span>  That same year contains three great rites (mahâvrata):—the great rite on the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day, the great rite on the Vishuvat day, and the great rite [^438] on the Mahâvrata day itself. Now, those of old used, indeed, to enter upon (perform) that (year's session) with three great rites, and they became glorious, truth-speaking, and faithful to their vow; but if nowadays any (sattrins) were to perform it on this wise, they assuredly would crumble away even as a jar of unbaked clay would crumble away if water were poured into it. They (who do so) perform too much: that (object) of theirs is gained by truth, by toil, by fervid devotion, by faith, by sacrifice, and by oblations.


<span id="v12_1_4"><sup><small>12:1:4</small></sup></span>

## FOURTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v12_1_4_11"><sup><small>12:1:4:11.</small></sup></span>  The Year, indeed, is Man;—the opening (prâya<i>n</i>îya) Atirâtra is his feet, for by means of their <span id="p145">[<sup><small>p. 145</small></sup>]</span> feet (men) go forward (prayanti): that part of them which is white is of the form of the day, and that which is black is (of the form) of the night; the nails are of the form of herbs and trees. The <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day is the thighs, the Abhiplava the breast, and the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya the back.

<span id="v12_1_4_22"><sup><small>12:1:4:22.</small></sup></span>  The Abhi<i>g</i>it is this right arm, the Svarasâman days these three (openings of the) vital airs on the right side [^439] the Vishuvat the head, and the (second period of) Svarasâman days these three vital airs on the left side.

<span id="v12_1_4_33"><sup><small>12:1:4:33.</small></sup></span>  The Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it is this left arm,—the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and Abhiplava have been told,—the Go and Âyus those downward vital airs; the Da<i>s</i>arâtra the limbs, the Mahâvrata the mouth; and the concluding (udayanîya) Atirâtra is the hands, for by means of the hands (men) move (reach) upwards (udyanti) that part of them which is white is of the form of the day, and that which is black is of that of the night; and the nails are of the form of the stars. Thus that year is established in respect of the body; and, verily, whosoever thus knows that year to be established in respect of the body, establishes himself by means of offspring and cattle in this, and by immortality in the other, world.



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_11_8">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XI, 8. Eighth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_12_2">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XII, 2. Second Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^415]: 135:1 Viz. the wind as the vital air pervading man; see [paragraph 11](Book_5_12_1#v12_1_1_11).

[^416]: 135:2 He, as well as the first three priests, is initiated by the Adhvaryu.

[^417]: 135:3 Soma is the king of plants, whence these are called ‘soma-râ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>î,’ II, 3, 4; 4; V, 4, 2, 3; <i>Ri</i>g-veda S. X, 97, 8.

[^418]: 136:1 Viz. as the offering-priest κατ᾽ ἐξοχήν, he who, by the recitation of his ‘invitatory’ and ‘offering’ verses, like Agni, draws the gods to the offering, and causes them to graciously accept it.

[^419]: 136:2 The Adhvaryu is the head of the sacrifice (IV, 1, 5, 16); and, as the mind, he marches in front. See also III, 2, 4, 11. ‘Mind goes before Speech (prompting her), “Speak thus! say not this!”’

[^420]: 137:1 Or, after getting them ready, or prepared (k<i>li</i>pti).

[^421]: 137:2 That is, one who has completed his course of theological study (brahma<i>k</i>arya), and has taken the bath (snâta) marking the end of that course, and his return to the bosom of his family. See above, pp. [48](Book_5_11_3#p48)\-[50](Book_5_11_3#p50) (esp. [XI, 3, 3, 7](Book_5_11_3#v11_3_3_7)).

[^422]: 137:3 Literally, the initiation in the regular succession.

[^423]: 138:1 That is to say, when they become initiated in accordance with this knowledge.

[^430]: 141:1 See [XIV, 1](Book_5_14_1#v14_1_1)\-[3](Book_5_14_3#v14_3_1); and part ii, p. 104, note 3.

[^431]: 141:2 Viz. Agni, Soma, and Vish<i>n</i>u; cf. part ii, p. 305, note 1.

[^432]: 141:3 See part ii, p. 162 seqq.

[^433]: 141:4 Viz. inasmuch as the Atirâtra includes both a day and a night performance.

[^434]: 141:5 Viz. both because this is the real opening day of the year's session, and because Pra<i>g</i>âpati (as the Purusha and the Year) is ‘<i>k</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a’ or ‘twenty-four-fold’ (e<i>g</i>. VI, 2, 1, 23).

[^435]: 142:1 See [p. 140](Book_5_12_1#p140), note [1](Book_5_12_1#fn427).

[^436]: 144:1 Or, in the true, abiding (place)—sati.

[^437]: 144:2 That is, those who perform a sacrificial session (sattra) without their possessing the esoteric knowledge regarding the several ceremonies, set forth in the preceding paragraphs, are mere ‘sattrasada<i>h</i>’ (i.e. ‘merely sitting through the sacrificial session’) whilst those possessing that knowledge are ‘sari sada<i>h</i>.’

[^438]: 144:3 That is, more especially, the chanting of the Mahâvrata-sâman, for which see part iv, p. 282, note 5.

[^439]: 145:1 Viz. the right eye, ear, and nostril.