---
title: "Book V — XIII, 5. Fifth Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_4">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XIII, 4. Fourth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_6">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XIII, 6. Sixth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="v13_5_1"><sup><small>13:5:1</small></sup></span>

## FIFTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### THE STOTRAS AND <i>S</i>ASTRAS OF THE SOMA-DAYS.

<span id="v13_5_1_11"><sup><small>13:5:1:11.</small></sup></span>  Then, on the morrow, there is (used) Gotama's Stoma (form of chanting) successively increasing by four (verses) [^976]: the Bahishpavamâna thereof is on four, the Â<i>g</i>ya (stotras) on eight, the Mâdhyandina Pavamâna on twelve, the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a (stotras) on <span id="p376"><sup><small>[ p. 376 ]</small></sup></span> sixteen, the Ârbhava Pavamâna on twenty, and the Agnish<i>t</i>oma-sâman on twenty-four (verses).

<span id="v13_5_1_22"><sup><small>13:5:1:22.</small></sup></span>  Now, some make its Agnish<i>t</i>oma-sâman a Sâman of four (verses), saying, ‘It is neither an Agnish<i>t</i>oma, nor an Ukthya [^977].’ If they do so, let hire (the Hot<i>ri</i>), <span id="p377"><sup><small>[ p. 377 ]</small></sup></span> after reciting the Stotriya [^978] (strophe) together, recite the Anurûpa (strophe) together: the Rathantara P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-sâman [^979], the <i>S</i>astra containing the Rathantara (text), and the Agnish<i>t</i>oma sacrifice—thereby he makes sure of this world.

<span id="v13_5_1_33"><sup><small>13:5:1:33.</small></sup></span>  ‘There are twenty-one Savanîya [^980] victims, all of them sacred to Agni: for these there is one and the same performance,’ so say some; but, indeed, he should immolate two sets of eleven (victims), with the view of his obtainment of whatever desired object there may be in (victims) belonging to a set of eleven.

<span id="v13_5_1_44"><sup><small>13:5:1:44.</small></sup></span>  When the Agnish<i>t</i>oma is completed, and the Vasatîvarî water carried round, the Adhvaryu performs the Annahomas [^981] (oblations of food): the import of these has been explained. With twelve <span id="p378"><sup><small>[ p. 378 ]</small></sup></span> Anuvâkas (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXII, 23-34), ‘To the in-breathing hail! To the off-breathing hail!’ (he offers)—twelve months are a year, and the year is everything, and the A<i>s</i>vamedha is everything: thus it is for his obtaining and securing everything.

<span id="v13_5_1_55"><sup><small>13:5:1:55.</small></sup></span>  The central day is an ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day [^982]; for the twenty-one-fold is yonder sun, and he is the A<i>s</i>vamedha: by means of his own Stoma he thus establishes him in his own deity,—therefore it is an ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day.

<span id="v13_5_1_66"><sup><small>13:5:1:66.</small></sup></span>  And, again, as to why it is an ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day;—man is twenty-one-fold—ten fingers, ten toes, and the body (self) as the twenty-first: by means of that twenty-one-fold self he thus establishes him in the twenty-one-fold (day) as on a firm foundation,—therefore it is an ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day.

<span id="v13_5_1_77"><sup><small>13:5:1:77.</small></sup></span>  And, again, as to why it is an ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day;—the ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, assuredly, is the foundation of Stomas, and manifold is that ever-varying performance which takes place on this day,—and it is because he thinks that that manifold and ever-varying performance which takes place on this day, shall take place so as to be established on the ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a as a firm foundation, that this is an ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day.

<span id="v13_5_1_88"><sup><small>13:5:1:88.</small></sup></span>  Now, as to the morning-service of this day. The Hot<i>ri</i>, having recited as the Â<i>g</i>ya (hymn [^983]) in the Paṅkti (metre) ‘Agni I think on, who is good . . .,’ recites thereto the one of a one-day's <span id="p379"><sup><small>[ p. 379 ]</small></sup></span> Soma-sacrifice [^984]. And the Bârhata Praüga and the Mâdhu<i>kh</i>andasa one he recites both together [^985] in triplets—(this being done) for the obtainment of the objects of desire which (may be contained) both in the Bârhata and the Mâdhu<i>kh</i>andasa Praüga. The morning-service is (thus) set right.

<span id="v13_5_1_99"><sup><small>13:5:1:99.</small></sup></span>  Then as to the midday-service. For the obtainment of the A<i>s</i>vamedha, the ati<i>kh</i>andas (verse, II, 22, 1), ‘In the three troughs the buffalo drank the barley-draught,’ is the opening verse of the Marutvatîya (<i>s</i>astra); for outstanding, indeed, is this ati<i>kh</i>andas (hypercatalectic verse) amongst metres, and outstanding is the A<i>s</i>vamedha amongst sacrifices. This (verse), being recited thrice, amounts to a triplet, and thereby he obtains the object of desire which (may be contained) in the triplet. ‘Here, O good one, is the pressed plant’ (<i>Ri</i>g-veda VIII, 2, 1-3) is the ‘anu<i>k</i>ara’ (sequent triplet): this same (triplet) is the constant <span id="p380"><sup><small>[ p. 380 ]</small></sup></span> connecting link of the one-day's sacrifice [^986]. Having recited both the paṅkti (verses, I, 80, 1-16) ‘Here in the Soma-draught alone (the Brahman gave thee strength),’ and the six-footed ones (VIII, 36, 1-7) ‘The patron thou art of the offerer of Soma,’ he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn) of the one-day's sacrifice. Thus as to the Marutvatîya (-<i>s</i>astra).

<span id="v13_5_1_1010"><sup><small>13:5:1:1010.</small></sup></span>  Then as to the Nishkevalya (-<i>s</i>astra [^987]). The Mahânâmnî (verses) are the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a (-stotra); and he recites them along with the anurûpa (verses) and pragâtha (-strophes), for the obtainment of all the objects of his desire, for in the Mahânâmnîs, as well as in the A<i>s</i>vamedha, are contained all objects of desire. Having recited the paṅkti verses (I, 81, 1-9) ‘Indra hath grown in ebriety and strength,’ and the six-footed ones (VIII, 37, 1-7) ‘This sacred work didst thou protect in <span id="p381"><sup><small>[ p. 381 ]</small></sup></span> fights with V<i>ri</i>tra,’ he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn) of the one-day's sacrifice [^988]. The midday-service is (thus) set right.

<span id="v13_5_1_1111"><sup><small>13:5:1:1111.</small></sup></span>  Then as to the evening-service. The atî<i>kh</i>andas verse (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. IV, 25), ‘Unto that god Savit<i>ri</i> within the two bowls (do I sing praises [^989]),’ is the opening verse [^990] of the Vai<i>s</i>vadeva(-<i>s</i>astra [^991]): the mystic import thereof is the same as of the former (ati<i>kh</i>andas verse). The Anu<i>k</i>ara [^992] (<i>Ri</i>g-veda I, 24, 3-5), ‘Unto (abhi) thee, (the lord of treasures), O god Savit<i>ri</i>, (ever helpful we come for our share . . .),’ contains (the word) ‘abhi,’ as a form (sign) of victory (abhibhûti). Having recited the Sâvitra (triplet, VI, 71, 4-6), ‘Up rose this god Savit<i>ri</i>, the friend of the house . . .,’ he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn) of the one-day's sacrifice [^993]. Having recited the four verses to Heaven and Earth (IV, 56, 1-4), ‘The mighty Heaven and Earth, the most glorious, here . . .,’ he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn I, 159) of the one-day's sacrifice. Having recited the Ârbhava (hymn, IV, 34), ‘<i>Ri</i>bhu, Vibhvan, Indra, Vâ<i>g</i>a, come ye to this our sacrifice . . .,’ <span id="p382"><sup><small>[ p. 382 ]</small></sup></span> he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn, I, 111) of the one-day's sacrifice. Having recited the (hymn, V, 41) to the All-gods, ‘Who is there righteous unto you, Mitra and Varu<i>n</i>a? . . .,’ he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn, I, 89) of the one-day's sacrifice. Thus as to the Vai<i>s</i>vadeva (-<i>s</i>astra).

<span id="v13_5_1_1212"><sup><small>13:5:1:1212.</small></sup></span>  Then as to the Âgnimâruta [^994]. Having recited the (hymn, VI, 7) to (Agni) Vai<i>s</i>vânara, ‘The head of the sky, and the disposer of the earth . . .,’ he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn, III, 3) of the one-day's sacrifice. Having recited the (hymn, V, 57) to the Maruts, ‘Hither, O Rudras, come ye united with Indra . . .,’ he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn, I, 87) of the one-day's sacrifice. Having recited the nine verses (VI, 15, 1-9) to <i>G</i>âtavedas, ‘This guest of yours, the early-waking . . .,’ he inserts the Nivid in the (hymn, I, 143) of the one-day's sacrifice. And as to why the (hymns) of the one-day's sacrifice are used for inserting the Nivid, it is for the sake of his (the Sacrificer's) not being deprived of a firm foundation, for the <i>G</i>yotish<i>t</i>oma is a foundation.

<span id="v13_5_1_1313"><sup><small>13:5:1:1313.</small></sup></span>  For this (day) there are those sacrificial animals—‘A horse, a hornless he-goat, and a Gom<i>ri</i>ga [^995],’ fifteen ‘paryaṅgyas’: the mystic import of these has been explained. Then these wild ones—for spring he seizes (three) kapi<i>ñ</i><i>g</i>alas [^996], for summer sparrows, for the rainy season partridges: of these

<span id="p383"><sup><small>[ p. 383 ]</small></sup></span>

(wild animals) also (the mystic import) has been told [^997].

<span id="v13_5_1_1414"><sup><small>13:5:1:1414.</small></sup></span>  Then those (victims) for the twenty-one (stakes). He seizes twenty-one animals for each of the (eleven) deities of the Seasonal offerings [^998]; for as many as there are gods of the Seasonal offerings so many are all the gods; and all objects of desire are in the A<i>s</i>vamedha: ‘by gratifying all the deities I shall gain all my desires,’ so he thinks. But let him not proceed in this way.

<span id="v13_5_1_1515"><sup><small>13:5:1:1515.</small></sup></span>  Let him seize seventeen victims for the central stake [^999], in order that he may gain and secure every-thing, <span id="p384"><sup><small>[ p. 384 ]</small></sup></span> for the seventeenfold is Pra<i>g</i>âpati, and the seventeenfold (stoma) is everything, and the A<i>s</i>vamedha is everything;—and sixteen at each of the other (stakes) in order that he may gain and secure everything, for everything here consists of sixteen parts, and the A<i>s</i>vamedha is everything. Thirteen wild (beasts) he seizes for each intermediate space, in order that he may gain and secure everything, for the year consists of thirteen months, and the A<i>s</i>vamedha is everything.

<span id="v13_5_1_1616"><sup><small>13:5:1:1616.</small></sup></span>  Now, prior to the (chanting of the) Bahishpavamâna, they (the assistants of the Adhvaryu) bring up the horse, after cleansing it; and with it they glide along for the Pavamâna: the mystic import of this has been explained [^1000]. When the Bahishpavamâna has been chanted, they make the horse step on the place of chanting: if it sniffs, or turns away, let him know that his sacrifice is successful. Having led up that (horse), the Adhvaryu says, ‘Hot<i>ri</i>, sing praises!’ and the Hot<i>ri</i> sings its praises [^1001] with eleven (verses, <i>Ri</i>g-veda I, 163, 1-11)—

<span id="v13_5_1_1717"><sup><small>13:5:1:1717.</small></sup></span>  ‘When, first born, thou didst neigh . . .’—thrice (he praises) with the first, and thrice with the last (verse), these amount to fifteen,—fifteenfold is the thunderbolt, and the thunderbolt means vigour: with that thunderbolt, vigour, the Sacrificer thus from the very first repels evil: thus [^1002], indeed, it is to the Sacrificer that the thunderbolt is given in <span id="p385"><sup><small>[ p. 385 ]</small></sup></span> order to smite for him whoever is to be smitten.—\[<i>Ri</i>g-veda I, 163, 12. 13\], The swift racer hath gone forward to the slaying. . . .'—‘The racer hath gone forward to the highest place. . .’—

<span id="v13_5_1_1818"><sup><small>13:5:1:1818.</small></sup></span>  Having omitted these two (verses), he inserts the hymn (I, 162), ‘Never (shall forget us) Mitra, Varu<i>n</i>a, Aryaman, Âyu . . .,’ in the Adhrigu [^1003] (litany). Some, however, insert this verse (I, 162, 18), ‘Thirty-four (ribs) of the steed, akin to the gods, (doth the knife hit) . . .,’ before the (passage,—‘twenty-six are its) ribs,’ thinking lest they should place the holy syllable ‘om’ in the wrong place [^1004], or lest they should suggest the plural by a singular [^1005]. Let him not proceed thus, but let him insert the hymn as a whole.—‘The swift racer hath gone forward to the slaying . . .’—‘The racer hath gone forward to the highest place . . .’—


<span id="p386"><sup><small>[ p. 386 ]</small></sup></span>

<span id="v13_5_2"><sup><small>13:5:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v13_5_2_11"><sup><small>13:5:2:11.</small></sup></span>  Having uttered these two (verses), he pronounces what remains of the Adhrigu. ‘A cloth, an upper cloth, and gold,’ this is what they spread out for the horse [^1006]: thereon they ‘quiet’ (slaughter) it. When the victims have been ‘quieted,’ the (king's) wives come up with water for washing the feet,—four wives; and a young maiden as the fifth, and four hundred female attendants.

<span id="v13_5_2_22"><sup><small>13:5:2:22.</small></sup></span>  When the foot-water is ready, they cause the Mahishî to lie down near the horse, and cover her up with the upper cloth, with ‘In heaven ye envelop yourselves,’—for that indeed is heaven where they immolate the victim, . . ., ‘May the vigorous male, the layer of seed, lay seed!’ she says [^1007] for the completeness of union.

<span id="v13_5_2_33"><sup><small>13:5:2:33.</small></sup></span>  Whilst they are lying there, the Sacrificer addresses the horse (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 21), ‘Utsakhyâ ava guda<i>m</i> dhehi!’ No one replies to him, lest there should be some one to rival the Sacrificer.

<span id="v13_5_2_44"><sup><small>13:5:2:44.</small></sup></span>  The Adhvaryu then addresses the maiden, ‘Hey hey maiden, that little bird . . .’—The maiden replies to him, ‘Adhvaryu! that little bird . . .’

<span id="v13_5_2_55"><sup><small>13:5:2:55.</small></sup></span>  And the Brahman addresses the Mahishî, ‘Mahishî, hey hey Mahishî, thy mother and father mount to the top of the tree . . .’—She has a hundred daughters of kings attending upon her: these <span id="p387"><sup><small>[ p. 387 ]</small></sup></span> reply to the Brahman, ‘Brahman, hey hey Brahman, thy mother and father play on the top of the tree. . .’

<span id="v13_5_2_66"><sup><small>13:5:2:66.</small></sup></span>  And the Udgât<i>ri</i> addresses the favourite, ‘Vâvâtâ, hey hey Vâvâtâ, turn upwards!’ She has a hundred noble-women (râ<i>g</i>anyâ) attending upon her: these reply to the Udgât<i>ri</i>, ‘Hey hey Udgât<i>ri</i>, turn upwards!’

<span id="v13_5_2_77"><sup><small>13:5:2:77.</small></sup></span>  And the Hot<i>ri</i> says to the discarded wife, ‘Pariv<i>ri</i>ktâ, hey hey Pariv<i>ri</i>ktâ, when large meets small in this a<i>m</i>hubhedî . . .’—She has a hundred daughters of heralds and head-men of villages attending upon her: these reply to the Hot<i>ri</i>, ‘Hot<i>ri</i>, hey hey Hot<i>ri</i>, when the gods favoured the lalâmagu . . .’

<span id="v13_5_2_88"><sup><small>13:5:2:88.</small></sup></span>  Then the chamberlain addresses the fourth wife, ‘Pâlâgalî, hey hey Pâlâgalî, when the deer eats the corn, one thinks not of the fat cattle . . .’—She has a hundred daughters of chamberlains and charioteers attending upon her: these reply to the chamberlain, ‘Chamberlain, hey hey chamberlain, when the deer eats the corn, one thinks not of the fat cattle. . .’

<span id="v13_5_2_99"><sup><small>13:5:2:99.</small></sup></span>  These speeches, the derisive discourses, indeed are every kind of attainment, and in the A<i>s</i>vamedha all objects of desire are contained: ‘By every kind of speech may we obtain all objects of our desire’ thus thinking, they cause the Mahishî to rise, Those (women) then walk back in the same way as they had come; and the others finally utter the verse containing (the word) ‘fragrant’ (<i>Ri</i>g-v. IV, 39, 6), ‘To Dadhikrâvan have I sung praises. . .’

<span id="v13_5_2_1010"><sup><small>13:5:2:1010.</small></sup></span>  For, indeed, life and the deities depart from those who at the sacrifice speak impure speech: it is their speech they thereby purify so that the deities may not depart from the divine service. <span id="p388"><sup><small>[ p. 388 ]</small></sup></span> Now (some) put the omentum of the Gom<i>ri</i>ga and that of the hornless he-goat upon the horse and then take it (to the Âhavanîya), saying, ‘The horse has no omentum.’ Let him not do so: of the horse he should certainly take the fat; the (omenta of the) others are normal.

<span id="v13_5_2_1111"><sup><small>13:5:2:1111.</small></sup></span>  When the omenta have been roasted, and when they have performed (the oblations) with the Svâhâs [^1008], and returned to the back (of the sacrificial ground), they hold a Brahmodya [^1009] (theological discussion) in the Sadas. Having entered by the front door, they sit down at their several hearths.

<span id="v13_5_2_1212"><sup><small>13:5:2:1212.</small></sup></span>  The Hot<i>ri</i> asks the Adhvaryu (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 45), ‘Who is it that walketh singly [^1010]?. . .’ He replies to him (ib. 46), ‘Sûrya (the sun) walketh singly. . .’

<span id="v13_5_2_1313"><sup><small>13:5:2:1313.</small></sup></span>  The Adhvaryu then asks the Hot<i>ri</i> (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 47), ‘Whose light is there equal to the sun?. . .’ He replies to him (ib. 48), ‘The Brahman (n.) is the light equal to the sun. . .’

<span id="v13_5_2_1414"><sup><small>13:5:2:1414.</small></sup></span>  The Brahman then asks the Udgât<i>ri</i> (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 49), ‘I ask thee for the sake of knowledge, O friend of the gods \[if thou hast applied thy mind thereto: hath Vish<i>n</i>u entered the whole world at those three places at which offering is made unto him?\]’ and he replies (ib. 50), ‘I too am at those three places \[at which he entered the whole world: <span id="p389"><sup><small>[ p. 389 ]</small></sup></span> daily do I, with the one body [^1011], go round the earth, the sky, and the back of yonder sky\].’

<span id="v13_5_2_1515"><sup><small>13:5:2:1515.</small></sup></span>  The Udgât<i>ri</i> then asks the Brahman (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 51), ‘Into what (things) hath the Spirit [^1012] entered, \[and what (things) are established in the spirit? this, O Brahman, we crave of thee: what answer dost thou give unto us thereon?\]’ and he replies (ib. 52), ‘Into five (things) hath the spirit entered, and they are established in the spirit: this I reply unto thee thereon; not superior in wisdom art thou (to me).’

<span id="v13_5_2_1616"><sup><small>13:5:2:1616.</small></sup></span>  When this (verse) has been uttered, they rise and betake themselves from the Sadas eastwards to the Sacrificer. Haying come to him, seated in front of the Havirdhâna [^1013] (shed), they sit down in their several places.

<span id="v13_5_2_1717"><sup><small>13:5:2:1717.</small></sup></span>  The Hot<i>ri</i> then asks the Adhvaryu (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 53), ‘What was the first conception [^1014]?. . .’ and he replies (ib. 54), ‘The sky was the first conception. . .’

<span id="v13_5_2_1818"><sup><small>13:5:2:1818.</small></sup></span>  The Adhvaryu then asks the Hot<i>ri</i> (ib. 55), ‘Who, pray, is the tawny one (pi<i>s</i>aṅgilâ)? \[who is the kurupi<i>s</i>aṅgilâ? who moveth in leaps? who creepeth along the path?\]’ and he replies (ib. 56), ‘The tawny one is the uncreated (night) [^1015]; \[the kurupi<i>s</i>aṅgilâ is the porcupine; the hare <span id="p390"><sup><small>[ p. 390 ]</small></sup></span> moveth in leaps; the snake creepeth along the path\].’

<span id="v13_5_2_1919"><sup><small>13:5:2:1919.</small></sup></span>  The Brahman then asks the Udgât<i>ri</i> (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 57), ‘How many kinds are thereof this (sacrifice), how many syllables?—\[how many oblations? how often is (the fire) enkindled? The ordinances of sacrifice have I now asked of thee: how many priests offer in due form?\]’ and he replies (ib. 58), ‘Six kinds there are of this (sacrifice), a hundred syllables, \[eighty oblations, and three kindling-sticks; the ordinances of sacrifice do I declare unto thee: seven priests offer in due form\].’

<span id="v13_5_2_2020"><sup><small>13:5:2:2020.</small></sup></span>  The Udgât<i>ri</i> then asks the Brahman (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 59), ‘Who knoweth the navel of this world? \[who heaven and earth and the air? who knoweth the birth-place of the great Sun? who knoweth the Moon, whence it was born?\]’ and he replies (ib. 60), ‘I know the navel of this world, \[I know heaven and earth and the air; I know the birth-place of the great Sun, and I know the Moon, whence it was born\]’

<span id="v13_5_2_2121"><sup><small>13:5:2:2121.</small></sup></span>  The Sacrificer then asks the Adhvaryu (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 61), ‘I ask thee about the farthest end of the earth, \[I ask where is the navel of the world; I ask thee about the seed of the vigorous steed; I ask thee about the highest seat of speech\];’ and he replies (ib. 62), ‘This altar-ground is the farthest end of the earth; \[this sacrifice is the navel of the world; this Soma-juice is the seed of the vigorous <span id="p391"><sup><small>[ p. 391 ]</small></sup></span> steed; this Brahman (priest) is the highest seat of speech\].’

<span id="v13_5_2_2222"><sup><small>13:5:2:2222.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the complete attainment of speech, to wit the Brahmodya, and in the A<i>s</i>vamedha all desires are contained: ‘By means of all speech may we obtain all our desires!’ so (they think).

<span id="v13_5_2_2323"><sup><small>13:5:2:2323.</small></sup></span>  When the colloquy has been held, the Adhvaryu enters the (Havirdhâna), and draws Pra<i>g</i>âpati's (first) Mahiman cup (of Soma) in a gold vessel. The Puroru<i>k</i> formula [^1016] thereof is (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 1; Rig-v. X, 121, 1), ‘The golden germ was first produced . . .’ And its Puroऽnuvâkyâ is (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 63), ‘Of good nature, self-existent at first (within the great ocean: I verily place the right germ whence is born Pra<i>g</i>âpati).’—‘May the Hot<i>ri</i> offer to Pra<i>g</i>âpati: \[of the Mahiman Soma (cup); may he relish, may he drink the Soma! Hot<i>ri</i>, utter the offering-formula!\]’ is the Praisha (ib. 64). The Hot<i>ri</i> utters the offering-formula (ib. 65), ‘O Pra<i>g</i>âpati, none other than thee hath encompassed all these forms [^1017] . . . ;’ and as the Vasha<i>t</i> is pronounced, he (the Adhvaryu) offers with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 2), ‘What greatness of thine there hath been in the day, and the year, \[^1018]!\]’ He does not repeat the Vasha<i>t</i>, for he offers the cup of Soma all at once.


<span id="p392"><sup><small>[ p. 392 ]</small></sup></span>

<span id="v13_5_3"><sup><small>13:5:3</small></sup></span>

## THIRD BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### THE VAPÂ-OFFERINGS.

<span id="v13_5_3_11"><sup><small>13:5:3:11.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the offering of the omenta. ‘They should proceed with them singly up to the omentum of the Vai<i>s</i>vadeva (victim) [^1019]; and when the omentum of the Vai<i>s</i>vadeva has been offered, they should thereupon offer the others,’ said Satyakâma <i>G</i>âbâla; ‘for, doubtless, the All-Gods (Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>) are all (sarve) the gods: it is in this way he gratifies them deity after deity.’

<span id="v13_5_3_22"><sup><small>13:5:3:22.</small></sup></span>  ‘When the omentum of the Aindrâgna (victim) has been offered, they should thereupon offer the others,’ said the two Saumapa Mânutantavya;‘for, doubtless, Indra and Agni are all the gods: it is in this way he gratifies them deity after deity.’

<span id="v13_5_3_33"><sup><small>13:5:3:33.</small></sup></span>  ‘When the omentum of the (victim) sacred to Ka has been offered, they should thereupon offer <span id="p393"><sup><small>[ p. 393 ]</small></sup></span> the others,’ said <i>S</i>ailâli; ‘for, doubtless, Ka is Pra<i>g</i>âpati, and behind Pra<i>g</i>âpati are all the gods: it is in this way he gratifies them deity after deity.’

<span id="v13_5_3_44"><sup><small>13:5:3:44.</small></sup></span>  ‘Having gone through the twenty-one deities of the Seasonal [^1020] (victims), let them proceed by dividing (the omenta) into twenty-one parts [^1021],’ said Bhâllaveya; ‘for as many as there are Seasonal deities so many are all the gods: it is in this way he gratifies them deity after deity.’

<span id="v13_5_3_55"><sup><small>13:5:3:55.</small></sup></span>  ‘Let them proceed (with the omenta) singly and not otherwise,’ said Indrota Saunaka; ‘why, indeed, should they hasten? It is in this way he gratifies them deity after deity.’ This, then, is what these have said, but the established practice is different therefrom.

<span id="v13_5_3_66"><sup><small>13:5:3:66.</small></sup></span>  Now Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>avalkya said, 'They should proceed simultaneously with the (omenta) of Pra<i>g</i>âpati's [^1022] (victims), and simultaneously with those consecrated to single gods: it is in this way that he gratifies them deity after deity, that he goes straightway to the completion of the sacrifice, and does not stumble.’

<span id="v13_5_3_77"><sup><small>13:5:3:77.</small></sup></span>  When the omenta have been offered, the Adhvaryu enters (the Havirdhâna shed) and draws <span id="p394"><sup><small>[ p. 394 ]</small></sup></span> Pra<i>g</i>âpati's second Mahiman cup of Soma in a silver vessel. The Puroru<i>k</i> thereof is (Vâ<i>g</i>. XXIII, 3), ‘He who by his greatness hath become the one king of the breathing and blinking world, \[and who here ruleth over the two-footed and the four-footed: to the god Ka (Who?) will we pay homage by offering\].’ The Anuvâkyâ and Yâ<i>g</i>yâ are interchanged so as to (ensure) unimpaired vigour [^1023], and the Praisha (direction to Hot<i>ri</i>) is the same (as that of the first cup). As the Vasha<i>t</i> is uttered, he offers with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIII, 4), ‘What greatness of thine there hath been in the night, and the year, \[^1024]\].’ He does not repeat the Vasha<i>t</i>: the significance of this has been explained.

<span id="v13_5_3_88"><sup><small>13:5:3:88.</small></sup></span>  Of the blood of the other victims they make no sacrificial portions; of (that of) the horse they do make portions [^1025]. Of (the blood of) the others they make portions [^1026] on the south side, of (that of) the horse on the north side (of the altar); of (the blood of) the others he makes portions on (a mat of) plaksha (ficus infectoria) twigs, of (that of) the horse on rattan twigs. <span id="p395"><sup><small>[ p. 395 ]</small></sup></span> 13:5:3:99\. But concerning this, Sâtyaya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>i said, ‘They may indeed do it in either way, only one must not depart from the (right) path.’ But the former, indeed, is the established practice. The sacrifice (of the second day) is an Ukthya: thereby he causes the air-world to prosper. The last day is an Atirâtra with all the Stomas, for him to obtain and secure everything, for the Atirâtra with all the Stomas is everything, and the A<i>s</i>vamedha is everything.

<span id="v13_5_3_1010"><sup><small>13:5:3:1010.</small></sup></span>  Its Bahishpavamâna (stotra) is in the Triv<i>ri</i>t (9-versed Stoma), the Â<i>g</i>ya (stotras) in the Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a (15-versed), the Mâdhyandina-pavamâna in the Saptada<i>s</i>a (17), the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as in the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (21), the T<i>ri</i>tîya Pavamâna in the Tri<i>n</i>ava (27), the Agnish<i>t</i>oma-sâman in the Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (33), the Ukthas in the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (21), the Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in in the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, the night (chants) in the Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a, the Sandhi (twilight chant) in the Triv<i>ri</i>t (9). Whatever <i>S</i>astra is (recited) for the second day of the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya Sha<i>d</i>aha that is (used at) the Atirâtra sacrifice [^1027]; thereby he causes yonder (heavenly) world to prosper.

<span id="v13_5_3_1111"><sup><small>13:5:3:1111.</small></sup></span>  ‘There are twenty-one Savanîya victims, all of them consecrated to Agni, and there is one and the same performance for them,’ so say some; but let him rather immolate those twenty-four bovine (victims [^1028]) for twelve deities,—twelve months are a year, and the year is everything, and the A<i>s</i>vamedha <span id="p396"><sup><small>[ p. 396 ]</small></sup></span> is everything: thus it is for the sake of his obtaining and securing everything.


<span id="v13_5_4"><sup><small>13:5:4</small></sup></span>

## FOURTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### DIFFERENT ARRANGEMENTS OF THE CHANTS OF THE A<i>S</i>VAMEDHA.

<span id="v13_5_4_11"><sup><small>13:5:4:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, Indrota Daivâpa <i>S</i>aunaka once performed this sacrifice for <i>G</i>aname<i>g</i>aya Pârikshita, and by performing it he extinguished all evil-doing, all Brahman-slaughter; and, verily, he who performs the A<i>s</i>vamedha extinguishes (the guilt incurred by) all evil-doing, all Brahman-slaughter.

<span id="v13_5_4_22"><sup><small>13:5:4:22.</small></sup></span>  It is of this, indeed, that the Gâthâ (strophe) sings,—‘In Âsandîvat [^1029], <i>G</i>aname<i>g</i>aya bound for the gods a black-spotted, grain-eating horse, adorned with a golden ornament and with yellow garlands.’

<span id="v13_5_4_33"><sup><small>13:5:4:33.</small></sup></span>  \[There are\] those same first two days [^1030], and a <i>G</i>yotis [^1031] Atirâtra: therewith (they sacrificed) for Bhîmasena;—those same first two days, and a Go Atirâtra: therewith (they sacrificed) for Ugrasena;—those same first two days, and an Âyus Atirâtra: therewith (they sacrificed) for <i>S</i>rutasena. These are the Pârikshitîyas [^1032], and it is of this that the Gâthâ sings,—‘The righteous Pârikshitas, performing horse-sacrifices, by their righteous work did away with sinful work one after another.’ <span id="p397"><sup><small>[ p. 397 ]</small></sup></span> 13:5:4:44\. Those same first two days, and an Abhi<i>g</i>it [^1033] Atirâtra,—therewith Para Â<i>t</i>nâra, the Kausalya king, once sacrificed: it is of this that Gâthâ sings,—'A<i>t</i>nâra's son, the Kausalya Para, Haira<i>n</i>yanâbha, caused a horse, meet for sacrifice, to be bound, and gave away the replete regions.’

<span id="v13_5_4_55"><sup><small>13:5:4:55.</small></sup></span>  Those same first two days, and a Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it [^1033] Atirâtra,—therewith Purukutsa, the Aikshvâka king, once on a time performed a horse (daurgaha)-sacrifice, whence it is of this that the <i>Ri</i>shi sings (<i>Ri</i>g-v. IV, 42, 8),—‘These, the seven <i>Ri</i>shis, were then our fathers when Daurgaha [^1034] was bound.’

<span id="v13_5_4_66"><sup><small>13:5:4:66.</small></sup></span>  Those same first two days, and a Mahâvrata [^1035] Atirâtra,—therewith Marutta Âvikshita, the Âyogava king, once performed sacrifice; whence the Maruts became his guards-men, Agni his chamberlain, and the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i> his counsellors: it is of this that the Gâthâ sings,—'The Maruts dwelt as guards-men in Marutta Âvikshita's house, Agni as his chamberlain, and the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i> as his counsellors.' And, verily, the Maruts become the guards-men, Agni the chamberlain, and the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i> the counsellors of him who performs the horse-sacrifice.

<span id="v13_5_4_77"><sup><small>13:5:4:77.</small></sup></span>  Those same first two days, and an Aptoryâma [^1036] Atirâtra,—it was therewith that Kraivya, the Pâ<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>âla king, once performed sacrifice,—for Krivis they formerly called the Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>âlas: it is of this that the Gâthâ sings,—‘At Parivakrâ, the <span id="p398"><sup><small>[ p. 398 ]</small></sup></span> Pâ<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>âla overlord of the Krivis seized a horse, meet for sacrifice, with offering-gifts of a hundred thousand (head of cattle).’

<span id="v13_5_4_88"><sup><small>13:5:4:88.</small></sup></span>  And a second (Gâthâ),—‘A thousand myriads there were, and five-and-twenty hundreds, which the Brâhma<i>n</i>as of the Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>âlas from every quarter divided between them.’

<span id="v13_5_4_99"><sup><small>13:5:4:99.</small></sup></span>  The Agnish<i>t</i>oma in the Triv<i>ri</i>t (stoma); the Ukthya in the Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a; and the third day, with the Uktha (stotras), in the Saptada<i>s</i>a; the Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in (stotra) in the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, the night (stotras) in the Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a, and the Sandhi (stotra) in the Triv<i>ri</i>t,—this is the (sacrifice) resulting in the Anush<i>t</i>ubh [^1037]: it is therewith that sacrifice was performed by Dhvasan Dvaitavana, the king of the Matsyas, where there is the lake Dvaitavana; and it is of this that the Gâthâ sings,—‘Fourteen steeds did king Dvaitavana, victorious in battle, bind for Indra V<i>ri</i>trahan, whence the lake Dvaitavana (took its name).’

<span id="v13_5_4_1010"><sup><small>13:5:4:1010.</small></sup></span>  The (three) Pavamâna (stotras) in the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (stoma), and (those performed) by repetitions [^1038] in the Triv<i>ri</i>t; the Pavamânas in the Katu<i>s</i><i>k</i>atvâri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (44-versed stoma), and (those performed) by repetition [^1039] in the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a; the Pavamânas in <span id="p399"><sup><small>[ p. 399 ]</small></sup></span> the Ash<i>t</i>â<i>k</i>atvâri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (48), and (those performed) by repetition in the Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (33) up to the Agnish<i>t</i>oma-sâman, the Uktha (stotras) in the Dvâtri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (32), the Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in in the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, the night (stotras) in the Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a, and the Sandhi (stotra) in the Triv<i>ri</i>t

<span id="v13_5_4_1111"><sup><small>13:5:4:1111.</small></sup></span>  Suchlike is Vish<i>n</i>u's striding [^1040],—it was therewith that Bharata Dau<i>h</i>shanti once performed sacrifice, and attained that wide sway which now belongs to the Bharatas: it is of this that the Gâthâ sings,—‘Seventy-eight steeds did Bharata Dau<i>h</i>shanti bind for the V<i>ri</i>tra-slayer on the Yamunâ, and fifty-five near the Gaṅgâ.’

<span id="v13_5_4_1212"><sup><small>13:5:4:1212.</small></sup></span>  And a second (Gâthâ),—‘Having bound a hundred and thirty-three horses, meet for sacrifice, king Saudyumni, more shifty, overcame the other shiftless ones.’

<span id="v13_5_4_1313"><sup><small>13:5:4:1313.</small></sup></span>  And a third,—‘At Nâ<i>d</i>apit [^1041], the Apsaras <i>S</i>akuntalâ conceived Bharata, who, after conquering the whole earth, brought to Indra more than a thousand horses, meet for sacrifice.’

<span id="v13_5_4_1414"><sup><small>13:5:4:1414.</small></sup></span>  And a fourth [^1042],—‘The greatness of Bharata neither the men before nor those after him attained, nor did the five (tribes of) men, even as a mortal man (does not touch) the sky with his arms.’

<span id="v13_5_4_1515"><sup><small>13:5:4:1515.</small></sup></span>  With the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a-stoma [^1043] Rishabha Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>atura, <span id="p400"><sup><small>[ p. 400 ]</small></sup></span> king of the <i>S</i>viknas, performed sacrifice: it is of this that the Gâthâ sings,—‘When Rishabha Yâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>atura was sacrificing, the Brahman-folk, having received wealth at the A<i>s</i>vamedha, divided the offering-gifts between them.’

<span id="v13_5_4_1616"><sup><small>13:5:4:1616.</small></sup></span>  With the Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a-stoma <i>S</i>o<i>n</i>a Sâtrâsâha, the Pâ<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>âla king, performed sacrifice: it is of this that the Gâthâ sings,—‘When Sâtrâsâha performs the horse-sacrifice, the Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (stomas) come forth as (Taurva<i>s</i>a) horses, and six thousand mail-clad men [^1044].’

<span id="v13_5_4_1717"><sup><small>13:5:4:1717.</small></sup></span>  And a second (Gâthâ),—'At the sacrifice of thee, Koka's father, the Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (stomas) come forth, each as six times six thousand [^1045] (horses), and six thousand mail-clad men.’

<span id="v13_5_4_1818"><sup><small>13:5:4:1818.</small></sup></span>  And a third,—‘When Sâtrâsâha, the Pâ<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>âla king, was sacrificing, wearing beautiful garlands, Indra revelled in Soma, and the Brâhma<i>n</i>as became satiated with wealth.’

<span id="v13_5_4_1919"><sup><small>13:5:4:1919.</small></sup></span>  <i>S</i>atânîka Sâtrâ<i>g</i>ita performed the Govinata (form of A<i>s</i>vamedha), after taking away the <span id="p401"><sup><small>[ p. 401 ]</small></sup></span> horse of the Kâ<i>s</i>ya (king); and since that time the Kâ<i>s</i>is do not keep up the (sacrificial) fires, saying, ‘The Soma-drink has been taken from us.’

<span id="v13_5_4_2020"><sup><small>13:5:4:2020.</small></sup></span>  The mode (of chanting) for this (Govinata form) is:—the Pavamâna (stotras) in the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (stoma), and (those chanted) by repetitions in the Triv<i>ri</i>t;—the Pavamânas in the <i>K</i>atu<i>s</i><i>k</i>atvâri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, the Â<i>g</i>ya (stotras) in the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, the Ukthas [^1046] In the Tri<i>n</i>ava, the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as in the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a;—the Pavamânas in the Sha<i>t</i>tri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (36-versed), and (those chanted) by repetitions in the Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (33) up to the Agnish<i>t</i>oma-sâman, the Ukthas in the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, the Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in in the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, the night (stotras) in the Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a, and the Sandhi (stotra) in the Triv<i>ri</i>t.

<span id="v13_5_4_2121"><sup><small>13:5:4:2121.</small></sup></span>  It is of this that the Gâthâ sings,—‘<i>S</i>atânîka Sâtrâ<i>g</i>ita seized a sacrificial horse, in the neighbourhood, the sacrifice of the Kâ<i>s</i>is, even as Bharata (seized that) of the Satvats.’

<span id="v13_5_4_2222"><sup><small>13:5:4:2222.</small></sup></span>  And a second,—'The mighty <i>S</i>atânîka, having seized, in the neighbourhood, Dh<i>ri</i>tarâsh<i>t</i>ra's white sacrificial horse, roaming at will in its tenth month, <i>S</i>atânîka [^1047] performed the Govinata-sacrifice.’

<span id="v13_5_4_2323"><sup><small>13:5:4:2323.</small></sup></span>  And a fourth [^1048],—‘The greatness of the Bharatas neither the men before nor those after them attained, nor did the seven (tribes of) men, even as a mortal man (does not touch) the sky with his flanks.’ <span id="p402"><sup><small>[ p. 402 ]</small></sup></span> 13:5:4:2424\. Now as to the sacrificial gifts. Whatever there is towards the middle of the kingdom other than the land, the men, and the property of the Brâhma<i>n</i>a, of that the eastern region belongs to the Hot<i>ri</i>, the southern to the Brahman, the western to the Adhvaryu, the northern to the Udgât<i>ri</i>; and the Hot<i>ri</i>kas share this along with them.

<span id="v13_5_4_2525"><sup><small>13:5:4:2525.</small></sup></span>  When the Udayanîyâ (completing offering) is finished, he seizes twenty-one barren cows, sacred to Mitra-Varu<i>n</i>a, the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>, and B<i>ri</i>haspati, with the view of his gaining those deities. And the reason why those sacred to B<i>ri</i>haspati come last is that B<i>ri</i>haspati is the Brahman (n.), and he thus establishes himself finally in the Brahman.

<span id="v13_5_4_2626"><sup><small>13:5:4:2626.</small></sup></span>  And as to their being twenty-one of them,—the twenty-one-fold is he who shines yonder: twelve months, five seasons, these three worlds, and yonder sun as the twenty-first—this consummation (he thereby obtains).

<span id="v13_5_4_2727"><sup><small>13:5:4:2727.</small></sup></span>  When the Udavasânîyâ (closing offering) is completed, they give, for a sacrificial gift, four women, with a maiden as the fifth, and four hundred female attendants according to agreement.

<span id="v13_5_4_2828"><sup><small>13:5:4:2828.</small></sup></span>  And during the following year he performs the animal sacrifices of the seasons,—six (victims) sacred to Agni in the spring, six to Indra in the summer, six to Par<i>g</i>anya, or to the Maruts, in the rainy season, six to Mitra and Varu<i>n</i>a in the autumn, six to Indra and Vish<i>n</i>u in the winter, and six to Indra and B<i>ri</i>haspati in the dewy season,—six seasons are a year: in the seasons, in the year, he thus establishes himself. These amount to thirty-six animals,—the B<i>ri</i>hatî (metre) consists of thirty-six syllables, and the heavenly world is established <span id="p403"><sup><small>[ p. 403 ]</small></sup></span> upon the B<i>ri</i>hatî: and thus he finally establishes himself, by means of the B<i>ri</i>hatî metre, in the heavenly world.



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_4">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XIII, 4. Fourth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_6">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XIII, 6. Sixth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^979]: 375:1 ‘From natural fissures and incisions made in the bark (of Butea frondosa) issues during the hot season a red juice, which soon hardens into a ruby-coloured, brittle, astringent gum, similar to kino, and sold as Bengal kino.’ Stewart and Brandis.

[^980]: 375:2 See [p. 331](../Book_5_13_3#p331), note [1](../Book_5_13_3#fn840).

[^981]: 375:3 Regarding the <i>K</i>atush<i>t</i>oma, see [p. 329](../Book_5_13_3#p329), note [1](../Book_5_13_3#fn836).

[^982]: 376:1 According to the practice here referred to, the Agnish<i>t</i>omasâman would not consist merely of the one triplet (usually Sâmav. II, 53-4 i.e. the so-called ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>îya triplet) ordinarily used for it, but of four different Sâmans, inasmuch as three of the triplets which may be used for the Uktha-stotras (of the Ukthya and other sacrifices) are added to that ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>îya triplet. In that case, however, the latter is not chanted to its own ‘ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>îya’ tune, but the Vâravantîya tune is used for all the four triplets. This practice is somewhat vaguely referred to in Tâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ya-Br. XIX, 5, 10-11. ‘One Sâman (tune), many metres (texts): therefore one (man) feeds many creatures. Verily, the Agnish<i>t</i>oma (sâman) is the self, and the metres (hymn-texts) are cattle: he thus secures cattle for his own self. It is neither an Ukthya nor an Agnish<i>t</i>oma (sacrifice), for cattle are neither (entirely) domestic nor wild (viz. because though kept “in the village,” they also freely graze “in the forest”).’ Here the passage ‘One Sâman, many metres,’ according to the commentary, refers to the Vâravantîya tune as being employed, on this occasion, for the texts of the Ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>îya, the Sâkama<i>s</i>va (II, 55-57, here the Calc. ed., by mistake, calls the second tune figured for chanting, like the first, Sâkama<i>s</i>va, instead of Vâravantîya), the Saubhara (II, 230-2, where the Calc. ed., by mistake, omits the name Vâravantîya), and the Taira<i>s</i><i>k</i>a (II, 233-5; curiously enough, the Taira<i>s</i><i>k</i>a is not mentioned, in Lâ<i>t</i>y. Sr. VIII, 9-10, amongst the Sâmans that may be used for the third—or the A<i>k</i><i>kh</i>âvâka's—Uktha, but Sâya<i>n</i>a, on Sâmav. II, 233, states distinctly, ‘taira<i>s</i><i>k</i>a<i>m</i> t<i>ri</i>tîyam uktham’). Whilst, as Uktha-stotras, the last three texts would usually he chanted in the ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, or twenty-one-versed form, in the present instance, as part of the <i>k</i>atush<i>t</i>oma, they would be chanted (along with the Ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>îya) in the twenty-four-versed form. Thus, though an Agnish<i>t</i>oma sacrifice, inasmuch as it has twelve stotras, yet it is not a regular one; neither is it an Ukthya, because the Ukthas are not chanted as so many Stotras, followed by the recitation of separate Sastras. In the Â<i>s</i>v. <i>S</i>r. X, 6, different alternatives are proposed for the chanting of the Agnish<i>t</i>oma-sâman p. 377 in the ‘Gotamastoma (i.e. <i>K</i>atush<i>t</i>oma) antarukthya’ and the corresponding Sastra, including apparently the employment of the Ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>îya-sâman either for all the four triplets, or for the Ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>îya triplet alone with the respective Sâmans used for the other triplets; different modes of recitation being thereby implied with regard to the Stotriya and Anurûpa pragâthas.

[^983]: 377:1 For the Âgnimâruta-<i>s</i>astra, recited by the Hot<i>ri</i> after the chanting of the Agnish<i>t</i>oma-sâman, and containing, amongst various hymns and detached verses, the triplet which forms the text of the Stotra, i.e. the ‘Stotriya pragâtha,’ as well as a corresponding antistrophe, the ‘Anurûpa pragâtha,’ see part ii, p. 369 note. On the present occasion, however, this constituent element of the Sastra would have to include the triplets of all the four Sâmans, as well as four ‘antistrophes’ which are thus ‘recited together.’

[^984]: 377:2 Or, P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotra, viz. the first stotra of that name at the midday-service, for which that Sâman is used in the Agnish<i>t</i>oma sacrifice (part ii, p. 339, note 2).

[^985]: 377:3 That is, victims sacrificed on the Sutyâs, or Soma-days. Two complete sets of eleven such victims are, however, required on each of the three days, see [p. 309](../Book_5_13_2#p309), note [2](../Book_5_13_2#fn787).

[^986]: 377:4 See [XIII, 2, 1, 1](../Book_5_13_2#v13_2_1_1) seqq., and [p. 297](../Book_5_13_2#p297), note [1](../Book_5_13_2#fn747).

[^987]: 378:1 That is one on which all Stotras are chanted in the ‘ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a’ Stoma, or twenty-one-versed hymn-form.

[^988]: 378:2 Viz. <i>Ri</i>g-veda V, 6, forming the special feature of the Â<i>g</i>ya<i>s</i>astra at the A<i>s</i>vamedha.

[^989]: 379:1 Viz. the Â<i>g</i>ya-sûkta, <i>Ri</i>g-veda III, 13, forming the chief part of the Hot<i>ri</i>'s Â<i>g</i>ya-<i>s</i>astra, or first <i>S</i>astra of the Agnish<i>t</i>oma, for which see part ii, p. 327 note.

[^990]: 379:2 The Bârhata Praüga, or Praüga-<i>s</i>astra in the B<i>ri</i>hatî metre,—being the one recited on the fifth day of the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha (Â<i>s</i>v. <i>S</i>r. VII, 12, 7), and consisting of the seven different triplets, addressed to as many different deities,—is to be recited also on this occasion; and along with it (or rather, intertwined with it, triplet by triplet) the ordinary Praüga-<i>s</i>astra of the Agnish<i>t</i>oma, made up of the two hymns Rig-veda I, 2 and 3 which are ascribed to Madhu<i>kh</i>andas, and consist of nine and twelve verses, or together seven triplets. I do not understand why Harisvâmin mentions ‘Vâyur agregâ<i>h</i>’ (? Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXVII, 31) as being the first triplet of the Mâdhu<i>kh</i>andasa Praüga, instead of I, 2, 1-3 ‘vâyav â yâhi dar<i>s</i>ata.’ The Praüga is the Hot<i>ri</i>'s second <i>S</i>astra of the morning-service, being preceded by the chanting of the first Â<i>g</i>ya-stotra; see part ii, p. 325.

[^991]: 380:1 See part ii, p. 337, where the same triplet forms the anu<i>k</i>ara of this Sastra at the Agnish<i>t</i>oma. It is followed there by the Pragâthas VIII, 53, 5-6; I, 40, 5-6 (read thus! each two counting as one triplet); three Dhâyyâ verses, and the Marutvatîya Pragâthas VIII, 89, 3-4 (!), These are to be followed up, on the present occasion, by the two hymns I, 80, and VIII, 36, after which the Indra hymn X, 73, the chief part of the normal Marutvatîya Sastra, is to be recited, with the Nivid formula inserted after the sixth verse.

[^992]: 380:2 That is, the <i>S</i>astra succeeding the chanting of the first, or Hot<i>ri</i>'s, P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotra (see part ii, p. 339). Whilst, however, in the one-day's sacrifice, the Rathantara (or the B<i>ri</i>hat) sâman is used for that stotra, the Mahânâmni verses (see part iii, introd. p. xx, note 2), with the Sâkvara tune, are to be used as the Stotriyâs on this occasion, and are therefore likewise to be recited by the Hot<i>ri</i> as Stotriya-pragâthas (cf. Â<i>s</i>v. VII, 12, 10 seqq.), to be followed up by the antistrophe (anurûpa)—here consisting of the triplets I, 84, 10-12; VIII, 93, 31-3; I, 11, 1-3—and the Sâma-pragâtha, VIII, 3, 1-2.

[^993]: 381:1 Viz. after the eighth verse of the hymn <i>Ri</i>g-veda I, 32, the chief part of the normal Nishkevalya-<i>s</i>astra.

[^994]: 381:2 For the complete verse see III, 3, 2, 1 2.

[^995]: 381:3 This verse is again recited thrice, and thus takes the place of the ordinary opening triplet.

[^996]: 381:4 For this <i>S</i>astra, recited after the Ârbhava-Pavamâna-stotra, see part ii, p. 361.

[^997]: 381:5 Â<i>s</i>v. <i>S</i>r. X, 10, 6 prescribes the ordinary anu<i>k</i>ara V, 82, 4-7; whence Sâya<i>n</i>a on I, 24, 3 (-5) offers no indication of the ritualistic use of that triplet on this occasion.

[^998]: 381:6 Viz. IV, 54, before the last verse of which the Nivid is inserted.

[^999]: 382:1 Viz. the final Sastra of the evening-service, preceded by the chanting of the Agnish<i>t</i>oma-sâman; see part ii, p. 369.

[^1000]: 382:2 See [p. 298](../Book_5_13_2#p298), note [4](../Book_5_13_2#fn753); [p. 338](../Book_5_13_3#p338), note [1](../Book_5_13_3#fn859).

[^1001]: 382:3 The ‘Kapi<i>ñ</i><i>g</i>ala’ is a kind of wildfowl, apparently of the quail or partridge species—a hazel-cock, or francoline partridge. Some of the later authorities, however, identify it with the ‘<i>k</i>âtaka’ p. 383 (‘cuculus melanoleucus’). With regard to some of the wild animals referred to in the corresponding section of the Vâ<i>g</i>. S., the commentator Mahîdhara significantly remarks (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXIV, 29; cf. Kâty. XX, 6, 6 scholl.) that the meaning of such names as are not understood must be made out with the help of quotations (nigama), Vedic vocabularies (nigha<i>n</i><i>t</i>u) and their comments (nirukta), grammar (vyâkara<i>n</i>a), the Unâdiv<i>ri</i>tti, and dictionaries.

[^1002]: 383:1 Viz. XIII, 2, 4, 1 seqq. It is not easy to see why the text should break off abruptly with the birds representing the rainy season. For autumn there are to be (three) quails, for winter ‘kakara,’ and for the dewy season ‘vikakara.’ Then follow, to the end of the 260 wild animals, a long series of divinities to each of which (or sometimes to allied deities) three animals are consigned. Thirteen of these wild animals are placed on each of the twenty spaces between the twenty-one stakes.

[^1003]: 383:2 Or, perhaps, for the (eleven) deities of the Seasonal offerings he seizes twenty-one animals for each (stake); which would certainly simplify the distribution of those animals. Regarding the victims actually consecrated to the deities of the <i>K</i>âturmâsya offerings, see [p. 309](../Book_5_13_2#p309), note [2](../Book_5_13_2#fn787).

[^1004]: 383:3 This does not include the twelve ‘paryaṅgyas’ tied to the horse's limbs, but only the horse and two other victims sacred to Pra<i>g</i>âpati, and twelve of a long series of beasts, of which three are dedicated to each successive deity (or allied group of deities). To these are afterwards added Agni's two victims belonging to the two sets of eleven victims (of the other twenty of which one is assigned to each of the other stakes).

[^1005]: 384:1 [XIII, 2, 3, 1](../Book_5_13_2#v13_2_3_1).

[^1006]: 384:2 The mode of recitation is similar to that of the kindling-verses (likewise eleven, brought up, by <i>r</i>epetitions of the first and last, to fifteen), viz. by making a pause after each half-verse, but without adding the syllable ‘om’ thereto. Â<i>s</i>v. <i>S</i>r. X, 8, 5.

[^1007]: 384:3 Harisvâmin explains ‘tad vai’ as standing for ‘sa vai’ (liṅgavyatyayena)—viz. that fifteenfold thunderbolt.

[^1008]: 385:1 On this recitation, consisting of a lengthy set of formulas, addressed to the slaughterers, see part ii, p, 188, note 2. The whole of the formulas are given Ait. Br. II, 6-7. The hymn, according to Â<i>s</i>v. X, 8, 7; is to be inserted either before the last formula of the litany, or somewhat further back—viz. before the formula ‘sha<i>d</i>vi<i>m</i><i>s</i>atir asya vaṅkrayas,’ ‘twenty-six are its ribs’—whilst our Brâhma<i>n</i>a rather allows the alternative of the eighteenth verse of I, 162 being inserted at the latter place,—unless, indeed, the insertion in that case is to be made immediately before the word ‘vaṅkraya<i>h</i>’ which is scarcely likely.

[^1009]: 385:2 Harisvâmin seems to take this to mean that as this verse is of the same nature as the formulas of the Adhrigu litany, he is to treat it as such, as otherwise, in reciting he would have to pronounce ‘om’ after that verse, which is not done after those formulas.

[^1010]: 385:3 Or, the plurality by the individual. Owing to the corrupt state of the MS., the commentator's explanation of this passage is not clear. He seems, however, at any rate, to take the ‘plural’ to refer to the formula ‘sha<i>d</i>vi<i>m</i><i>s</i>atir asya vaṅkrayas,’ where apparently ‘eshâm’ has to be substituted for ‘asya’ on this occasion, as many victims are immolated, and the ribs of a plurality of beasts are thus indicated, whilst in verse eighteen of the hymn, on the p. 386 contrary, only the ribs of one horse (thus forming a kind of unit) are referred to; and if that verse were recited, along with the whole hymn, before the final formula which refers to all the victims, the necessary connection would be interrupted.

[^1011]: 386:1 See [XIII, 2, 8, 1](../Book_5_13_2#v13_2_8_1).

[^1012]: 386:2 Nirâyatyâ<i>s</i>vasya <i>s</i>i<i>s</i>na<i>m</i> mahishy upasthe nidhatte ‘v<i>ri</i>shâ vâ<i>g</i>î retodhâ reto dadhâtv’ iti mithunasyaiva sarvatvâya.

[^1013]: 388:1 See III, 8, 2, 21-23.

[^1014]: 388:2 For a similar discussion between the Brahman and Hot<i>ri</i>, prior to the binding of the victims to the stakes, see [XIII, 2, 6, 9](../Book_5_13_2#v13_2_6_9) seqq.

[^1015]: 388:3 For the complete verse, comprising four questions, see [XIII, 2, 6, 10](../Book_5_13_2#v13_2_6_10)\-[13](../Book_5_13_2#v13_2_6_13); the answers being given there in the form of explanations.

[^1016]: 389:1 Or, with the one limb (ekenâṅgena) which Mahîdhara takes to mean ‘with the mind, in mind.’ Possibly ‘asya’ may have to be taken together with it—'with the one body of his (Vish<i>n</i>u's).’

[^1017]: 389:2 Or, man (purusha). The five things, according to Mahîdhara, are the vital airs, or breathings.

[^1018]: 389:3 That is, behind the uttaravedi, according to Kâty. XX, 7, 22.

[^1019]: 389:4 See [XIII, 2, 6, 14](../Book_5_13_2#v13_2_6_14) seqq.

[^1020]: 389:5 Mahîdhara takes ‘a<i>g</i>â’ (the eternal) here as meaning either the p. 390 night, or Mâyâ; cf. [XIII, 2, 6, 17](../Book_5_13_2#v13_2_6_17). Perhaps, however, ‘a<i>g</i>â’ may mean ‘goat’ here.

[^1021]: 391:1 That is, the preliminary formula, or formulas, preceding the upayâma' (‘Thou art taken with a support . . .’).

[^1022]: 391:2 See V, 4, 2, 9.

[^1023]: 391:3 See [XIII, 2, 11, 2](../Book_5_13_2#v13_2_11_2) with note.

[^1024]: 392:1 Whilst there are amongst the victims immolated on the second day, several others consecrated to the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>, Indra and Agni, and Ka,—the Vai<i>s</i>vadeva, Aindrâgna, and Kâya victims, referred to in this and the following two paragraphs, belong to the Kâturmâsya, or Seasonal victims, being amongst those tied to the fourteenth and sixteenth stakes. Though the text speaks only of one Vai<i>s</i>vadeva &c. victim, there are really three such victims in each case. According to the views referred to in these paragraphs (cf. comm. on Kâty. XX, 7, 23), the omenta of all the preceding victims (from the ‘paryaṅgya’ onwards) up to the beginning of the Kâturmâsyas, would be offered together after (or along with) the vapâs of those of the respective victims (Vai<i>s</i>vadeva &c.) specified in these paragraphs; and along therewith the vapâs of all the subsequent Seasonal victims. The deities to which this heap of omenta would be offered, would thus be either the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>, or Indra and Agni, or Ka, as representing all the deities. Â<i>s</i>v. S. X, 9, 7, assigns the omenta of all the victims, except the three Prâ<i>g</i>âpatya ones, to the Vi<i>s</i>ve Devâ<i>h</i>.

[^1025]: 393:1 See [p. 309](../Book_5_13_2#p309), note [2](../Book_5_13_2#fn787).

[^1026]: 393:2 According to this view, the omenta of all the victims after the three first (Prâ<i>g</i>âpatya) ones,—i.e. beginning from the ‘paryaṅgya’ animals (see [p. 299](../Book_5_13_2#p299), note [2](../Book_5_13_2#fn755)) up to the end of the <i>K</i>âturmâsya, or Seasonal victims, which are the last of the domesticated animals—would be put together in one heap and divided into twenty-one portions, which would then be offered to the first twenty-one deities of the Seasonal offerings, that is to say, to those of the Vai<i>s</i>vadeva, Varu<i>n</i>apraghâsa, Sâkamedha, and Mahâhavis offerings, thus omitting the deities of the Pitryesh<i>t</i>i and the <i>S</i>unâsîriya offerings.

[^1027]: 393:3 That is the first three victims, viz. the horse, the hornless he-goat, and the Gom<i>ri</i>ga.

[^1028]: 394:1 By simple repetition this would be impaired.

[^1029]: 394:2 See [XIII, 2, 11, 2](../Book_5_13_2#v13_2_11_2) with note.

[^1030]: 394:3 See [XIII, 3, 4, 2](../Book_5_13_3#v13_3_4_2)\-[5](../Book_5_13_3#v13_3_4_5).

[^1031]: 394:4 This would be an alternative view. According to the scholl. on Katy. XX, 8, 1-3, this would seem to refer to the other Prâ<i>g</i>âpatya victims, in which case one would, however, expect the dual here, as there are only two of them besides the horse.

[^1032]: 395:1 In the same way Â<i>s</i>v. S. X, 4, 8 lays down the rule that the <i>S</i>astras of the second day are those of the fifth day of the Vyû<i>dh</i>a P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha; cf. above, [XIII, 5, 1, 7](../Book_5_13_5#v13_5_1_7) seqq.

[^1033]: 395:2 See [XIII, 3, 2, 3](../Book_5_13_3#v13_3_2_3).

[^1034]: 396:1 Lit., (in the city, nagare, Harisvâmin) possessed of a throne. Cf. Ait. Br. VIII, 2 1.

[^1035]: 396:2 Viz., as stated before, an Agnish<i>t</i>oma and an Ukthya.

[^1036]: 396:3 As to the difference between the <i>G</i>yotis, Go, and Âyus forms of the Agnish<i>t</i>oma sacrifice, see part iv, p. 287, note 2.

[^1037]: 396:4 That is, according to Harisvâmin (and the Gâthâ), the brothers of (<i>G</i>aname<i>g</i>aya) Pârikshita, though one would rather have thought of his sons, the grandsons of Parikshit.

[^1039]: 397:1 Regarding the Abhi<i>g</i>it and Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it, see part iv, p. 320, note 2.

[^1040]: 397:2 Sâya<i>n</i>a, differently from our Brâhma<i>n</i>a, takes Daurgaha as the patronymic of Purukutsa (son of Durgaha).

[^1041]: 397:3 See part iv, p. 282, note 5.

[^1042]: 397:4 See part iii, introd. p. xx.

[^1043]: 398:1 Viz. inasmuch as, according to Harisvâmin, all the Stotras amount together to 798 verses, which make twenty-five anush<i>t</i>ubh verses (of 32 syllables each) or thereabouts.

[^1044]: 398:2 That is to say, all the remaining nine stotras of this, the Agnish<i>t</i>oma, day, the so-called Dhuryas, viz. the Â<i>g</i>ya-stotras, the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotras, and the Agnish<i>t</i>oma-sâman, in all of which the respective Stoma is obtained by repetitions of the three stotriyâ-verses.

[^1045]: 398:3 In this, the Ukthya, day, this includes also the three Uktha-stotras, as being, as it were, the Dhuryas of the Hot<i>ri</i>'s assistants p. 399 (cf. part iii, introd. p. xiv seqq.); whilst in the directions regarding the next day they are not included, as requiring a different Stoma.

[^1046]: 399:1 Just as there are here wide intervals between the Stomas, so Vish<i>n</i>u, in his three strides, passes over wide distances, comm.

[^1047]: 399:2 This, according to Harisvâmin, is the name of Ka<i>n</i>va's hermitage. Cf. Leumann, Zeitsch. d. D. M. G., XLVIII, p. 81.

[^1048]: 399:3 Cf. Ait. Br. VIII, 23; Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 202.

[^1049]: 399:4 That is, using the 21-versed form throughout the three days.

[^1050]: 400:1 This seems to be Harisvâmin's interpretation of the verse:—torva<i>s</i>â a<i>s</i>vâ <i>g</i>yesh<i>th</i>e tam api s<i>ri</i>gyeran iti (?) trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>â stomâ udga<i>k</i><i>kh</i>anti, sa hi <i>S</i>o<i>n</i>as trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>ân eva stomân trishv api divaseshu prayuṅkte nânyân iti to udga<i>k</i><i>kh</i>antîty âha, sha<i>t</i> tu sahasrâ<i>n</i>i varmi<i>n</i>â<i>m</i> râ<i>g</i>aputrâ<i>n</i>â<i>m</i> kava<i>k</i>inâm a<i>s</i>vapâlânâm udîrata iti vartate varshe prâptâ eva drash<i>t</i>avyâ<i>h</i>. The St. Petersb. Dict., on the other hand, construes ‘trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>â<i>h</i>’ along with ‘sha<i>t</i> sahasrâ<i>n</i>i’ = 6033 (? horses of mail-clad men). This interpretation seems to me to involve serious difficulties. The use of those Stomas doubtless is supposed to result in the advantages here enumerated.

[^1051]: 400:2 Koko nâma nâtha<i>h</i>, ke te a<i>s</i>vâ udîrata iti prathamâyâ<i>m</i> gâthâyâm ukta<i>m</i> tad atrâpy anuvartate; teshâ<i>m</i> tatra parimâ<i>n</i>a<i>m</i> noktam atra sha<i>t</i>tri<i>m</i>sad a<i>s</i>vasahasrâ<i>n</i>i rakshi<i>n</i>âm anu<i>k</i>arabhntâny udga<i>k</i><i>kh</i>antîty âha; trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>â<i>s</i> <i>k</i>odîrate sha<i>d</i> <i>dh</i>i(?) varmi<i>n</i>â<i>m</i> padânetâsu (?) ga<i>k</i><i>kh</i>antîti. Harisvâmin.

[^1052]: 401:1 Why these are here put before the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as, is not clear.

[^1053]: 401:2 Perhaps we ought here to read ‘Sâtrâ<i>g</i>ita.’

[^1054]: 401:3 Unless the Gâthâ in the preceding paragraph (being in the Trish<i>t</i>ubh metre) is really counted as two, the author seems here purposely to have omitted a verse. Possibly, however, it may mean, ‘the fourth,’ viz. referring to [paragraph 14](../Book_5_13_5#v13_5_4_14).