---
title: "Book IV — X, 5. Fifth Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_10_4">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book IV — X, 4. Fourth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_10_6">
          <span class="pr-2">Book IV — X, 6. Sixth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="v10_5_1"><sup><small>10:5:1</small></sup></span>

## FIFTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_5_1_11"><sup><small>10:5:1:11.</small></sup></span>  The mystic import of this Fire-altar, doubtless, is Speech; for it is with speech that it is built: with the <i>Ri</i><i>k</i>, the Ya<i>g</i>us and the Sâman as the divine (speech); and when he (the Adhvaryu) speaks with human speech, ‘Do ye this! do ye that!’ then also it (the altar) is built therewith.

<span id="v10_5_1_22"><sup><small>10:5:1:22.</small></sup></span>  Now, this speech is threefold—the <i>Ri</i>k-verses, the Ya<i>g</i>us-formulas, and the Sâman-tunes;—thereby the Fire-altar is threefold, inasmuch as it is built with that triad. Even thus, then, it is threefold; but in this respect also it is threefold, inasmuch as three kinds of bricks are put into it—those with masculine names, those with feminine names, and those with neuter names; and these limbs of men also are of three kinds—those with masculine names, those with feminine names, and those with neuter names. <span id="p365"><sup><small>[ p. 365 ]</small></sup></span> 10:5:1:33\. This body (of the altar), indeed, is threefold; and with this threefold body he obtains the threefold divine Am<i>ri</i>ta (nectar, immortality). Now all these (bricks) are called ‘ish<i>t</i>akâ (f.),’ not ‘ish<i>t</i>aka<i>h</i> (m.),’ nor ‘ish<i>t</i>akam (n.):’ thus (they are called) after the form of speech (vâ<i>k</i>, f.), for everything here is speech—whether feminine (female), masculine (male), or neuter—for by speech everything here is obtained. Therefore he ‘settles’ all (the bricks) [^713] with, ‘Aṅgiras-like lie thou steady (dhruvâ, f.)!’ not with, ‘Aṅgiras-like lie thou steady (dhruva<i>h</i>, m.)!’ or with, ‘Aṅgiras-like lie thou steady (dhruvam, n.)!’ for it is that Speech he is constructing.

<span id="v10_5_1_44"><sup><small>10:5:1:44.</small></sup></span>  Now, this speech is yonder sun, and this (Agni, the Fire-altar) is Death: hence whatsoever is on this side of the sun all that is field by Death; and he who builds it (the Fire-altar) on this side thereof, builds it as one held by Death, and he surrenders his own self unto Death; but he who builds it thereabove, conquers recurring Death, for by his knowledge that (altar) of his is built thereabove.

<span id="v10_5_1_55"><sup><small>10:5:1:55.</small></sup></span>  This speech, indeed, is threefold—the <i>Ri</i>k-verses, the Ya<i>g</i>us-formulas, and the Sâman-tunes the <i>Ri</i>k-verses are the orb, the Sâman-tunes the light, and the Ya<i>g</i>us-formulas the man (in the sun); and that immortal element, the shining light, is this lotus-leaf [^714]: thus, when he builds up the Fire-altar <span id="p366"><sup><small>[ p. 366 ]</small></sup></span> after laying down the lotus-leaf, it is on that immortal element that he builds for himself a body consisting of the <i>Ri</i>k, the Ya<i>g</i>us, and the Sâman; and he becomes immortal.


<span id="v10_5_2"><sup><small>10:5:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_5_2_11"><sup><small>10:5:2:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, that shining orb is the Great Litany, the <i>Ri</i>k-verses: this is the world of the <i>Ri</i><i>k</i>. And that glowing light is (the hymn of) the Great Rite, the Sâman-tunes: this is the world of the Sâman. And the man in yonder orb is the Fire-altar, the Ya<i>g</i>us-formulas: this is the world of the Ya<i>g</i>us.

<span id="v10_5_2_22"><sup><small>10:5:2:22.</small></sup></span>  It is this threefold lore that shines, and even they who do not know this say, ‘This threefold lore does indeed shine;’ for it is Speech that, seeing it, speaks thus.

<span id="v10_5_2_33"><sup><small>10:5:2:33.</small></sup></span>  And that man in yonder (sun's) orb is no other than Death; and that glowing light is that immortal element: therefore Death does not die, for he is within the immortal; and therefore he is not seen, for he is within the immortal [^715].

<span id="v10_5_2_44"><sup><small>10:5:2:44.</small></sup></span>  There is this verse:—‘Within Death is immortality,’—for below death is immortality;—‘founded on Death is immortality,’—for established on that man (in the sun) the immortal shines [^716];—‘Death putteth on the radiant,’—the <span id="p367"><sup><small>[ p. 367 ]</small></sup></span> radiant one (vivasvant), doubtless, is yonder sun, for he irradiates (vi-vas) day and night; and it is him that (Death) puts on, for on every side he is surrounded by him;—'Death's self is in the radiant,'—for the self (body) of that man indeed is in that orb: such, then, is that verse.

<span id="v10_5_2_55"><sup><small>10:5:2:55.</small></sup></span>  Now, that orb is the foundation (foothold) of both that light and that man; whence one must not recite the Great Litany for another [^717], lest he should cut away that foothold from beneath his own self; for he who recites the Mahad Uktham for another, indeed cuts away that foothold from beneath his own self: wherefore the (professional) singer of praises (<i>s</i>astra) is greatly despised, for he is cut off from his foothold. Thus in regard to the deity.

<span id="v10_5_2_66"><sup><small>10:5:2:66.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the sacrifice. That shining orb is the same as this gold plate (under the altar) [^718], and that glowing light is the same as this lotus-leaf (under the altar); for there are those (divine) <span id="p368"><sup><small>[ p. 368 ]</small></sup></span> waters [^719], and the lotus-leaf is water [^720]; and that man in yonder orb is no other than this gold man (in the altar): thus, by laying down these (in the fire-altar), it is that (divine) triad he constructs. And after the consummation of the sacrifice it rises upwards and enters that shining (sun): one need not therefore mind destroying Agni, for he is then in yonder (world) [^721]. Thus, then, in regard to the sacrifice.

<span id="v10_5_2_77"><sup><small>10:5:2:77.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the self (body). That shining orb and that gold plate are the same as the white here in the eye; and that glowing light and that lotus-leaf are the same as the black here in the eye; and that man in yonder orb and that gold man are the same as this man in the right eye. <span id="p369"><sup><small>[ p. 369 ]</small></sup></span> 10:5:2:88\. The Lokamp<i>ri</i><i>n</i>â (space-filling brick) is the same as that (gold man in the sun) [^722]: it is that (brick) which this entire Agni finally results in [^723]. Moreover, this man (or person) in the left eye is the mate of that one (in the right eye and in the sun); and a mate is one half of one's own self [^724], for when one is with a mate he is whole and complete: thus it (the second man) is for the sake of completeness. And as to there being two of these (persons in the eyes), a pair means a productive couple: hence two Lokamp<i>ri</i><i>n</i>âs are laid down each time [^725], and hence they set up the layer by two (kinds of bricks).

<span id="v10_5_2_99"><sup><small>10:5:2:99.</small></sup></span>  Now, that person in the right eye is the same as Indra, and (that other person is) the same as Indrâ<i>n</i>î: it is for the sake of these two that the gods made that partition (between the eyes), the nose; whence he (the husband) should not eat food in the presence of his wife [^726]; for from him (who <span id="p370"><sup><small>[ p. 370 ]</small></sup></span> does not do so) a vigorous son is born, and she in whose presence (the husband) does not eat food bears a vigorous (son):—

<span id="v10_5_2_1010"><sup><small>10:5:2:1010.</small></sup></span>  Such, indeed, is the divine ordinance;—amongst men princes keep most aloof [^727], and for that reason a vigorous (son) is born to them; and of birds the Am<i>ri</i>tavâkâ (does so, and she) produces the Kshipra<i>s</i>yena [^728].

<span id="v10_5_2_1111"><sup><small>10:5:2:1111.</small></sup></span>  Those two (persons in the eyes) descend to the cavity of the heart [^729], and enter into union with each other; and when they reach the end of their union, then the man sleeps,—even as here on reaching the end of a human union he becomes, as it were, insensible [^730], so does he then become, as it were, <span id="p371"><sup><small>[ p. 371 ]</small></sup></span> insensible; for this is a divine union [^731], and that is the highest bliss.

<span id="v10_5_2_1212"><sup><small>10:5:2:1212.</small></sup></span>  Therefore let him, who knows this, sleep, for it makes for heaven [^732]: he thereby, indeed, makes those two deities enjoy their dear wish, union. And one should not therefore forcibly [^733] awaken him who sleeps, lest he should hurt those two deities whilst enjoying their union; and hence the mouth of him who has been asleep is, as it were, clammy, for those two deities are then shedding seed, and from that seed everything here originates, whatsoever exists.

<span id="v10_5_2_1313"><sup><small>10:5:2:1313.</small></sup></span>  Now, that man in yonder orb (of the sun), and that man in the right eye truly are no other than Death;—his feet have stuck fast in the heart, and having pulled them out he comes forth; and when he comes forth then that man dies: whence they say of him who has passed away, ‘he has been cut off [^734].’

<span id="v10_5_2_1414"><sup><small>10:5:2:1414.</small></sup></span>  And, indeed, he is the breath (prâ<i>n</i>a), for it is he (the man in the eye) that leads forward (pra<i>n</i>ayati) all these creatures. These vital airs (prâ<i>n</i>a) are his own (sva); and when he sleeps (svapiti) then <span id="p372"><sup><small>[ p. 372 ]</small></sup></span> these vital airs take possession of him [^735] as his own (svâ api-yanti): hence (the term) 'svâpyaya (being taken possession of by one's own people),' ‘svâpyaya’ doubtless being what they mystically call ‘svapna (sleep),’ for the gods love the mystic.

<span id="v10_5_2_1515"><sup><small>10:5:2:1515.</small></sup></span>  And when he is asleep, he does not, by means of them, know of anything whatever, nor does he form any resolution with his mind, or distinguish the taste of food with (the channel of) his speech, or distinguish any smell with (the channel of) his breath; neither does he see with his eye, nor hear with his ear, for those (vital airs) have taken possession of him. Whilst being one only, he (the man in the eye) is numerously distributed among living beings: whence the Lokamp<i>ri</i><i>n</i>â (representing the man in the sun), whilst being one only (in kind), extends over the whole altar; and because he (the man in the eye) is one only, therefore (the Lokamp<i>ri</i><i>n</i>â) is one.

<span id="v10_5_2_1616"><sup><small>10:5:2:1616.</small></sup></span>  As to this they say, ‘One death, or many?’ Let him say, ‘Both one and many;’ for inasmuch as he is that (man in the sun) in yonder world he is one, and inasmuch as he is numerously distributed here on earth among living beings, there are also many of them.

<span id="v10_5_2_1717"><sup><small>10:5:2:1717.</small></sup></span>  As to this they say, ‘Is Death near or far away?’ Let him say, ‘Both near and far away;’ for inasmuch as he is here on earth in the body he is near, and inasmuch as he is that one in yonder world he also is far away.

<span id="v10_5_2_1818"><sup><small>10:5:2:1818.</small></sup></span>  Regarding this there is the verse,—‘Concealed <span id="p373"><sup><small>[ p. 373 ]</small></sup></span> in food he, the immortal, shineth at the flowing together of vital saps;’—yonder shining orb is food, and the man in that orb is the eater: being concealed in that food, he shines. Thus much as to the deity.

<span id="v10_5_2_1919"><sup><small>10:5:2:1919.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the body. This body indeed is food, and that man in the right eye is the eater: being concealed in that food he shines.

<span id="v10_5_2_2020"><sup><small>10:5:2:2020.</small></sup></span>  That same (divine person), the Adhvaryus (Ya<i>g</i>ur-veda priests) serve under the name of ‘Agni’ (fire-altar) and ‘Ya<i>g</i>us,’ because he holds together (yu<i>g</i>) all this (universe) [^736]; the <i>Kh</i>andogas (Sâma-veda priests, chanters) under that of ‘Sâman,’ because in him all this (universe) is one and the same (samâna) [^737]; the Bahv<i>ri</i><i>k</i>as (<i>Ri</i>g-veda priests, Hotars) under that of ‘Uktham,’ because he originates (utthâp) everything here; those skilled in sorcery, under that of ‘sorcery (yâtu),’ because everything here is held in check (yata) by him; the serpents under that of ‘poison;’ the snake-charmers under that of ‘snake;’ the gods under that of ‘ûr<i>g</i> (strengthening food);’ men under that of ‘wealth;’ demons under that of ‘mâyâ (magic power);’ the deceased Fathers under that of ‘svadhâ (invigorating draught);’ those knowing the divine host under that of ‘divine host;’ the Gandharvas under that of ‘form (rûpa [^738]);’ the Apsaras under that of ‘fragrance (gandha),’—thus, in whatsoever form they serve him that indeed he becomes, and, having become that, <span id="p374"><sup><small>[ p. 374 ]</small></sup></span> he is helpful to them; whence he who knows should serve him in all these (forms), for he becomes all that, and, having become all that, he is helpful to him.

<span id="v10_5_2_2121"><sup><small>10:5:2:2121.</small></sup></span>  Now this Agni (fire-altar) consists of three bricks,—the <i>Ri</i><i>k</i> being one, the Ya<i>g</i>us another, and the Sâman another: whatever (brick) he lays down here with a <i>ri</i>k (verse) that has the gold plate for its foundation [^739]; whatever (brick he lays down) with a ya<i>g</i>us (formula) that has the (gold) man for its foundation; and whatever (brick he lays down) with a sâman (hymn-tune) that has the lotus-leaf for its foundation. Thus he consists of three bricks.

<span id="v10_5_2_2222"><sup><small>10:5:2:2222.</small></sup></span>  And, indeed, these two, to wit, that gold plate and that lotus-leaf join that (gold) man, for both the <i>Ri</i><i>k</i> and the Sâman join the Ya<i>g</i>us; and so he also consists of a single brick.

<span id="v10_5_2_2323"><sup><small>10:5:2:2323.</small></sup></span>  Now, that man in yonder orb (of the sun), and this man in the right eye, are no other than Death [^740]; and he becomes the body (self) of him who knows this: whenever he who knows departs this world he passes into that body, and becomes immortal, for Death is his own self.


<span id="v10_5_3"><sup><small>10:5:3</small></sup></span>

## THIRD BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_5_3_11"><sup><small>10:5:3:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, in the beginning this (universe) was, as it were [^741], neither non-existent nor existent; in <span id="p375"><sup><small>[ p. 375 ]</small></sup></span> the beginning this (universe), indeed, as it were, existed and did not exist: there was then only that Mind.

<span id="v10_5_3_22"><sup><small>10:5:3:22.</small></sup></span>  Wherefore it has been said by the <i>Ri</i>shi (<i>Ri</i>g-veda X, 129, 1), ‘There was then neither the non-existent nor the existent;’ for Mind was, as it were, neither existent nor non-existent.

<span id="v10_5_3_33"><sup><small>10:5:3:33.</small></sup></span>  This Mind, when created, wished to become manifest,—more defined [^742], more substantial: it sought after a self (body) [^743]. It practised austerity [^744]: it acquired consistency [^745]. It then beheld thirty-six thousand Arka-fires [^746] of its own self, composed of mind, built up of mind: mentally [^747] alone they were established (on sacrificial hearths) and mentally <span id="p376"><sup><small>[ p. 376 ]</small></sup></span> built up [^748]; mentally the cups (of Soma) were drawn thereat mentally they chanted, and mentally they recited on (near) them,—whatever rite is performed at the sacrifice, whatever sacrificial rite there is, that was performed mentally only, as a mental performance, on those (fires or fire-altars) composed of mind, and built up of mind. And whatever it is that (living) beings here conceive in their mind that was done regarding those (mental Agnis [^749]):—they establish them (on the hearths) and build them up (as fire-altars); they draw the cups for them; they chant on (near) them and recite hymns on them,—of that extent was the development of Mind, of that extent its creation,—so great is Mind: thirty-six thousand Arka-fires; and each of these as great as that former (fire-altar) was.

<span id="v10_5_3_44"><sup><small>10:5:3:44.</small></sup></span>  That Mind created Speech. This Speech, when created, wished to become manifest,—more defined, more substantial: it sought after a self. It practised austerity: it acquired consistency. It beheld thirty-six thousand Arka-fires of its own self, composed of speech, built up of speech: with speech they were established, and with speech built up; with speech the cups were drawn thereat; with speech they chanted, and with speech they recited on them—whatever rite is performed at the sacrifice, whatever sacrificial rite there is, that was <span id="p377"><sup><small>[ p. 377 ]</small></sup></span> performed by speech alone, as a vocal performance, on those (fires) composed of speech, and built up of speech. And whatever beings here speak by speech that was done regarding those (fires): they establish them and build them up; they draw the cups for them; they chant on them and recite hymns on them,—of that extent was the development of Speech, of that extent its creation,—so great is Speech: thirty-six thousand Arka-fires; and each of these as great as that former (fire-altar) was.

<span id="v10_5_3_55"><sup><small>10:5:3:55.</small></sup></span>  That Speech created the Breath. This Breath, when created, wished to become manifest,—more defined, more substantial: it sought after a self. It practised austerity: it acquired consistency. It beheld thirty-six thousand Arka-fires of its own self, composed of breath, built up of breath: with breath they were established, and with breath built up; with breath the cups were drawn thereat; with breath they chanted and with breath they recited on them,—whatever rite is performed at the sacrifice, whatever sacrificial rite there is, that was performed by breath alone, as a breathing-performance, on those (fires) composed of breath, and built up of breath. And whatever beings here breathe with breath that was done regarding those (fires):—they establish them, and build them up; they draw the cups for them; they chant on them and recite hymns on them,—of that extent was the development of Breath, of that extent was its creation,—so great is Breath: thirty-six thousand Arka-fires; and each of these as great as that former (fire-altar) was.

<span id="v10_5_3_66"><sup><small>10:5:3:66.</small></sup></span>  That Breath created the Eye. This Eye, when created, wished to become manifest,—more <span id="p378"><sup><small>[ p. 378 ]</small></sup></span> defined, more substantial: it sought after a self. It practised austerity: it acquired consistency. It beheld thirty-six thousand Arka-fires of its own self, composed of the eye, built up of the eye: by means of the eye they were established, and by means of the eye built up; by the eye the cups were drawn thereat; by means of the eye they chanted and recited hymns on them,—whatever rite is performed as the sacrifice, whatever sacrificial rite there is, that was performed by the eye alone, as an eye-performance, on those (fires) composed of eye, and built up of the eye. And whatever beings here see with the eye that was done regarding those (fires):they establish them and build them up; they draw the cups for them; they chant on them and recite hymns on them,—of that extent was the development of the Eye, of that extent its creation,—so great is the Eye: thirty-six thousand Arka-fires; and each of these as great as that former (fire-altar) was.

<span id="v10_5_3_77"><sup><small>10:5:3:77.</small></sup></span>  That Eye created the Ear. This Ear, when created, wished to become manifest,—more defined, more substantial: it sought after a self. It practised austerity: it acquired consistency. It beheld thirty-six thousand Arka-fires of its own self, composed of the ear, built up of the ear: by means of the ear they were established, and by means of the ear built up; by the ear the cups were drawn thereat; by means of the ear they chanted and recited hymns on them,—whatever rite is performed at the sacrifice, whatever sacrificial rite there is, that was performed by the ear alone, as an ear-performance, on those (fires) composed of ear, and built up of the ear. And whatever beings here hear with the ear <span id="p379"><sup><small>[ p. 379 ]</small></sup></span> that was done regarding those (fires):—they establish them and build, them up; they draw the cups for them; they chant on them and recite hymns on them,—of that extent was the development of the Ear, of that extent its creation,—so great is the Ear: thirty-six thousand Arka-fires; and each of these as great as that former (fire-altar) was.

<span id="v10_5_3_88"><sup><small>10:5:3:88.</small></sup></span>  That Ear created Work, and this condensed itself into the vital airs, into this compound, this composition of food [^750]; for incomplete is work without the vital airs, and incomplete are the vital airs without work.

<span id="v10_5_3_99"><sup><small>10:5:3:99.</small></sup></span>  This Work, when created, wished to become manifest,—more defined, more substantial: it sought after a self. It practised austerity: it acquired consistency. It beheld thirty-six thousand Arka-fires of its own self, composed of work, built up of (or by) work: by work they were established, and by work built up; by work the cups were drawn thereat; by work they chanted and recited hymns on them,—whatever rite is performed at the sacrifice, whatever sacrificial rite there is, that was performed by work alone, as a work-performance, on those (fires) composed of work, and built up of work. And whatever beings here work by work that was done regarding those (fires);—they establish them and build them up; they draw the cups for them; they chant on them and recite hymns on them,—of that extent was the development of Work, of that <span id="p380"><sup><small>[ p. 380 ]</small></sup></span> extent its creation,—so great is Work: thirty-six thousand Arka-fires; and each of these as great as that former (fire-altar) was.

<span id="v10_5_3_1010"><sup><small>10:5:3:1010.</small></sup></span>  That Work created the Fire,—Fire, doubtless, is more manifest than Work, for by work (sacrificial performance) they produce it, and by work they kindle it.

<span id="v10_5_3_1111"><sup><small>10:5:3:1111.</small></sup></span>  This Fire, when created, wished to become manifest,—more defined, more substantial: it sought after a self. It practised austerity [^751]: it acquired consistency. It beheld thirty-six thousand Arka-fires of its own self, composed of fire, built up of fire: with fire they were established, and with fire built up; with fire the cups were drawn thereat; with fire they chanted and recited hymns on them;—whatever rite is performed at the sacrifice, whatever sacrificial rite there is, that was performed with fire alone, as a fire-performance, on those (fires) composed of fire, and built up of fire. And whatever fire beings here kindle that was done regarding those (fires):—they establish them and build them up; they draw the cups for them; they chant on them and recite hymns on them,—of that extent was the development of Fire, of that extent its creation,—so great is Fire: thirty-six thousand Arka-fires; and each of these as great as that former (fire-altar) was.

<span id="v10_5_3_1212"><sup><small>10:5:3:1212.</small></sup></span>  These fires (altars), in truth, are knowledge-built; and all beings at all times build them for him who knows this, even whilst he is asleep: by knowledge alone these fires (altars) are indeed built for him who knows this.


<span id="v10_5_4"><sup><small>10:5:4</small></sup></span>

<span id="p381"><sup><small>[ p. 381 ]</small></sup></span>

## FOURTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_5_4_11"><sup><small>10:5:4:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this (brick-)built Fire-altar (Agni) is this (terrestrial) world:—the waters (of the encircling ocean) are its (circle of) enclosing-stones; the men its Ya<i>g</i>ushmatîs (bricks with special formulas); the cattle its Sûdadohas [^752]; the plants and trees its earth-fillings (between the layers of bricks), its oblations and fire-logs [^753]; Agni (the terrestrial fire) its Lokamp<i>ri</i><i>n</i>â (space-filling brick);—thus this comes to make up the whole Agni, and the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler [^754]; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler [^755].

<span id="v10_5_4_22"><sup><small>10:5:4:22.</small></sup></span>  But, indeed, that Fire-altar also is the air:—the function of heaven and earth (the horizon) is its (circle of) enclosing-stones, for it is beyond the air that heaven and earth meet, and that (junction) is the (circle of) enclosing-stones; the birds are its Ya<i>g</i>ushmatî bricks, the rain its Sûdadohas, the rays <span id="p382"><sup><small>[ p. 382 ]</small></sup></span> of light its earth-fillings, oblations and fire-logs; Vâyu (the wind) is its space-filler; thus this comes to make up the whole Agni, and the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span id="v10_5_4_33"><sup><small>10:5:4:33.</small></sup></span>  But, indeed, that Fire-altar also is the sky:—the (heavenly) waters are its enclosing-stones, for even as a case [^756] here is closed up so are these worlds (enclosed) within the waters; and the waters beyond these worlds are the enclosing-stones;—the gods are the Ya<i>g</i>ushmatî bricks; what food there is in that world is its Sûdadohas; the Nakshatras (lunar mansions) are the earth-fillings, the oblations and the fire-logs; and Âditya (the sun) is the space-filler;—thus this comes to make up the whole Agni; and the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span id="v10_5_4_44"><sup><small>10:5:4:44.</small></sup></span>  But, indeed, that Fire-altar also is the sun:—the regions are its enclosing-stones, and there are three hundred and sixty of these [^757], because three hundred and sixty regions encircle the sun on all sides;—the rays are its Ya<i>g</i>ushmatî bricks, for there are three hundred and sixty of these [^758], and three hundred and sixty rays of the sun; and in that he establishes the Ya<i>g</i>ushmatîs within the enclosing-stones thereby he establishes the rays in the regions. And what is between the regions and the rays, is its Sûdadohas; and what food there is in the regions and rays that is the earth-fillings, the oblations and <span id="p383"><sup><small>[ p. 383 ]</small></sup></span> the fire-logs; and that which is called both ‘regions’ and ‘rays’ is the space-filling (brick):—thus this comes to make up the whole Agni; and the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span id="v10_5_4_55"><sup><small>10:5:4:55.</small></sup></span>  But, indeed, that Fire-altar also is the Nakshatras:—for there are twenty-seven of these Nakshatras, and twenty-seven secondary stars accompany each Nakshatra,—this makes seven hundred and twenty [^759], and thirty-six in addition thereto. Now what seven hundred and twenty bricks [^760] there are of these, they are the three hundred and sixty enclosing-stones and the three hundred and sixty Ya<i>g</i>ushmatî bricks; and what thirty-six there are in addition, they are the thirteenth (intercalary) month, the body (of the altar); the trunk [^761] (consisting of) thirty, the feet of two, the (channels of the) vital airs of two [^762], and the head itself being the (thirty-fifth and) thirty-sixth,—and as to there being two of these, it is because ‘<i>s</i>iras’ (head) consists of two syllables;—and what (space) there is between (each) two <span id="p384"><sup><small>[ p. 384 ]</small></sup></span> Nakshatras that is the Sûdadohas; and what food there is in the Nakshatras that is the earth-fillings (between the layers of bricks), the oblations and the fire-logs; and what is called ‘nakshatras’ that is the space-filling (brick):—thus this comes to make up the whole Agni, and the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span id="v10_5_4_66"><sup><small>10:5:4:66.</small></sup></span>  Now, these (amount to) twenty-one B<i>ri</i>hatîs [^763]; and—the heavenly world being the twenty-one-fold one [^764] and the B<i>ri</i>hatî (the great one)—this (altar) thus comes to be equal to the heavenly world, and to the twenty-one-fold Stoma (hymn-form) and the B<i>ri</i>hatî metre.

<span id="v10_5_4_77"><sup><small>10:5:4:77.</small></sup></span>  But, indeed, that Fire-altar also is the Metres; for there are seven of these metres, increasing by four syllables [^765]; and the triplets of these make seven hundred and twenty syllables, and thirty-six in addition thereto. Now what seven hundred and twenty bricks there are of these, they are the three hundred and sixty enclosing-stones and the three hundred and sixty Ya<i>g</i>ushmatîs; and what thirty-six there are in addition, they are the thirteenth month, and the body (of this altar),—the trunk (consisting of) thirty, the feet of two, <span id="p385"><sup><small>[ p. 385 ]</small></sup></span> the vital airs of two, and the head itself being the (thirty-fifth and) thirty-sixth; and as to there being two of these, it is because ‘<i>s</i>iras’ consists of two syllables.

<span id="v10_5_4_88"><sup><small>10:5:4:88.</small></sup></span>  Now the first ten syllables of this B<i>ri</i>hatî, consisting of thirty-six syllables, make an Ekapadâ [^766] of ten syllables; and the (first) twenty make a Dvipadâ of twenty syllables; and the (first) thirty a Virâ<i>g</i> [^767] of thirty syllables; and the (first) thirty-three a (Virâ<i>g</i>) of thirty-three syllables; and the (first) thirty-four a Svarâ<i>g</i> [^768] of thirty-four syllables; and in that this fire-altar is built with all metres thereby it is an Ati<i>kh</i>andas [^769], and (so) indeed are all these bricks [^770]. And the three syllables ‘ish<i>t</i>akâ (brick)’ are a Gâyatrî tripadâ, whence this Agni is Gâyatra; and the three syllables ‘m<i>ri</i>d’ (clay) and ‘âpa<i>h</i>’ (water) [^771] also are a Gâyatrî tripadâ: thereby also he is Gâyatra. And what is between (each two) metres is the <span id="p386"><sup><small>[ p. 386 ]</small></sup></span> Sûdadohas; and the food which is in the metres is the earth-fillings, the oblations, and the fire-logs; and what is called ‘metres,’ that is the space-filling (brick):—thus this comes to make up the whole Agni; and the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span id="v10_5_4_99"><sup><small>10:5:4:99.</small></sup></span>  Now, these (amount to) twenty-one B<i>ri</i>hatîs; and—the heavenly world being the twenty-one-fold and the B<i>ri</i>hatî—this (altar) thus comes to be equal to the heavenly world, and to the twenty-one-fold Stoma and the B<i>ri</i>hatî metre.

<span id="v10_5_4_1010"><sup><small>10:5:4:1010.</small></sup></span>  But, indeed, that Fire-altar also is the Year,—the nights are its enclosing-stones, and there are three hundred and sixty of these, because there are three hundred and sixty nights in the year; and the days are its Ya<i>g</i>ushmatî bricks, for there are three hundred and sixty of these, and three hundred and sixty days in the year; and those thirty-six bricks which are over [^772] are the thirteenth month, the body (of the year and the altar), the half-months and months,—(there being) twenty-four half-months, and twelve months. And what there is between day and night that is the Sûdadohas; and what food there is in the days and nights is the earth-fillings, the oblations, and the fire-logs; and what is called ‘days and nights’ that constitutes the space-filling (brick):—thus this comes to make up the whole Agni, and the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler. <span id="p387"><sup><small>[ p. 387 ]</small></sup></span> 10:5:4:1111\. Now, these (amount to) twenty-one B<i>ri</i>hatîs; and—the heavenly world being the twenty-one-fold and the B<i>ri</i>hatî—this (altar) thus comes to be equal to the heavenly world, and to the twenty-one-fold Stoma and the B<i>ri</i>hatî metre.

<span id="v10_5_4_1212"><sup><small>10:5:4:1212.</small></sup></span>  But, indeed, that Fire-altar also-is the body,—the bones are its enclosing-stones, and there are three hundred and sixty of these, because there are three hundred and sixty bones in man; the marrow parts are the Ya<i>g</i>ushmatî bricks, for there are three hundred and sixty of these, and three hundred and sixty parts of marrow in man; and those thirty-six bricks which are over, are the thirteenth month, the trunk, the vital air (of the altar),—in his body there are thirty parts [^773], in his feet two, in his vital airs two, and in his head two,—as to there being two of these, it is because the head consists of two skull-bones. And that whereby these joints are held together is the Sûdadohas; and those three whereby this body is covered—to wit, hair, skin, and flesh—are the earth-fillings; what he drinks is the oblations, and what he eats the fire-logs; and what is called the ‘body,’ that is the space-filling (brick):—thus this comes to make up the whole Agni, and the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span id="v10_5_4_1313"><sup><small>10:5:4:1313.</small></sup></span>  Now, these (amount to) twenty-one B<i>ri</i>hatîs; and—the heavenly world being the twenty-one-fold and the B<i>ri</i>hatî—this (altar) thus comes to be equal to the heavenly world, and to the twenty-one-fold Stoma and the B<i>ri</i>hatî metre. <span id="p388"><sup><small>[ p. 388 ]</small></sup></span> 10:5:4:1414\. But, indeed, that built Agni (the fire-altar) is all beings, all the gods; for all the gods, all beings are the waters [^774], and that built fire-altar is the same as those waters [^775];—the navigable streams (round the sun) are its enclosing-stones, and there are three hundred and sixty of these, because three hundred and sixty navigable streams encircle the sun on all sides; and the navigable streams, indeed, are also the Ya<i>g</i>ushmatî bricks, and there are three hundred and sixty of these, because three hundred and sixty navigable streams flow towards [^776] the sun. And what is between (each) two navigable rivers is the Sûdadohas; and those thirty-six bricks which remain over are the same as that thirteenth month, and the body (of this altar, the waters [^777],) is the same as this gold man.

<span id="v10_5_4_1515"><sup><small>10:5:4:1515.</small></sup></span>  His feet are that gold plate and lotus-leaf(that is) the waters and the sun's orb [^778]\—are his feet; his arms are the two spoons, and they are Indra and Agni; the two naturally-perforated (bricks) are this earth and the air; and the three Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>yotis (all-light) bricks are these deities—Agni, Vâyu, and <span id="p389"><sup><small>[ p. 389 ]</small></sup></span> Âditya, for these deities, indeed, are all the light; and the twelve seasonal (bricks) are the year, the body (of the altar, and the gold man); and the five Nâkasads and five Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>a<i>k</i>û<i>d</i>âs are the sacrifice, the gods; and the Vikar<i>n</i>î the (third) Svayamât<i>ri</i><i>n</i><i>n</i>â and the variegated stone [^779]; and the fire which is deposited (on the altar [^779]) is the thirty-fifth; and the formula of the Lokamp<i>ri</i><i>n</i>â (brick) [^780] is the thirty-sixth;—that (gold man), indeed, the body (of the altar) is the end of everything here [^781]: he is in the midst of all the waters, endowed with all objects of desire—for all objects of desire are the waters [^782]; whilst possessed of all (objects of) desires he is without desire, for no desire of anything (troubles) him [^783].

<span id="v10_5_4_1616"><sup><small>10:5:4:1616.</small></sup></span>  Regarding this there is this verse—‘By knowledge [^784] they ascend that (state) where desires have vanished [^785]: sacrificial gifts go not thither [^786], nor the fervid practisers of rites without knowledge;’—for, indeed, he who does not know this does not attain to that world either by sacrificial gifts or by devout <span id="p390"><sup><small>[ p. 390 ]</small></sup></span> practices, but only to those who know does that world belong.

<span id="v10_5_4_1717"><sup><small>10:5:4:1717.</small></sup></span>  The welkin is the earth-fillings (between the layers of brick); the moon the oblations; the Nakshatras (lunar mansions) the fire-logs,—because the moon resides in (or with) the Nakshatra, therefore the oblation resides in the fire-wood: that [^787], indeed, is the food of the oblation, and its support; whence the oblation does not fail (na kshîyate), for that is its food and its support And what are called ‘the gods’ they are the space-filling (brick); for by (naming) the gods everything here is named.

10:5:4:1818 It is regarding this that it is said by the <i>Ri</i><i>k</i> (X, 12, 3), ‘The All-gods have gone after this thy Ya<i>g</i>us,’—for all beings, all the gods, indeed, become the Ya<i>g</i>us here. Thus this whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span id="v10_5_4_1919"><sup><small>10:5:4:1919.</small></sup></span>  Now, these (amount to) twenty-one B<i>ri</i>hatîs; and—the heavenly world being the twenty-one-fold and the B<i>ri</i>hatî—this (altar) thus comes to be equal to the heavenly world, and to the twenty-one-fold Stoma and the B<i>ri</i>hatî metre.


<span id="v10_5_5"><sup><small>10:5:5</small></sup></span>

## FIFTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_5_5_11"><sup><small>10:5:5:11.</small></sup></span>  Ku<i>s</i>ri Vâ<i>g</i>a<i>s</i>ravasa [^788] once built a fire-altar. Su<i>s</i>ravas Kaushya then said to him, 'Gautama, when thou wert just now building up Agni, didst thou build him with his face forward, or backward, or downward, or upward? <span id="p391"><sup><small>[ p. 391 ]</small></sup></span> 10:5:5:22\. 'If perchance thou hast built him looking forward, it would be just as if one were to offer food from behind to one sitting with averted face [^789]: he thereby will not receive thy offering.

<span id="v10_5_5_33"><sup><small>10:5:5:33.</small></sup></span>  'And if thou hast built him looking backward, wherefore, then, hast thou made him a tail behind?

<span id="v10_5_5_44"><sup><small>10:5:5:44.</small></sup></span>  'And if thou hast built him with his face downward, it would be just as if one were to put food on the back of one lying with his face downward: he surely will not receive thy offering.

<span id="v10_5_5_55"><sup><small>10:5:5:55.</small></sup></span>  ‘And if thou hast built him with his face upward—surely, a bird does not fly towards heaven with its face turned upward [^790]: he will not carry thee to heaven, he will not become conducive to heaven for thee.’

<span id="v10_5_5_66"><sup><small>10:5:5:66.</small></sup></span>  He said, ‘I have built him with his face forward; I have built him with his face backward; I have built him with his face downward; I have built him with his face upward: I have built him in all directions.’

<span id="v10_5_5_77"><sup><small>10:5:5:77.</small></sup></span>  When he lays down the (gold) man with his head forward (eastward), and the two spoons (with their bowls) forward [^791], thereby he (Agni) is built looking forward; and when he lays down the <span id="p392"><sup><small>[ p. 392 ]</small></sup></span> tortoise [^792] with its head backward (westward), and the victims’ heads turned backward, thereby he is built looking backward; and when he, lays down the tortoise with its face downward, and the victims’ heads with their faces downward, and the bricks with their faces downward [^793], thereby he is built looking downward; and when he lays down the (gold) man with his face upward, and the two spoons (with their open bowls) turned upward, and the mortar turned upward, and the fire-pan turned upward, thereby he is built looking upward; and when he lays down the bricks whilst moving round (the altar) in every direction, thereby he is built (looking) in all directions.

<span id="v10_5_5_88"><sup><small>10:5:5:88.</small></sup></span>  Now, the Koshas, whilst driving about, once drove up [^794] to an Agni with his head pulled out [^795]. One of them said, ‘The head (<i>s</i>iras) means excellence (<i>s</i>rî): he has pulled out his excellence, he will be deprived of his all!’ and so indeed it happened to him.

<span id="v10_5_5_99"><sup><small>10:5:5:99.</small></sup></span>  And another said, ‘The head means the vital airs: he has pulled out his vital airs, he will quickly go to yonder world!’ and so, indeed, it happened to him. <span id="p393"><sup><small>[ p. 393 ]</small></sup></span> 10:5:5:1010\. Upwards, indeed, he (Agni) is built up, to wit, (in the shape of) the grass-bunch, the clod-bricks, the lotus-leaf, the gold plate and man, the two spoons, the naturally-perforated one, the grass-brick, the Dviya<i>g</i>us, the two Reta<i>h</i>si<i>k</i>, the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>yotis, the two seasonal bricks, the Ashâ<i>dh</i>â, and the tortoise; and that fire which is placed on the altar-pile, assuredly, is then most manifestly his (Agni's) head: let him therefore not pull out (the head).



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_10_4">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book IV — X, 4. Fourth Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_10_6">
          <span class="pr-2">Book IV — X, 6. Sixth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^725]: 365:1 See VI, 1, 2, 28; VII, 1, 1, 30.

[^726]: 365:2 Viz. the lotus-leaf deposited in the centre of the altar-site, before the first layer is laid down, see VII, 4, 1, 7 seqq., where, however, it is represented as symbolising the womb whence Agni (the fire-altar) is to be born.

[^727]: 366:1 M<i>ri</i>tyurûpa<i>h</i> purushoऽm<i>ri</i>tarûpesऽr<i>k</i>ishy antar vartate, . . . m<i>ri</i>tyo<i>h</i> purushasya am<i>ri</i>tam am<i>ri</i>tarûpâr<i>k</i>ir adhikara<i>n</i>a<i>m</i> ma<i>n</i><i>d</i>alam âhitam pratish<i>th</i>itam. Sâya<i>n</i>a.

[^728]: 366:2 ‘Antarara<i>m</i> m<i>ri</i>tyor am<i>ri</i>tam ity avara<i>m</i> hy etan m<i>ri</i>tyor am<i>ri</i>tam’ ity âdinâ, avaram adhastâdbhâvam am<i>ri</i>ta<i>m</i> purusha<i>h</i> p. 367 parastâd ity arthasiddha<i>h</i>; anena am<i>ri</i>tamadhyavartitvam uktam ity artha<i>h</i>; dvitîyapâdagatâm<i>ri</i>tapadenâr<i>k</i>ir adhikara<i>n</i>a<i>m</i> ma<i>n</i><i>d</i>alam u<i>k</i>yate, tat purushe pratish<i>th</i>ita<i>m</i> tapati, tena hi tasya ma<i>n</i><i>d</i>alasya <i>g</i>agatprakâ<i>s</i>akatvam asti. Sây. But for this interpretation, one might have rendered the first pâda by, ‘Close unto death is immortality,’ for after death comes immortality.

[^729]: 367:1 Cf. Aitareyâr. V, 3, 3, 1, ‘No one but a dîkshita (initiated) should recite the Mahâvrata (<i>s</i>astra); and he should not recite it at a (Mahâvrata) unless it be combined with (the building of) a fire-altar; neither should he do so for another person, nor at a (sacrificial session lasting) less than a year,’ so say some; but he may recite it for his father or for his teacher, for in that case it is recited on his own behalf.

[^730]: 367:2 In these symbolical identifications, one might also take the relative clause to be the predicate, not the subject, of the sentence; the former usually preceding the latter.

[^731]: 368:1 Though the sun itself does not consist of water, he at any rate floats along a sea of water; cf. VII, 5, 1, 8, ‘For that indeed is the deepest of waters where yonder sun shines;’ and there are waters above and below the sun, VII, 1, 1, 24; and the sun is encircled by 360 navigable streams, and as many flow towards it, [X, 5, 4, 14](../Book_4_10_5#v10_5_4_14).—Sâya<i>n</i>a, on the other hand, takes it to mean, ‘for that (light) is water,’ inasmuch as the sun's rays produce the rain,—ar<i>k</i>isho hy âpa<i>h</i> sûryakira<i>n</i>ânâm eva v<i>ri</i>sh<i>t</i>ikart<i>ri</i>katvât kâryakâranayor abhedena ar<i>k</i>ir vâ âpa ity uktam. Possibly this may be the right interpretation.

[^732]: 368:2 See VII, 4, 1, 8, where the lotus-plant is said to represent the (cosmic) waters, whilst the earth is a lotus-leaf floating on the waters.

[^733]: 368:3 According to Sâya<i>n</i>a, he is so in the shape of both the sun and the Sacrificer's body or self,—yatoऽsminn agni<i>m</i> <i>k</i>itavân paratrâdityo bhavati, atoऽgni<i>m</i> parihantu<i>m</i> nâdriyeta, <i>k</i>i<i>t</i>am agnim ish<i>t</i>akâvi<i>s</i>eshe<i>n</i>a nâ<i>s</i>ayitam âdara<i>m</i> na <i>k</i>uryât, kuta<i>h</i>, eshoऽgnir amutra bhavati, paraloke ya<i>g</i>amâna<i>s</i>arîrâtmanotpadyate; yad vâ parihantu<i>m</i> prâptu<i>m</i> sprash<i>t</i>um ity artha<i>h</i>, <i>k</i>ityâgnispar<i>s</i>ane dosha<i>s</i>rava<i>n</i>ât. Sâya<i>n</i>a, thus, is doubtful as to how ‘Agnim parihantum’ is to be taken, whether it means ‘to injure the altar (? or extinguish the fire) by some brick,’ or to ‘knock against (touch) the altar.’ The St. Petersb. Dict. takes it in the sense of ‘to extinguish the fire,’ p. 369 but it might also, perhaps, mean, ‘to destroy the fire-altar’ by taking it to pieces.

[^734]: 369:1 On the identification of the sun with the Lokamp<i>ri</i><i>n</i>â on the ground that the former fills these worlds (lokân pûrayati), see [VIII, 7, 2, 1](../Book_4_8_7#v8_7_2_1).

[^735]: 369:2 Or, finally comes to; viz. inasmuch as it is by the placing of the Lokamp<i>ri</i><i>n</i>â bricks that the altar is completed (Sây.); and inasmuch as Agni passes into the sun.

[^736]: 369:3 Purusho mithuna<i>m</i> yoshid ity etasmin mithuna<i>m</i> hy âtmanoऽrdham ardhabhâga<i>h</i>, ardho vâ esha âtmano yat patnîti taittirîya<i>s</i>rute<i>h</i>. Sây.

[^737]: 369:4 When the layers are filled up with ‘space-fillers,’ two Lokamp<i>ri</i><i>n</i>âs are first laid down in one of the four corners, and from them the available spaces are then filled up, in two turns, in the sunwise direction; cf. [p. 22](../Book_4_8_1#p22), note [1](../Book_4_8_2#fn73).

[^738]: 369:5 Cf. I, 9, 2, 12, ‘whenever women here eat, they do so apart from men;’ where the use of the ‘<i>g</i>ighatsanti’ (swallow their p. 370 food)—as against a<i>s</i>nîyât in our passage—is not meant disrespectfully, but as the regular desiderative of ‘ad’ (Pâ<i>n</i>. II, 4, 37), for which no doubt ‘a<i>s</i>i<i>s</i>ishanti’ (Sat. Br. III, 1, 2, 1) might have been used.

[^739]: 370:1 Or, ‘act most in secrecy.’ Sâya<i>n</i>a explains it: manushyâ<i>n</i>â<i>m</i> madhye râ<i>g</i>anyabandhavoऽnutamâ<i>m</i> gopâyanti atyartha<i>m</i> rahasyatvena kurvanti tasmât teshu viryavân putro <i>g</i>âyate. The St. Petersb. Dict., on the other hand, takes it in the sense of ‘they protect most of all;’ though it is difficult to see how the, ‘protection’ afforded by princes or rulers could have any bearing on men taking their food apart from their wives. If the above interpretation is right we may compare ‘anu-gup’ in the sense of ‘to conceal.’ See, however, the next note, where Sâya<i>n</i>a takes ‘gopâyati’ in the sense of ‘observes (that law),’ which might also have suited here. Princes, having their seraglio, would naturally have less occasion for coming into contact with their wives at mealtime than men of lower stations of life. On the superlative of the preposition, see [p. 287](../Book_4_10_1#p287), note [1](../Book_4_10_1#fn531).

[^740]: 370:2 ? The swift eagle,—vayasâm pakshi<i>n</i>âm madhye am<i>ri</i>tavâkâ nâma pakshi<i>g</i>âtir etad vrata<i>m</i> gopâyati, ata<i>h</i> sâ kshipra<i>m</i> <i>s</i>îghragâmina<i>m</i> <i>s</i>yena<i>m</i> nâma pakshi<i>n</i>a<i>m</i> <i>g</i>anayati. Sây.

[^741]: 370:3 H<i>ri</i>dayasyâkâ<i>s</i>a<i>m</i> daharam prâpya. Sây.

[^742]: 370:4 That is, ‘unconscious,’ with something of ‘indifferent, apathetic,’ implied:—Loke mânushasya maithunasyânta<i>m</i> gatvâऽ sa<i>m</i>vidâ p. 371 a<i>g</i>ânâneva nrâ strî bhavati (marg. corr. a<i>g</i>ânânâv eva strîpurushau bhavata<i>h</i>) eva<i>m</i> tadâ tayor mithunabhâve (? mithunâbhâve) purushoऽsa<i>m</i>vida iva bhavati. Sây.

[^743]: 371:1 Viz. because it is the union of Indra and Indrâ<i>n</i>î.

[^744]: 371:2 Or, perhaps, it is the usual practice (lokyam), as the St. Petersb. Dict. takes it.

[^745]: 371:3 Dhureva pî<i>d</i>ayaiva na bodhayet, na prabuddha<i>m</i> kuryât, dhûrvater hi<i>m</i>sârthat kvipi <i>t</i>âblope rûpam. Sây.

[^746]: 371:4 ? His (life) has been cut off; or, his (life-string) has been severed. Sâya<i>n</i>a (unless there is an omission in the MS.) does not explain ‘<i>k</i>â<i>kh</i>edy asya,’ but seems to take ‘pretam’ (passed away) as the word on which the stress lies:—tasmâd imam pretam ity âhu<i>h</i>, prapûrvâd ete<i>h</i> ktapratyaye rûpam; katham, akshipurushanirgame purushasya mara<i>n</i>am.

[^747]: 372:1 Or, they keep within him, they nestle in him,—apiyanti prâpnuvanti, âliyanta ity artha<i>h</i>. Sây.

[^748]: 373:1 Esha purusha ida<i>m</i> sarva<i>m</i> <i>g</i>agad yunakti sarvatra svaya<i>m</i> sa<i>m</i>gata iti. Sây.

[^749]: 373:2 Etasmin paramâtmani kâra<i>n</i>e sarva<i>m</i> kârya<i>g</i>âta<i>m</i> samânam iti. Sây.

[^750]: 373:3 The characteristic attributes of the Gandharvas and Apsaras are evidently exchanged in the text as it stands; cf. [IX, 4, 1, 4](../Book_4_9_4#v9_4_1_4).

[^751]: 374:1 Viz. inasmuch as the (round) gold plate (representing the sun) is deposited in the centre of the altar-site, before the first layer is constructed. In the same way the other two objects.

[^752]: 374:2 Sâya<i>n</i>a seems to construe this somewhat differently: sa esho gnir ya<i>g</i>urâtmakoऽdhidaiva<i>m</i> ma<i>n</i><i>d</i>alamadhyavartî adhyâtma<i>m</i> dakshi<i>n</i>âkshivartî purusho m<i>ri</i>tyurûpa<i>h</i>.

[^753]: 374:3 Sâya<i>n</i>a seems to take ‘iva’ here in the sense of ‘eva,’ as indeed it often has to be taken, especially in negative sentences.

[^754]: 375:1 Niruktatara<i>m</i> nirukta<i>m</i> <i>s</i>abdanirvâ<i>k</i>yam. Sây.

[^755]: 375:2 Sâya<i>n</i>a also allows the interpretation, ‘after (its source, or cause,) the (supreme) self,’—âtmâna<i>m</i> svakâra<i>n</i>a<i>m</i> paramâtmâna<i>m</i> svasvarûpa<i>m</i> vâऽnvai<i>k</i>k<i>h</i>at. What seems, indeed, implied in these esoteric lucubrations, is that meditation on the infinite is equivalent to all ceremonial rites which are supposed to be incessantly performed for one so engaged, even during his sleep ([paragraph 12](../Book_4_10_5#v10_5_3_12)).

[^756]: 375:3 I. e. intense meditation (paryâlokanam), Sây.? ‘it became heated.’

[^757]: 375:4 Sâya<i>n</i>a apparently takes ‘prâmûr<i>kh</i>at’ in the sense of ‘became great, or important,’—samu<i>k</i><i>kh</i>ritam babhûva.

[^758]: 375:5 Sâya<i>n</i>a here takes ‘arka’ in the sense of ‘ar<i>k</i>anîya (worthy of veneration)’, as, indeed, he did several times before; though once he seems to call them ‘agnyarkâ<i>h</i>,’ as being the highest, merely speculative or immaterial form of sacrificial fires or fire-altars (dhyeyâ agnaya<i>h</i>); cf. [X, 3, 4, 3](../Book_4_10_3#v10_3_4_3) seq.—The 36,000 fires are calculated so as to be equal to the number of days in the life of the perfect man living a hundred years ([X, 2, 6, 9](../Book_4_10_2#v10_2_6_9)); there being thus for each day of his life a (spiritual) sacrificial fire, a mental exercise or discipline, as Sâya<i>n</i>a expresses it,—tatraikasmin dine (âgneyâ?) manov<i>ri</i>tti<i>h</i>.

[^759]: 375:6 The text has everywhere the instrumental ‘manasâ,’ which would imply either the agent, the instrument, or the material, as the case might be.

[^760]: 376:1 That is, the ceremonies of Agnyâdhâna (establishment of the sacrificial fire) and Agni<i>k</i>ayana (building of the fire-altar) were performed by means of these fires. Sâya<i>n</i>a remarks that these rites were performed by the same ‘beings (bhûtâni),’ which are mentioned immediately after, as would, indeed, appear to be the case from [paragraph 12](../Book_4_10_5#v10_5_3_12).

[^761]: 376:2 Yat ki<i>m</i> <i>k</i>a bhûtâni manasâ dhyâyanti vâ<i>k</i>â vadanti tai<i>h</i> sa<i>m</i>kalpavadanâdibhir eva teshâm agnînâm kara<i>n</i>am. Sây.

[^762]: 379:1 Sâya<i>n</i>a explains ‘sa<i>m</i>degham annasa<i>m</i>deham’ by ‘annaprâ<i>n</i>â<i>s</i>raya<i>m</i> <i>s</i>arîram,’—svayam asa<i>m</i>deham a<i>s</i>arîra<i>m</i> sat karma prâ<i>n</i>ânnayor anyonyasâha<i>k</i>aryâd abhiv<i>ri</i>ddhi<i>m</i> vyatirekam makhyenâha, ak<i>ri</i>tsnam &c. Sâya<i>n</i>a would thus take ‘sa<i>m</i>degha’ as equivalent to the later ‘deha’ (body), and in no depreciatory sense.

[^763]: 380:1 Or, fervid devotion; though perhaps the physical sense of ‘it became heated’ would suit better here.

[^764]: 381:1 That is, either the food obtained by the milking of the drink of immortality (am<i>ri</i>tadohânnam), or the verse <i>Ri</i>g-veda VIII, 69, 3 (tâ asya sûdadohasa<i>h</i>, &c.) pronounced over the ‘settled’ brick, and supposed to supply vital air to the different parts of Agni-Pra<i>g</i>âpati's body (whence it is also repeated in the B<i>ri</i>had Uktham between the different parts of the bird-like body; cf. [p. 112](../Book_4_8_6#p112), note [1](../Book_4_8_6#fn204)). Sây.

[^765]: 381:2 Sâya<i>n</i>a seems to interpret this in two different ways,—oshadhivanaspataya eva purîshâhutisamittrayarûpâ etasya purîshâhutisamittrayarûpatvam uttaratra spash<i>t</i>îkarishyate; atha (vâ) yad dikshu <i>k</i>a ra<i>s</i>mishu <i>k</i>ânna<i>m</i> tat purîsha<i>m</i> tâ ahutayas tâ<i>h</i> samidha<i>h</i>.

[^766]: 381:3 See [X, 5, 2, 8](../Book_4_10_5#v10_5_2_8). Viz. ‘inasmuch as all become fit for their work by being provided with fire.’ Sây.

[^767]: 381:4 Or, the word-filler, the ruler of the world (lokâdhish<i>th</i>ât<i>ri</i>). Sây.

[^768]: 382:1 Or, as (the valves, or shells, of) a pod are closed up.

[^769]: 382:2 See [p. 354](../Book_4_10_4#p354), note [2](../Book_4_10_4#fn691).

[^770]: 382:3 See [IX, 4, 3, 6](../Book_4_9_4#v9_4_3_6).

[^771]: 383:1 On this inaccurate calculation (the real product being 729), resorted to in order to get a total amount equal to the number of Ya<i>g</i>ushmatî bricks (756), see A. Weber, Nakshatra, II, p. 298.

[^772]: 383:2 That is, Nakshatras considered as the bricks of which the fire-altar is constructed. The latter being identical with the year, the 720 bricks represent the days and nights of the year.

[^773]: 383:3 Thus Sâya<i>n</i>a (madhyadeha),—the âtman (in that case, however, the whole body) is usually represented as consisting of twenty-five parts. Here the thirty parts would probably be the trunk, the head, the upper and fore-arms, the thighs and shanks, and the fingers and toes.

[^774]: 383:4 Viz. inasmuch as eyes, ears, and nostrils are in pairs. Sây.

[^775]: 384:1 The B<i>ri</i>hatî verse consisting of 36 syllables, this makes a total of 756 syllables, or the same amount as that of the days and nights of the year, plus the days (36) of the intercalary month.

[^776]: 384:2 Viz. inasmuch as the sun is ‘the twenty-first,’ cf. I, 3, 5, 11; VI, 2, 2, 3: svargas tv âditya iti surake(tu)rûpo vâ loka<i>h</i> svarga<i>h</i> ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>atisa<i>m</i>khyâpûraka<i>h</i>. Sây

[^777]: 384:3 The seven metres, increasing by four syllables from 24 up to 48, consist together of 252 syllables, and hence the triplets of them amount to 756 = 720 + 36 syllables.

[^778]: 385:1 The Ekapadâ is a verse consisting of a single pâda, and the Dvipadâ one of two pâdas, whilst verses in the ordinary metres consist of three or four pâdas.

[^779]: 385:2 The Virâ<i>g</i> is a metre consisting of 1 to 4 (usually 3) decasyllabic pâdas; the one consisting of four such pâdas being, however, commonly called Paṅkti. Besides this, the principal, Virâ<i>g</i>, there is, however, another consisting of 3 pâdas of 11 syllables each.

[^780]: 385:3 This name, which is here applied to a verse of 34 syllables, was in VII, 4, 1, 9 used of a verse of 10 + 10 + 11 + 11 = 42 syllables (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XI, 29); cf. Weber, Ind. Stud. VIII, p. 63.

[^781]: 385:4 That is, an over-metre, excessive metre, consisting of more than 48 syllables. The fire-altar, being built up with all the metres (viz. with the <i>Kh</i>andasyâ bricks, representing the metres, cf. [VIII, 3, 3, 1](../Book_4_8_3#v8_3_3_1) seqq.), would thus-far exceed the latter number.

[^782]: 385:5 ? Thus Sâya<i>n</i>a: <i>k</i>ityâgnir ati<i>kh</i>andâ iti yat tena sarvâ ish<i>t</i>akâ ati<i>kh</i>andomayya ity uktam.

[^783]: 385:6 That is, the materials used for making bricks.

[^784]: 386:1 Viz. those required to make up the 756 Ya<i>g</i>ushmatîs.

[^785]: 387:1 See [p. 383](#p383), note [^761].

[^786]: 388:1 Viz. inasmuch as they are the foundation and ultimate source of the universe; cf. VI, 8, 2, 2. 3; and everything is contained therein, [X, 5, 4, 3](../Book_4_10_5#v10_5_4_3).

[^787]: 388:2 Viz. inasmuch as the built Agni is the same as the sun, and the sun is surrounded by water; cf. [p. 368](../Book_4_10_5#p368), note [1](../Book_4_10_5#fn719).

[^788]: 388:3 It is not clear whether these rivers are meant to be different ones from those flowing round the sun, or whether they are the same as ‘washing against’ the sun.

[^789]: 388:4 Athokteshu paryâyeshv agnyavayava-trayoda<i>s</i>amâsâtmika âtmâ agnyâtmanâ dhyeyânâm apâm âtmety artha<i>h</i>. Sây.

[^790]: 388:5 That is, in regard to the sacrifice, the gold plate and lotus-leaf are his feet, and in regard to the deity, the waters and the sun's disk. Sây. They are, nevertheless, counted as four.

[^792]: 389:1 For this stone, which was deposited near the Âgnîdhrîya shed, and afterwards placed in the Âgnîdhra hearth, see [p. 243](../Book_4_9_4#p243), note [2](../Book_4_9_4#fn410).

[^793]: 389:2 See [VIII, 7, 2, 6](../Book_4_8_7#v8_7_2_6).

[^794]: 389:3 See [X, 5, 2, 6](../Book_4_10_5#v10_5_2_6)\-[8](../Book_4_10_5#v10_5_2_8).

[^795]: 389:4 Sa eva . . . sha<i>t</i>tri<i>m</i><i>s</i>adish<i>t</i>akâmayo hira<i>n</i>maya<i>h</i> purusha âtmâ sarvabhûtadevâtmanâm apâm agnyâtmanâ dhyeyânâm madhye vartate. Sây.

[^796]: 389:5 Sâya<i>n</i>a does not explain this last sentence.

[^797]: 389:6 ‘Only by knowledge is such a body (self) to be obtained by all, not by hundreds of religious performances.’ Sây.

[^798]: 389:7 Yatra svarûpe kâmâ<i>h</i> sarve parâgatâ viv<i>ri</i>ttâ<i>h</i> (? niv<i>ri</i>tta<i>h</i>) svayam akâmam ity artha<i>h</i>, tad âtmasvarûpa<i>m</i> vidyayâ svarûpe<i>n</i>a ârohanti âpnuvanti. Sây.

[^799]: 389:8 Sâya<i>n</i>a takes ‘dakshi<i>n</i>â’ as instrumental, in accordance with the comment offered by the Brâhma<i>n</i>a, which, however, is probably not meant as a close grammatical explanation.

[^800]: 390:1 Viz. the staying (of the moon) in, or with, the Nakshatras, whose name is then made use of for a fanciful etymology.

[^801]: 390:2 That is, Ku<i>s</i>ri Gautama, (son and) disciple of Vâ<i>g</i>a<i>s</i>ravas.

[^802]: 391:1 The oblations are offered by the Adhvaryu whilst standing south, or south-west, of the fire, with his face turned towards northeast,—hence Agni, looking eastwards, would not see the food offered him.

[^803]: 391:2 Yady agnir uttâna<i>s</i> <i>k</i>itas tarhi yathâ uttâna<i>m</i> vaya<i>h</i> pakshî svayam âkâ<i>s</i>am utpatitu<i>m</i> na <i>s</i>aknoti kim utânya<i>m</i> purusha<i>m</i> dvâbhyâ<i>m</i> pakshâbhyâ<i>m</i> g<i>ri</i>hîtvotpatitu<i>m</i> na <i>s</i>akta iti . . . tvâ<i>m</i> <i>k</i>itavanta<i>m</i> svarga<i>m</i> loka<i>m</i> prâpayitu<i>m</i> na <i>s</i>aknoty uttâna <i>k</i>ayanâd ity artha<i>h</i>; abhivakshyatîti vaha<i>h</i> prâpa<i>n</i>e l<i>ri</i><i>t</i>i syapratyaye rûpam. Sây.

[^804]: 391:3 See VII, 4, I, 15. 16.

[^805]: 392:1 See VII, 5, 1, 1.

[^806]: 392:2 Ish<i>t</i>akânâ<i>m</i> nî<i>k</i>îtvenopadhâna<i>m</i> nâma ri<i>g</i>ulekhâdakshi<i>n</i>âpasavyatryâlikhitâdilekhânâm uparibhâge dar<i>s</i>anam. Sây. The broad side of the bricks not marked with lines is thus looked upon as their face.

[^807]: 392:3 That is to say, according to Sâya<i>n</i>a, whilst going about officiating at sacrifices, they built the altar in that way at some one's house.

[^808]: 392:4 That is, with a head built on to the altar on the front side of the body; see the diagram of the <i>s</i>yena<i>k</i>iti in Burnell's Cat. of Vedic MSS. (1870), p. 29.