---
title: "Book IV — X, 3. Third Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_10_2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book IV — X, 2. Second Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_10_4">
          <span class="pr-2">Book IV — X, 4. Fourth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="v10_3_1"><sup><small>10:3:1</small></sup></span>

## THIRD ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_3_1_11"><sup><small>10:3:1:11.</small></sup></span>  The Gâyatrî is the breath (of Pra<i>g</i>âpati, the altar), the Ush<i>n</i>ih the eye, the Anush<i>t</i>ubh the voice, the B<i>ri</i>hatî the mind, the Paṅkti the ear; the Trish<i>t</i>ubh is that generative breath; and the <i>G</i>agatî <span id="p328"><sup><small>[ p. 328 ]</small></sup></span> that downward breathing;—these are the seven metres increasing by four (syllables) each [^631], which are produced in Agni (the fire-altar).

<span id="v10_3_1_22"><sup><small>10:3:1:22.</small></sup></span>  ‘The Gâyatrî is the breath,’—thus, whatever power, whatever vigour there is in the breath that is this one thousand; and to the breath, indeed, this vigour belongs; for were the breath of him who builds it to pass away, this fire-altar, assuredly, would not be built: by this its form that (altar) becomes built (so as to contain) a thousand Gâyatrîs.

<span id="v10_3_1_33"><sup><small>10:3:1:33.</small></sup></span>  ‘The Ush<i>n</i>ih is the eye,’—thus, whatever power, whatever vigour there is in the eye that is this one thousand; and to the eye, indeed, this vigour belongs, for were the eye-sight of him who builds it to pass away, this fire-altar, assuredly, would not be built: by this its form that (altar) becomes built (so as to contain) a thousand Ush<i>n</i>ihs.

<span id="v10_3_1_44"><sup><small>10:3:1:44.</small></sup></span>  ‘The Anush<i>t</i>ubh is the voice,’—thus, whatever power, whatever vigour there is in the voice that is this one thousand; and to the voice, indeed, this vigour belongs, for were the voice of him who builds it to pass away, this fire-altar, assuredly, would not be built: by this its form that (altar) becomes built (so as to contain) a thousand Anush<i>t</i>ubhs.

<span id="v10_3_1_55"><sup><small>10:3:1:55.</small></sup></span>  ‘The B<i>ri</i>hatî is the mind,’—thus, whatever power, whatever vigour there is in the mind that is this one thousand; and to the mind, indeed, this vigour belongs, for were the mind of him who builds it to pass away, this fire altar, assuredly, <span id="p329"><sup><small>[ p. 329 ]</small></sup></span> would not be built: by this its form that (altar) becomes built (so as to contain) a thousand B<i>ri</i>hatîs.

<span id="v10_3_1_66"><sup><small>10:3:1:66.</small></sup></span>  ‘The Paṅkti is the ear,’—thus, whatever power, whatever vigour there is in the ear that is this one thousand; and to the ear, indeed, this vigour belongs, for were the power of hearing of him who builds it to pass away, this fire-altar, assuredly, would not be built: by this its form that (altar) becomes built (so as to contain) a thousand Paṅktis.

<span id="v10_3_1_77"><sup><small>10:3:1:77.</small></sup></span>  ‘The Trish<i>t</i>ubh is that generative (life-giving) breath,’—thus, whatever power, whatever vigour there is in that breath, that is this one thousand; and to that breath, indeed, this vigour belongs, for were that breath of him who builds it to become disordered, this fire-altar, assuredly, would not be built: by this its form that (altar) becomes built (so as to contain) a thousand Trish<i>t</i>ubhs.

<span id="v10_3_1_88"><sup><small>10:3:1:88.</small></sup></span>  ‘And the <i>G</i>agatî is that downward breathing,’—thus, whatever power, whatever vigour there is in that breathing, that is this one thousand; and to that breathing, indeed, this vigour belongs, for were that breathing of him who builds it to become disordered, this fire-altar, assuredly, would not be built: by this its form that (altar) becomes built (so as to include) a thousand <i>G</i>agatîs.

<span id="v10_3_1_99"><sup><small>10:3:1:99.</small></sup></span>  Now, these seven metres which increase by four (syllables) successively, and are firmly established in one another, are those seven vital airs [^632] in man, firmly established in one another: thus, by <span id="p330"><sup><small>[ p. 330 ]</small></sup></span> as much as the number of metres he utters has that (altar) of him who knows this, prayers uttered upon it in metre after metre, or hymns chanted, or <i>s</i>astras recited, or (bricks) laid down upon it.


<span id="v10_3_2"><sup><small>10:3:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_3_2_11"><sup><small>10:3:2:11.</small></sup></span>  As to this they say, ‘What metre and what deity are the head of the fire-altar?’ The metre Gâyatrî and the deity Agni are its head.

<span id="v10_3_2_22"><sup><small>10:3:2:22.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are its neck?’ The metre Ush<i>n</i>ih and the deity Savit<i>ri</i> are its neck.

<span id="v10_3_2_33"><sup><small>10:3:2:33.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are its spine?’ The metre B<i>ri</i>hatî and the deity B<i>ri</i>haspati are its spine.

<span id="v10_3_2_44"><sup><small>10:3:2:44.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are its wings?’ The metres B<i>ri</i>hat and Rathantara and the deities Heaven and Earth are its wings.

<span id="v10_3_2_55"><sup><small>10:3:2:55.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are its waist?’ The metre Trish<i>t</i>ubh and the deity Indra are its waist.

<span id="v10_3_2_66"><sup><small>10:3:2:66.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are its hips?’ The metre <i>G</i>agatî and the deity Âditya (the sun) are its hips.

<span id="v10_3_2_77"><sup><small>10:3:2:77.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are the vital air whence the seed flows?’ The metre Ati<i>kh</i>andas and the deity Pra<i>g</i>âpati.

<span id="v10_3_2_88"><sup><small>10:3:2:88.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are that downward vital air?’ The metre Ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>iya and the deity Vai<i>s</i>vânara.

<span id="v10_3_2_99"><sup><small>10:3:2:99.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are the thighs?’ The metre Anush<i>t</i>ubh and that deity, the Vi<i>s</i>vedevâ<i>h</i>, are the thighs. <span id="p331"><sup><small>[ p. 331 ]</small></sup></span> 10:3:2:1010\. ‘What metre and what deity are the knees?’ The metre Paṅkti and that deity, the Maruts, are the knees.

<span id="v10_3_2_1111"><sup><small>10:3:2:1111.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are the feet?’ The metre Dvipadâ and the deity Vish<i>n</i>u are the feet.

<span id="v10_3_2_1212"><sup><small>10:3:2:1212.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are the vital airs?’ The metre Vi<i>kh</i>andas and the deity Vâyu (the wind) are the vital airs.

<span id="v10_3_2_1313"><sup><small>10:3:2:1313.</small></sup></span>  ‘What metre and what deity are the defective and redundant parts?’ The metre (of the verse) wanting a syllable (or syllables) and that deity, the waters, are the defective and redundant parts. This, then, is the knowledge of the body (of the altar), and suchlike is the deity that enters into this body; and, indeed, there is in this (sacrificial performance) no other prayer for the obtainment of heavenly bliss [^633].


<span id="v10_3_3"><sup><small>10:3:3</small></sup></span>

## THIRD BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_3_3_11"><sup><small>10:3:3:11.</small></sup></span>  Dhîra <i>S</i>âtapar<i>n</i>eya once on a time repaired to Mahâ<i>s</i>âla [^634] <i>G</i>âbâla. He said to him, ‘Knowing what [^635], hast thou come to me?’—‘Agni (the fire) I know.’—‘What Agni knowest thou?’—‘Speech.’—‘What becomes of him who knows that Agni?’—‘He becomes eloquent [^636],’ he said, ‘speech does not fail him.’ <span id="p332"><sup><small>[ p. 332 ]</small></sup></span> 10:3:3:22\. ‘Thou knowest Agni,’ he said; ‘knowing what (else) hast thou come to me?’—‘Agni I know.’—‘What Agni knowest thou?’—‘The Eye.’—‘What becomes of him who knows that Agni?’—‘He becomes seeing,’ he said; his eye does not fail him.’

<span id="v10_3_3_33"><sup><small>10:3:3:33.</small></sup></span>  ‘Thou knowest Agni,’ he said; ‘knowing what hast thou come to me?’—‘Agni I know.’—‘What Agni knowest thou?’—‘The Mind.’—‘What becomes of him who knows that Agni?’—‘He becomes thoughtful,’ he said; ‘his mind does not fail him.’

<span id="v10_3_3_44"><sup><small>10:3:3:44.</small></sup></span>  ‘Thou knowest Agni,’ he said; ‘knowing what hast thou come to me?’—‘Agni I know.’—‘What Agni knowest thou?’—‘The Ear.’—‘What becomes of him who knows that Agni?’—‘He becomes hearing,’ he said; ‘his ear does not fail him.’

<span id="v10_3_3_55"><sup><small>10:3:3:55.</small></sup></span>  ‘Thou knowest Agni,’ he said; ‘knowing what hast thou come to me?’—‘Agni I know.’—‘What Agni knowest thou?’—‘The Agni who is everything here, him I know.’—On (hearing) this said, he stepped down to him and said, ‘Teach me that Agni, sir!’

<span id="v10_3_3_66"><sup><small>10:3:3:66.</small></sup></span>  He said,—Verily, that Agni is the breath; for when man sleeps, speech passes into the breath, and so do the eye, the mind, and the ear; and when he awakes, they again issue from the breath. Thus much as to the body.

<span id="v10_3_3_77"><sup><small>10:3:3:77.</small></sup></span>  Now as to the deity. That speech verily is Agni himself; and that eye is yonder sun; and that <span id="p333"><sup><small>[ p. 333 ]</small></sup></span> mind is that moon; and that ear is the quarters; and that breath is the wind that blows here.

<span id="v10_3_3_88"><sup><small>10:3:3:88.</small></sup></span>  Now, when that fire goes out, it is wafted up in the wind (air), whence people say of it, ‘It has expired [^637],’ for it is wafted up in the wind. And when the sun sets it enters the wind, and so does the moon; and the quarters are established in the wind, and from out of the wind they issue again. And when he who knows this passes away from this world, he passes into the fire by his speech, into the sun by his eye, into the moon by his mind, into the quarters by his ear, and into the wind by his breath; and being composed thereof, he becomes whichever of these deities he chooses, and is at rest.


<span id="v10_3_4"><sup><small>10:3:4</small></sup></span>

## FOURTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_3_4_11"><sup><small>10:3:4:11.</small></sup></span>  <i>S</i>vetaketu Âru<i>n</i>eya [^638], once upon a time, was about to offer sacrifice. His father said to him, ‘What priests hast thou chosen to officiate?’ He said, ‘This Vai<i>s</i>vâvasavya here is my Hot<i>ri</i>.’ He asked him, 'Knowest thou, Brâhma<i>n</i>a Vai<i>s</i>vâvasavya,—

<span id="v10_3_4_22"><sup><small>10:3:4:22.</small></sup></span>  The four great (things)?'—‘I know them, sir,’ he said.—‘Knowest thou the four great ones of the great?’—‘I know them, sir,’ he said.—‘Knowest thou the four rites (vrata)?’—‘I know them, sir,’ he said.—‘Knowest thou the four rites of rites?’—‘I know them, sir,’ he said.—‘Knowest thou the <span id="p334"><sup><small>[ p. 334 ]</small></sup></span> four relating to Ka [^639]?’—‘I know them, sir,’ he said.—‘Knowest thou the four deepest of those relating to Ka [^640]?’—‘I know them, sir,’ he said.—‘Knowest thou the four flames [^641]?’—‘I know them, sir,’ he said.—‘Knowest thou the four flames of flames?’—‘I know them, sir,’ he said.

<span id="v10_3_4_33"><sup><small>10:3:4:33.</small></sup></span>  ‘Knowest thou the Arka [^642]?’—‘Nay, but thou wilt teach us [^643], sir!’—‘Knowest thou the two Arka-leaves?’—‘Nay, but thou wilt teach us, sir!’—‘Knowest thou the two Arka-flowers?’—‘Nay, but thou wilt teach us, sir!’—‘Knowest thou the two pod-leaves [^644] of the Arka?’—‘Nay, but thou wilt teach us, sir!’—‘Knowest thou the two coops [^645] of the Arka?’—‘Nay, but thou wilt teach us, sir!’—‘Knowest thou the Arka-grains?’—‘Nay, but thou wilt teach us, sir!’—‘Knowest thou the bulge [^646] of <span id="p335"><sup><small>[ p. 335 ]</small></sup></span> the Arka?’—‘Nay, but thou wilt teach us, sir!’—‘Knowest thou the root of the Arka?’—‘Nay, but thou wilt teach us, sir!’

<span id="v10_3_4_44"><sup><small>10:3:4:44.</small></sup></span>  Now, when he said, ‘Knowest thou the four great (things)? Knowest thou the four great of the great?’—the great one is Agni (the fire), and the great (thing) of that great one are the plants and trees, for they are his food; and the great one is Vâyu (the wind), and the great (thing) of that great one are the waters, for they are his (the wind's) food; and the great one is Âditya (the sun), and the great (thing) of that great one is the moon, for that is his food; and the great one is Man, and the great (thing) of that great one is cattle, for they are his food:—these are the four great things, these the four great of the great;—these are the four rites, these the four rites of rites;—these are the four relating to Ka, these the four deepest relating to Ka;—these are the four flames, these the four flames of flames.

<span id="v10_3_4_55"><sup><small>10:3:4:55.</small></sup></span>  And when he said, ‘Knowest thou the Arka?’ he thereby meant man;—‘Knowest thou the two Arka-leaves?’ he thereby meant his ears;—‘Knowest thou the two Arka-flowers?’ he thereby meant his eyes;—‘Knowest thou the pod-leaves of the Arka?’ he thereby meant his nostrils;—‘Knowest thou the two coops of the Arka?’ he thereby meant his lips;—‘Knowest thou the Arka-grains?’ he thereby meant his teeth;—‘Knowest thou the bulge of the Arka?’ he thereby meant his tongue;—‘Knowest thou the root of the Arka?’ <span id="p336"><sup><small>[ p. 336 ]</small></sup></span> he thereby meant his food. Now that Arka, to wit, man, is Agni; and verily, whoso regards Agni as the Arka and the man, in his (altar-) body that Agni, the Arka, will be built up even through the knowledge that ‘I here am Agni, the Arka.’


<span id="v10_3_5"><sup><small>10:3:5</small></sup></span>

## FIFTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v10_3_5_11"><sup><small>10:3:5:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, the Ya<i>g</i>us, indeed, is he who blows here, for even whilst passing along he (Vâyu, the wind) generates (vivifies) everything here, and after him passing along everything is generated: this is why the Ya<i>g</i>us is no other than Vâyu.

<span id="v10_3_5_22"><sup><small>10:3:5:22.</small></sup></span>  And the course [^647] (<i>g</i>û<i>h</i>) is this space, to wit, this air [^648], for along this space it (the wind) courses; and the Ya<i>g</i>us is both the wind and the air—the ‘yat’ and the ‘<i>g</i>û<i>h</i>’—whence (the name) Ya<i>g</i>us. And the ‘yat’ (that which goes) is this (Adhvaiyu) [^649], for when he ‘goes’ on (performing), the <i>Ri</i><i>k</i> and Sâman carry that Ya<i>g</i>us established on the <i>Ri</i><i>k</i> and Sâman. Hence the Adhvaryu performs his work with the very same Grahas (cups of Soma), (while) there are each time [^650] different stotras (chants) and <i>s</i>astras (recitations): it is just as if, after driving with a first pair (of horses), one drives with a second pair. <span id="p337"><sup><small>[ p. 337 ]</small></sup></span> 10:3:5:33\. Now Agni is in front [^651] (puras), for placing Agni in front (of them) these creatures attend upon him; and the sun is motion (<i>k</i>ara<i>n</i>a), for as soon as he rises everything here moves about. Such is the Ya<i>g</i>us with the preparatory performance (pura<i>s</i><i>k</i>ara<i>n</i>a [^652]) as regards the deities.

<span id="v10_3_5_44"><sup><small>10:3:5:44.</small></sup></span>  Now as regards the body. The Ya<i>g</i>us is the breath, for whilst moving (yat) it generates (vivifies) everything here, and along with the moving breath birth takes place here: hence the Ya<i>g</i>us is the breath.

<span id="v10_3_5_55"><sup><small>10:3:5:55.</small></sup></span>  And this course (<i>g</i>û<i>h</i>) is space—this space which is inside the body—for along this space it (the breath) courses; and the Ya<i>g</i>us is both the breath and space,—the ‘yat’ and the ‘<i>g</i>û<i>h</i>’: hence ‘ya<i>g</i>us.’ And the ‘yat’ (moving) is the breath, for the breath moves.

<span id="v10_3_5_66"><sup><small>10:3:5:66.</small></sup></span>  The Ya<i>g</i>us, indeed, is food, for by food one is produced, and by food one moves. And food carries along that Ya<i>g</i>us established on food, whence even different food is introduced into the same (channel of the) breath.

<span id="v10_3_5_77"><sup><small>10:3:5:77.</small></sup></span>  And the Mind is in front (puras), for the mind is the first of vital airs; and the eye is motion (<i>k</i>ara<i>n</i>a), for it is in accordance with the eye that this <span id="p338"><sup><small>[ p. 338 ]</small></sup></span> body moves. Such is the Ya<i>g</i>us with the preparatory performance, firmly established both as regards the deity and the body; and, indeed, whosoever thus knows this Ya<i>g</i>us with the preparatory performance to be firmly established both as regards the deity and the body,—

<span id="v10_3_5_88"><sup><small>10:3:5:88.</small></sup></span>  He, indeed, reaches successfully the end of the sacrifice, unscathed and uninjured: he who knows this becomes the first, the leader (pura-et<i>ri</i>), of his own people, an eater of food (i.e. prosperous), and a ruler.

<span id="v10_3_5_99"><sup><small>10:3:5:99.</small></sup></span>  And if any one strives to become a rival [^653] among his own people to one who knows this, he does not satisfy his dependants; but, indeed, only he satisfies his dependants, who is faithful [^654] to that one and who, along with him, strives to support his dependants.

<span id="v10_3_5_1010"><sup><small>10:3:5:1010.</small></sup></span>  And this is the greatest Brahman (n., mystic science), for than this there is no thing greater; and, he who knows this, being himself the greatest, becomes the highest among his own people.

<span id="v10_3_5_1111"><sup><small>10:3:5:1111.</small></sup></span>  This Brahman has nothing before it and nothing after it [^655]; and whosoever thus knows this Brahman to have nothing before it and nothing <span id="p339"><sup><small>[ p. 339 ]</small></sup></span> after it, than he there is no one higher among his equals in station; and ever higher will be the descendants that spring from him. Wherefore, if any one would be greater than he, let him reverentially approach the regions in front (to the eastward) of that one in this way, and he will do him no injury [^656].

<span id="v10_3_5_1212"><sup><small>10:3:5:1212.</small></sup></span>  But, indeed, the mystic import (upanishad) is the essence of this Ya<i>g</i>us; and thus, if, with ever so small a ya<i>g</i>us-formula, the Adhvaryu draws a cup of Soma, that (essence) is equal to both the Stotra and the <i>S</i>astra, and comes up to both the Stotra and the <i>S</i>astra: hence, however small the essence (flavour) of food, it benefits (renders palatable) the whole food, and pervades the whole food.

<span id="v10_3_5_1313"><sup><small>10:3:5:1313.</small></sup></span>  Satiation (contentment), doubtless, is the successful issue thereof (to wit, of food, and the Ya<i>g</i>us): hence when one is satiated by food he feels like one who has succeeded. And joy, the knowledge thereof (viz. of the essence, the mystic import), is its soul (self); and, assuredly, all the gods are of joyful soul; and this, the true knowledge, belongs to the gods alone,—and, indeed, whosoever knows this is not a man, but one of the gods. <span id="p340"><sup><small>[ p. 340 ]</small></sup></span> 10:3:5:1414\. And Priyavrata Rauhi<i>n</i>âyana, knowing this (truth), once spake unto the blowing wind, ‘Thy soul [^657] is joy: blow thou either hither or thither!’ and so, indeed, it now blows. Wherefore, if one desire to invoke any blessing from the gods, let him approach them with this, ‘Your soul is joy,—my wish is such and such: let it be fulfilled unto me!’ and whatever the wish he entertains, it will be fulfilled to him; for, assuredly, he who knows this attains this contentment, this successful issue, this joy, this soul.

<span id="v10_3_5_1515"><sup><small>10:3:5:1515.</small></sup></span>  This Ya<i>g</i>us is silent [^658], indistinct; for the Ya<i>g</i>us is the breath, and the breath is of silent (secret) abode; and if any one were to say of that (Adhvaryu) who pronounces (the Ya<i>g</i>us) distinctly, ‘He has uttered distinctly the indistinct deity: his breath shall fail him!’ then that would, indeed, come to pass.

<span id="v10_3_5_1616"><sup><small>10:3:5:1616.</small></sup></span>  And, assuredly, he who knows the indistinct (secret) manifestation of this (Ya<i>g</i>us) becomes manifest in fame and glory. Silently the Adhvaryu draws the cup of Soma with the (muttered) Ya<i>g</i>us, and, when drawn and deposited, it becomes manifest;—silently he builds the fire-altar with the Ya<i>g</i>us, and, when built and completed, it becomes manifest;—silently he takes out (material for) the oblation with the Ya<i>g</i>us, and, when cooked and ready (for offering), it becomes manifest: thus, whatever he performs silently, when performed and completed, it becomes manifest. And, assuredly, he who thus knows this secret manifestation of this <span id="p341"><sup><small>[ p. 341 ]</small></sup></span> (Ya<i>g</i>us) becomes manifest in fame, and glory, and sanctity; and quickly, indeed, he becomes known: he becomes the Ya<i>g</i>us itself, and by the Ya<i>g</i>us people call him [^659].



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_10_2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book IV — X, 2. Second Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_4_10_4">
          <span class="pr-2">Book IV — X, 4. Fourth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^641]: 328:1 The Gâyatrî verse consists of twenty-four syllables; and each of the following increases by four syllables, the <i>G</i>agatî consisting of 4 × 12, or forty-eight syllables.

[^642]: 329:1 Viz. those enumerated in the preceding paragraphs, including those passing through the eye, ear, &c.

[^643]: 331:1 Atrâgnau lokyatâyai pu<i>n</i>yalokâvâptaye anyâ uktavyatiriktâ â<i>s</i>î<i>h</i> prârthanâ nâsti. Sâya<i>n</i>a.

[^644]: 331:2 Literally, one who keeps a large house, a lord. Sâya<i>n</i>a, however, treats it as a proper name.

[^645]: 331:3 That is, ‘with what knowledge.’

[^646]: 331:4 Or, perhaps, possessed of a good voice. To be ‘vâgmin’ is p. 332 enumerated among the necessary qualifications of the officiating priest by Lâ<i>t</i>y. I, 1, 6, where the commentator, however, explains the term either as ‘ready of speech (vaktu<i>m</i> samartha<i>h</i>),’ or as ‘using correct, or elegant, speech (sa<i>m</i>sk<i>ri</i>tavâ<i>k</i>).’

[^647]: 333:1 Literally, ‘it has blown out, or up.’

[^648]: 333:2 That is, grandson of Aru<i>n</i>a (Aupave<i>s</i>i), and son of (Uddâlaka) Âru<i>n</i>i (II, 3, I, 35. 34; IV, 5, 7, 9).

[^649]: 334:1 Sâya<i>n</i>a takes ‘kya’ to mean ‘those useful to, or pleasing to (hita), Ka, i.e. Pra<i>g</i>âpati.’

[^650]: 334:2 Literally, ‘the four Kya of the Kya.’ For more symbolical speculation on these terms, see [X, 4, 1, 4](Book_4_10_4#v10_4_1_4).

[^651]: 334:3 Or, fires (arka), used of the sun, the fire and the lightning, as well as of the Arka plant. Sâya<i>n</i>a, however, here explains ‘arkâ<i>h</i>’ by ‘ar<i>k</i>anîyâ<i>h</i>,’ ‘worthy of being praised, or honoured.’

[^652]: 334:4 That is, the Arka plant (Calotropis gigantea), apparently so called (= ‘arka,’ lightning) from the wedge-like shape of its leaves. Cf. [IX, 1, 1, 4](Book_4_9_1#v9_1_1_4), where the leaf is used in offering the <i>S</i>atarudriya oblations. The other meanings of ‘arka,’ especially that of ‘flame, fire,’ however, are likewise implied in these mystic speculations.

[^653]: 334:5 Or, simply, ‘Thou wilt tell us, then (atha vai), sir.’

[^654]: 334:6 ? Or, the pods, sheaths; arkako<i>s</i>yau ko<i>s</i>yâkâre phale (or pu<i>t</i>ake). Sâya<i>n</i>a.

[^655]: 334:7 ? Or, ‘seas’ (samudra). Sâya<i>n</i>a explains it as two opened ‘lip-parts’ at the top of the Arka-pod (arkako<i>s</i>âgre vidalitaush<i>th</i>abhâgau).

[^656]: 334:8 That is, according to the St. Petersb. Dict., ‘the globular, cake-shaped, hardened cicatrix of the Calotropis gigantea.’ Sâya<i>n</i>a p. 335 explains it by, ‘arkako<i>s</i>amadhye vistare<i>n</i>a (? v. l. gihvâstâra<i>n</i>a-) vartamânâ tûlî.’

[^657]: 336:1 ‘<i>G</i>û<i>h</i>’ would rather seem to mean ‘the urger, or speeder.’

[^658]: 336:2 ‘Yad idam antariksham,’ perhaps, with the double sense—‘this air is the “yat (the going, moving thing)”’—made use of in the sequel. The construction, however, is not quite clear. Sâya<i>n</i>a explains: ayam evâkâ<i>s</i>o <i>g</i>ûr iti; <i>g</i>u iti sautro dhâtur gatyartha<i>h</i>; yad idam pratîyamânam antariksham asti tad eva <i>g</i>ûr iti; yad evo<i>k</i>yate—etam âkâ<i>s</i>am anulakshya <i>g</i>avate, vâyur ga<i>k</i><i>kh</i>ati, vâyu<i>g</i>avamâdakara<i>n</i>a—tvâ<i>g</i> <i>g</i>ûr âkâ<i>s</i>a<i>h</i>.

[^659]: 336:3 Or, whence (the name) Ya<i>g</i>us, to wit, this (Adhvaryu).

[^660]: 336:4 That is, in different Soma-sacrifices.

[^661]: 337:1 Literally, apparently, ‘The in-front is Agni.’

[^662]: 337:2 This term, literally, ‘moving in front,’ seems virtually to imply the entire manual work connected with the sacrifice, and which, along with the muttering of the Ya<i>g</i>us-formulas, forms the official duty of the Adhvaryu. It would thus include all the sacrificial performances prior to the muttering of a Ya<i>g</i>us, as the finishing or consecratory rite. For a somewhat similar discussion, see IV, 6, 7, 20. 21. The commentary introduces the present discussion thus: atha brâhma<i>n</i>âparanâmadheyasya pura<i>s</i><i>k</i>ara<i>n</i>a<i>s</i>abdasya pûrvavan nirva<i>k</i>anapura<i>h</i>saram adhidaivam artham âha.

[^663]: 338:1 Or, tries to make opposition, as Sâya<i>n</i>a takes it—ya<i>h</i> purusha<i>h</i> sveshu madhye eva<i>m</i>vidam uktavidyâ<i>m</i> <i>g</i>ânâna<i>m</i> purusha<i>m</i> pratibubhûshati (!) prâtikûlyam â<i>k</i>aritum i<i>k</i><i>kh</i>ati.

[^664]: 338:2 Thus ‘anu-bhû’ is taken by the St. Petersb. Dict. (‘to serve, be helpful to’), and by Sâya<i>n</i>a—‘yas tv eva<i>m</i>vidam anukûlayet sa poshyân poshayitu<i>m</i> <i>s</i>aknoti.’

[^665]: 338:3 Sâya<i>n</i>a seems to take ‘aparavat’ in the sense of ‘it has (only) something after it’—srash<i>t</i>avya<i>g</i>agadrûpâparavat—and the use of the word ‘aparapurushâ<i>h</i> (descendants)’ immediately after might indeed seem to favour that interpretation.

[^666]: 339:1 The MISS. of the commentary (I. O. 613. 149) are unfortunately not in a very satisfactory condition:—sa yo haitad iti, evam upâsîtety artha<i>h</i>; yadi veditu<i>h</i> sakâ<i>s</i>ât gyâyasa<i>h</i> purushasya sadbhâve tadâ svayam bâdhyo bhavatîty â<i>s</i>aṅkya tasmâd adhikapurushâd adhikam (a<i>kh</i>âdikât B) \[vastu di<i>s</i>yopâsîtavyam (!) ity âha, yoऽsmâ<i>g</i> <i>g</i>yâyân iti; yadi asmâd upâsakât yoऽdhika<i>h</i> syât tarhi tasmâd adhikât, om. B\] di<i>s</i>a<i>h</i> pûrvâ ity upâsîta; tata<i>h</i> <i>g</i>yâyasoऽpi <i>g</i>yâya-upâsane svasyâdhikyât bâdhako nâsti<i>t</i>y artha<i>h</i>. The commentary would thus seem to take it to mean that by showing reverence to something before, or higher than, his rival, he would turn aside his schemes.

[^667]: 340:1 Or, thine own self, thy nature—tavâtmâ svarûpam. Sâya<i>n</i>a.

[^668]: 340:2 That is, pronounced in an undertone, muttered.

[^669]: 341:1 Ya<i>g</i>ushaivainam â<i>k</i>akshata iti <i>g</i><i>ñ</i>ât<i>ri</i><i>g</i><i>ñ</i>eyayor abhedopa<i>k</i>âre<i>n</i>a tasya vidusha eva ya<i>g</i>u<i>h</i> tasya vyavahâryatvam bhavatîty artha<i>h</i>. Sâya<i>n</i>a.