---
title: "Book V — XII, 2. Second Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_12_1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XII, 1. First Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_12_3">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XII, 3. Third Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="v12_2_1"><sup><small>12:2:1</small></sup></span>

## SECOND ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v12_2_1_11"><sup><small>12:2:1:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, those who become initiated for (a sacrificial session of) a year cross an ocean: the Prâya<i>n</i>îya Atirâtra is a flight of steps [^440], for it is by means of a flight of steps that one enters (the water); and <span id="p146"><sup><small>[ p. 146 ]</small></sup></span> when they enter on the Prâya<i>n</i>îya Atirâtra it is just as if they were entering the ocean by a flight of steps.

<span id="v12_2_1_22"><sup><small>12:2:1:22.</small></sup></span>  The <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day is (in the form of) a foothold, a shallow place [^441], such a one as (where the water reaches) either to the arm-pits or to the neck, whence, having rested, they enter [^442] (the deep water). The Abhiplava is (a spot) suitable for swimming; and so is the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya suitable for swimming.

<span id="v12_2_1_33"><sup><small>12:2:1:33.</small></sup></span>  The Abhi<i>g</i>it is a foothold, a shallow place, such a one as (where the water reaches) either to the arm-pits, or to the neck, whence, having rested, they come out (of the water). The first Svarasâman is thigh-deep, the second knee-deep, the third knuckle-deep. The Vishuvat is a foothold (in the form of) an island. The first (Svarasâman) with reversed Sâmans is knuckle-deep, the second knee-deep, and the third thigh-deep.

<span id="v12_2_1_44"><sup><small>12:2:1:44.</small></sup></span>  The Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it is a foothold, a shallow place, such a one as (where the water reaches) either to the arm-pits or to the neck, whence, having rested, he enters (the deep water again). The P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya is suitable for swimming, and so is the Abhiplava, and so are the Go and Âyus, and so is the Da<i>s</i>arâtra.

<span id="v12_2_1_55"><sup><small>12:2:1:55.</small></sup></span>  The Mahâvrata is a foothold, a shallow place, such a one as (where the water reaches) either to the arm-pits or to the neck, whence, having rested, <span id="p147"><sup><small>[ p. 147 ]</small></sup></span> they step out (of the water). The Udayanîya (concluding) Atirâtra is a flight of steps, for it is by a flight of steps that people step out (of the water): thus, when they perform the Udayanîya Atirâtra, it is just as if, having entered the sea by a flight of steps, they were to step out of it, by a flight of steps.

<span id="v12_2_1_66"><sup><small>12:2:1:66.</small></sup></span>  Regarding this they say, ‘How many Atirâtras are there in the year, how many Agnish<i>t</i>omas, how many Ukthyas, how many Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>ins, how many Sha<i>d</i>ahas?’—Two Atirâtras, a hundred and six Agnish<i>t</i>omas, and two hundred and forty Ukthyas,—thus in the case of those who perform the Svarasâmans as Ukthyas.

<span id="v12_2_1_77"><sup><small>12:2:1:77.</small></sup></span>  But in the case of those who perform them as Agnish<i>t</i>omas, a hundred and twelve Agnish<i>t</i>omas, two hundred and thirty-four Ukthyas, twelve Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>ins, and sixty Sha<i>d</i>ahas. This, then, is how the year is obtained.

<span id="v12_2_1_88"><sup><small>12:2:1:88.</small></sup></span>  There are twelve months in the year, and their vital energy and power are the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as; and by performing the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as month by month, they obtain, in monthly portions [^443], that vital energy of the year.—‘And how do they obtain the vital energy of the thirteenth (intercalary) month?’ Well, subsequent to the Vishuvat day they perform the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it Agnish<i>t</i>oma with all the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as [^444], and thus indeed they obtain the vital energy of the thirteenth month.

<span id="v12_2_1_99"><sup><small>12:2:1:99.</small></sup></span>  Now, concerning this, <i>S</i>vetaketu Âru<i>n</i>eya, <span id="p148"><sup><small>[ p. 148 ]</small></sup></span> knowing this, once said, ‘I am now going to get myself initiated for one year.’ His father, looking at him, said, ‘Knowest thou, long-lived one, the fording-footholds of the year?’—‘I know them,’ he replied, for, indeed, he said this as one knowing it.


<span id="v12_2_2"><sup><small>12:2:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v12_2_2_11"><sup><small>12:2:2:11.</small></sup></span>  Here, now, they say, ‘Whereby are the Abhiplavas possessed of light (<i>g</i>yotis) on both sides [^445], <span id="p149"><sup><small>[ p. 149 ]</small></sup></span> and the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya of light on one side only?’ Well, the Abhiplavas are these worlds, and these worlds are indeed possessed of light on both sides—through the fire on this side, and through the sun on yonder side; and the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya is the seasons, and the seasons are indeed possessed, of light on one side only: he who burns yonder (the sun) is their light.

<span id="v12_2_2_22"><sup><small>12:2:2:22.</small></sup></span>  Verily, those two wheels of the gods, established on the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya [^446], revolve crushing [^447] the Sacrificer's evil; and, indeed, if during a sacrificial session any one speaks evil of such initiates as know this, those two wheels of the gods cut off his head: the (chariot-) seat is the Da<i>s</i>arâtra, and the two wheels are the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and Abhiplava.

<span id="v12_2_2_33"><sup><small>12:2:2:33.</small></sup></span>  Concerning this they say, ‘Seeing that the two wheels (of a cart) are alike, and those stomas unlike, how are those stomas one after another performed alike for him?’ Let him reply, ‘Thereby, that there are six of the one, and six of the other.’

<span id="v12_2_2_44"><sup><small>12:2:2:44.</small></sup></span>  ‘Let him make the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and Abhiplava two warps [^448],’ said Paiṅgya; ‘let him make their <span id="p150"><sup><small>[ p. 150 ]</small></sup></span> Stotras and <i>S</i>astras run together:’ inasmuch as he makes them run together, these (channels of the) vital airs, though separate from one another, run together, with one and the same aim [^449], into a common web; but were he not to make them run together, the Sacrificer would be liable to perish; and liable to perish, indeed, is one who is either blind or deaf.

<span id="v12_2_2_55"><sup><small>12:2:2:55.</small></sup></span>  The Agnish<i>t</i>omas amount to nine in a month [^450];—now, there are nine vital airs: it is the vital airs he thus lays into them (the Sacrificers); and thus they attain the full term of life, and so, indeed, they do not depart this world before the (full) term of life.

<span id="v12_2_2_66"><sup><small>12:2:2:66.</small></sup></span>  And the Ukthyas (amount) to twenty-one;—now, there are twelve months in the year, five seasons, and three worlds, that makes twenty, and he who burns yonder (the sun) is the twenty-first [^451], <span id="p151"><sup><small>[ p. 151 ]</small></sup></span> —that consummation (he attains), and by that consummation he ascends month by month to the world of heaven, and gains, in monthly portions, the world of heaven, and the twenty-one-fold Stoma, and the B<i>ri</i>hatî metre [^452].

<span id="v12_2_2_77"><sup><small>12:2:2:77.</small></sup></span>  The Agnish<i>t</i>omas amount to thirty-four in a month [^453]\—for the obtainment of all the gods; for there are thirty-three gods, and Pra<i>g</i>âpati is the thirty-fourth. And there is one Ukthya with the Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in (stotra); for the Ukthya means food, and the Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in vital strength.

<span id="v12_2_2_88"><sup><small>12:2:2:88.</small></sup></span>  By means of that food and vital strength the gods obtained all their desires, and secured all their desires; and in like manner does this (Sacrificer); by means of that food and vital strength, obtain all his desires, and secure all his desires: with a view to that object he who is initiated for (a sacrificial session of) a year should therefore perform the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and Abhiplava (-sha<i>d</i>ahas). <span id="p152"><sup><small>[ p. 152 ]</small></sup></span> 12:2:2:99\. Now, the Âdityas and the Aṅgiras, both of them sprung from Pra<i>g</i>âpati, were contending together saying, ‘We shall be the first to reach heaven,—we shall be the first!’

<span id="v12_2_2_1010"><sup><small>12:2:2:1010.</small></sup></span>  By means of four Stomas, four P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as [^454], and light (simple) hymn-tunes, the Âdityas sailed across to the heavenly world; and inasmuch as they sailed (abhi-plu) to it, they (these six-days’ periods) are called Abhiplava.

<span id="v12_2_2_1111"><sup><small>12:2:2:1111.</small></sup></span>  By means of all the Stomas, all the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>as [^455], and heavy (complicated) hymn-tunes, the Aṅgiras, coming after (the gods), as it were [^456], touched (reached) the heavenly world; and inasmuch as they touched (sp<i>ri</i><i>s</i>) it, it (this six-days’ period) is called P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya [^457].

<span id="v12_2_2_1212"><sup><small>12:2:2:1212.</small></sup></span>  It is a six-days’ Abhiplava, because it consists of six days; or a five-days’ Abhiplava, because it consists of five days, for the last day is the same as the first; or a four-days’ Abhiplava, for there are four Stomas (used) in it—the thrice-threefold (triv<i>ri</i>t), the fifteen-versed, the seventeen-versed, and the twenty-one-versed one; or a three-days’ Abhiplava, for it is of three orders—<i>G</i>yotis, Go, and <span id="p153"><sup><small>[ p. 153 ]</small></sup></span> Âyus [^458]; or a two-days’ Abhiplava, for there are two Sâmans (used) in it—the B<i>ri</i>hat and the Rathantara [^459]; or a one-day's Abhiplava, for it is performed with the Stomas of a one-day's (Soma-sacrifice [^460]). Twelve Stotras and twelve <i>S</i>astras of the four Ukthyas are in excess [^461]\—they make a seventh Agnish<i>t</i>oma, and thus the Agnish<i>t</i>omas amount to seven.

<span id="v12_2_2_1313"><sup><small>12:2:2:1313.</small></sup></span>  Now, Proti Kau<i>s</i>âmbeya [^462] Kausurubindi dwelt with Uddâlaka Âru<i>n</i>i as a religious student. The teacher asked him, ‘My son, how many days did thy father [^463] consider that there are in the year?’

<span id="v12_2_2_1414"><sup><small>12:2:2:1414.</small></sup></span>  ‘Ten,’ he replied.—‘Ten, indeed,’ he said; 'for the Virâ<i>g</i> consists of ten syllables, and the sacrifice is of Virâ<i>g</i> nature;—

15\. But how many are there really?'—‘Nine,’ he replied.—‘Nine, indeed,’ he said; ‘for there are nine vital airs, and by means of the vital airs the sacrifice is performed;— <span id="p154"><sup><small>[ p. 154 ]</small></sup></span> 12:2:2:1616\. But how many are there really?’—‘Eight,’ he replied.—‘Eight, indeed,’ he said; 'for the Gâyatrî consists of eight syllables, and the sacrifice is of Gâyatrî nature;—

<span id="v12_2_2_1717"><sup><small>12:2:2:1717.</small></sup></span>  But how many are there really?'—‘Seven,’ he replied.—‘Seven, indeed,’ he said; 'for there are seven metres (successively) increasing by four (syllables), and by means of the metres the sacrifice is performed;—

<span id="v12_2_2_1818"><sup><small>12:2:2:1818.</small></sup></span>  But how many are there really?'—‘Six,’ he replied.—‘Six, indeed,’ he said; 'six seasons make up a year, and the sacrifice is the year; and one and the same day are those two, the opening and concluding (Atirâtra [^464]);—

<span id="v12_2_2_1919"><sup><small>12:2:2:1919.</small></sup></span>  But how many are there really?'—‘Five,’ he replied.—‘Five, indeed,’ he said; 'the sacrifice is fivefold; the sacrificial animal is fivefold [^465]; there are five seasons in the year, and the sacrifice is the year; <span id="p155"><sup><small>[ p. 155 ]</small></sup></span> and one and the same day are those two, the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a and the Mahâvrata.;—

<span id="v12_2_2_2020"><sup><small>12:2:2:2020.</small></sup></span>  But how many are there really?'—‘Four,’ he replied.—‘Four, indeed,’ he said; 'animals are four-footed, and animals constitute a sacrifice; and one and the same day are those two, the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and Abhiplava;—

<span id="v12_2_2_2121"><sup><small>12:2:2:2121.</small></sup></span>  But how many are there really?'—‘Three,’ he replied.—‘Three, indeed,’ he said; 'there are three metres, three worlds; and the (Soma-) sacrifice consists of three services; and one and the same day are those two, the Abhi<i>g</i>it and Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it;—

<span id="v12_2_2_2222"><sup><small>12:2:2:2222.</small></sup></span>  But how many are there really?'—‘Two,’ he replied.—‘Two, indeed,’ he said; 'for man is two-footed, and the sacrifice is man; and one and the same day are the Svarasâmans;—

<span id="v12_2_2_2323"><sup><small>12:2:2:2323.</small></sup></span>  But how many are there really?'—‘One,’ he replied.—‘A day, indeed,’ he said; ‘the whole year is just that day after day:’—this is the mystic import of the year; and, verily, whosoever thus knows this mystic import [^466] of the year grows more (and more) glorious up to (the end of) it; he becomes possessed of a (new) body, he becomes the year, and in the shape of the year he joins the gods.


<span id="v12_2_3"><sup><small>12:2:3</small></sup></span>

## THIRD BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v12_2_3_11"><sup><small>12:2:3:11.</small></sup></span>  That year, doubtless, amounts to a B<i>ri</i>hatî—,there are two sha<i>d</i>ahas (12) of winning days  [^467]; the <span id="p156"><sup><small>[ p. 156 ]</small></sup></span> two, P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and Abhiplava (12); the Go and Âyus, and the Da<i>s</i>arâtra (ten days)—that makes thirty-six; for the B<i>ri</i>hatî consists of thirty-six syllables, and by means of the B<i>ri</i>hatî the gods strove to reach heaven, and by the B<i>ri</i>hatî they did gain heaven; and in like manner does this one, by means of the B<i>ri</i>hatî, now strive to reach heaven, and thereby gain heaven; he who knows this secures for himself whatever wish there is in the B<i>ri</i>hatî.

<span id="v12_2_3_22"><sup><small>12:2:3:22.</small></sup></span>  And as to the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day, it is the same as either the seventh or the ninth (day) of the Da<i>s</i>arâtra [^468] From out of the Abhiplava the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya is formed, from the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya the Abhi<i>g</i>it, <span id="p157"><sup><small>[ p. 157 ]</small></sup></span> from the Abhi<i>g</i>it the Svarasâmans, from the Svarasâmans the Vishuvat, from the Vishuvat the Svarasâmans, from the Svarasâmans the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it, from the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya [^469], from the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya the Abhiplava, from the Abhiplava the Go and Âyus, and from the Go and Âyus the Da<i>s</i>arâtra.

<span id="v12_2_3_33"><sup><small>12:2:3:33.</small></sup></span>  And that Mahâvrata is a winning-day, for its Stoma is the Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>avi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, and a metre does not collapse from (excess or deficiency of) a syllable—neither from one nor from two (syllables); neither does a Stoma by (an excess of) one hymn-verse [^470].

<span id="v12_2_3_44"><sup><small>12:2:3:44.</small></sup></span>  Prior to the Vishuvat they perform first the Abhiplava, and afterwards the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya, for the Abhiplava represents the sons, and the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya the father; whence in early life the sons subsist on (the resources of) their father. Subsequent to the Vishuvat they perform first the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya, and afterwards the Abhiplava; whence in later life the father subsists on (the resources of) his sons; and, verily, the sons of him who thus knows this subsist on him in early life, and he subsists on his sons in later life.

<span id="v12_2_3_55"><sup><small>12:2:3:55.</small></sup></span>  Here, now, they ask, ‘If he were to die after entering on the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day, how does he become one who has not merely (uttered) the <span id="p158"><sup><small>[ p. 158 ]</small></sup></span> Âgur-formula [^471]?’ Let him say, ‘In that they then perform the Opening Atirâtra, thereby (he becomes such a one).’

<span id="v12_2_3_66"><sup><small>12:2:3:66.</small></sup></span>  As to this they ask, ‘Seeing that there are the twelve months of the year, and that one day, to wit, the Vishuvat, is in excess, does this belong to those (months) that go before or to those that follow?’ Let him say, ‘Both to those that go before and to those that follow;’ for the Vishuvat is the body (trunk) of the year, and the months are its limbs; and where the body is there are (or, that includes) also the limbs, and where the limbs are there is also the body; and neither is the body in excess of the limbs, nor are the limbs in excess of the body: and thus, indeed, that (day) belongs both to those (months) that go before and to those that follow.

<span id="v12_2_3_77"><sup><small>12:2:3:77.</small></sup></span>  But, indeed, that year is a great eagle: the six months which they perform prior to the Vishuvat are the one wing, and those which they perform subsequent thereto are the other; and the Vishuvat is the body; and, indeed, where the body is there are also the wings, and where the wings are there is also the body; for neither is the body in excess of the wings, nor are the wings in excess of the body: and thus, indeed, that (day) belongs both to those (months) that go before and to those that follow.

<span id="v12_2_3_88"><sup><small>12:2:3:88.</small></sup></span>  As to this they ask, ‘Seeing that for six months prior to the Vishuvat they- perform Stomas tending upwards, and for six (months) reversed <span id="p159"><sup><small>[ p. 159 ]</small></sup></span> (Stomas), how are these latter performed so as to tend upwards?’ Let him say, ‘In that they perform that Da<i>s</i>arâtra as one with upward tending Stomas, thereby they do so.’ Now, the Mahâvrata did not yield itself to the gods saying, ‘How is it, ye have performed the Vishuvat with upward tending hymns, and me with reversed ones?’

<span id="v12_2_3_99"><sup><small>12:2:3:99.</small></sup></span>  The gods said, ‘Try ye to find out that sacrificial performance which has upward tending Stomas, and whereby we may gain this.’ They saw that Da<i>s</i>arâtra with upward tending Stomas after the manner of the year: what P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha there is in it that is the seasons, the (three) <i>Kh</i>andomas are these worlds, and the tenth day is the year. Thereby they gained this (Mahâvrata), and it yielded itself to them; and, verily, the Mahâvrata yields itself to him who so knows this.

<span id="v12_2_3_1010"><sup><small>12:2:3:1010.</small></sup></span>  And in this way, indeed, there is an ascent of days:—by means of the Opening Atirâtra they ascend the concluding Atirâtra, by means of the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a the Mahâvrata, by means of an Abhiplava a subsequent Abhiplava, by means of a P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya a subsequent P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya, by means of the Abhi<i>g</i>it the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it, by means of the Svarasâmans the subsequent Svarasâmans—but that one day is not ascended, to wit, the Vishuvat: and, verily, he who thus knows this ascends to (the state of) one more glorious, and no one inferior to him ascends (to be equal) to him.

<span id="v12_2_3_1111"><sup><small>12:2:3:1111.</small></sup></span>  And in this way, indeed, there is a descent of days:—the Prâya<i>n</i>îya Atirâtra descends to the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day, the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day to the Abhiplava, the Abhiplava to the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya, the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya to the Abhi<i>g</i>it, the Abhi<i>g</i>it to the Svarasâmans, the <span id="p160"><sup><small>[ p. 160 ]</small></sup></span> Svarasâmans to the Vishuvat, the Vishuvat to the Svarasâmans, the Svarasâmans to the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it, the Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it to the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya, the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya to the Abhiplava, the Abhiplava to the Go and Âyus, the Go and Âyus to the Da<i>s</i>arâtra, the Da<i>s</i>arâtra to the Mahâvrata, the Mahâvrata to the Udayanîya Atirâtra, the Udayanîya Atirâtra to the world of heaven, to the resting-place, to plenty.

<span id="v12_2_3_1212"><sup><small>12:2:3:1212.</small></sup></span>  Such, indeed, are the wilds and ravines of sacrifice, and they (take) hundreds upon hundreds of days’ carriage-drives; and if any venture into them without knowledge, then hunger or thirst, evil-doers and fiends harass them, even as fiends would harass foolish men wandering in a wild forest; but if those who know this do so, they pass from one duty to another, as from one stream into another, and from one safe place to another, and obtain well-being, the world of heaven.

<span id="v12_2_3_1313"><sup><small>12:2:3:1313.</small></sup></span>  As to this they say, ‘How many onward, and how many backward days are there?’ Well, those which are performed once each are onward days, and those which are performed repeatedly are backward days: let him at least consider these [^472] as backward ones, for in accordance with the course of the Sha<i>d</i>ahas he himself moves.


<span id="v12_2_4"><sup><small>12:2:4</small></sup></span>

## FOURTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v12_2_4_11"><sup><small>12:2:4:11.</small></sup></span>  The Year, indeed, is Man;—the Prâya<i>n</i>îya Atirâtra is his breath, for by means of the breath men go forward (prayanti); and the Ârambha<i>n</i>îya <span id="p161"><sup><small>[ p. 161 ]</small></sup></span> (opening) day [^473] is speech, for by means of speech men undertake (ârabh) whatever they do undertake.

<span id="v12_2_4_22"><sup><small>12:2:4:22.</small></sup></span>  The Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>aha is this right hand [^474]. This (little finger) is the first day thereof,—this (upper joint [^475])is its morning-service, this (middle joint) its midday-service, and this (lower joint) its evening-service: it is in place of the Gâyatrî, whence this (little finger) is the shortest of these (fingers).

<span id="v12_2_4_33"><sup><small>12:2:4:33.</small></sup></span>  This (third finger) is the second day,—this (upper joint) is its morning-service, this (middle joint) its midday-service, and this (lower joint) its evening-service: it is in place of the Trish<i>t</i>ubh, whence this (third finger) is larger than this (little finger).

<span id="v12_2_4_44"><sup><small>12:2:4:44.</small></sup></span>  This (middle finger) is the third day,—this is its morning-service, this its midday-service, and this its evening-service: it is in place of the <i>G</i>agatî, whence this is the largest of these (fingers).

<span id="v12_2_4_55"><sup><small>12:2:4:55.</small></sup></span>  This (fore-finger) is the fourth day,—this is its morning-service, this its midday-service, and this its evening-service: it is in place of the Virâ<i>g</i>; for the Virâ<i>g</i> is food, whence this (fore-finger) is the most food-eating [^476] of these (fingers). <span id="p162"><sup><small>[ p. 162 ]</small></sup></span> 12:2:4:66\. This (thumb) is the fifth day,—this is its morning-service, this its midday-service, and this its evening-service: it is in place of the Paṅkti, for the Paṅkti is broad [^477], as it were, whence this (thumb) is the broadest of these (fingers).

<span id="v12_2_4_77"><sup><small>12:2:4:77.</small></sup></span>  This (right arm) is the sixth day,—this (forearm [^478]) is its morning-service, this (upper arm) its midday-service, and this (shoulder-blade) its evening-service: it is in place of the Ati<i>kh</i>andas, whence this (arm) is larger than those (fingers). That day is a Gâyatrî one, whence this shoulder-blade is the shortest: this Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>aha (extends) in this, in this, in this, and in this, direction [^479]; and the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya is the body (trunk).

<span id="v12_2_4_88"><sup><small>12:2:4:88.</small></sup></span>  Now, as to this, Paiṅgya, knowing this, said, ‘The Abhiplavas leap about (plavante), as it were, and the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya stands (sthâ) [^480], as it were; for <span id="p163"><sup><small>[ p. 163 ]</small></sup></span> this (man) leaps about, as it were, with his limbs, and he stands, as it were, with his body.’

<span id="v12_2_4_99"><sup><small>12:2:4:99.</small></sup></span>  The Triv<i>ri</i>t (stoma) is its head, whence that (head) is threefold (triv<i>ri</i>t)—skin, bone, and brain.

<span id="v12_2_4_1010"><sup><small>12:2:4:1010.</small></sup></span>  The Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a (fifteen-versed hymn-form) is the neck-joints,—for there are fourteen of these (joints) [^481], and the vital force is the fifteenth; hence by means of that (neck), though being small, man bears a heavy burden: therefore the Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a is the neck.

<span id="v12_2_4_1111"><sup><small>12:2:4:1111.</small></sup></span>  The Saptada<i>s</i>a (seventeen-versed hymn-form) is the chest; for there are eight ‘<i>g</i>atru [^482]’ on the one <span id="p164"><sup><small>[ p. 164 ]</small></sup></span> side, and eight on the other, and the chest itself is the seventeenth: therefore the Saptada<i>s</i>a (stoma) is the chest.

<span id="v12_2_4_1212"><sup><small>12:2:4:1212.</small></sup></span>  The Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (twenty-one-versed hymn-form) is the belly, for inside the belly there are twenty ‘kuntâpa [^483],’ and the belly is the twenty-first: therefore the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (stoma) is the belly.

<span id="v12_2_4_1313"><sup><small>12:2:4:1313.</small></sup></span>  The Tri<i>n</i>ava (thrice nine-versed hymn-form) is the two sides (pâr<i>s</i>va);—there are thirteen ribs (par<i>s</i>u) on the one side, and thirteen on the other [^484], and the sides make up the thrice ninth: therefore the Tri<i>n</i>ava (stoma) is the two sides.

<span id="v12_2_4_1414"><sup><small>12:2:4:1414.</small></sup></span>  The Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (thirty-three-versed hymn-form) <span id="p165"><sup><small>[ p. 165 ]</small></sup></span> is the spine; for there are thirty-two ‘karûkara [^485]’ of that (spine), and the spine itself is the thirty-third: therefore the Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a (stoma) is the spine.

<span id="v12_2_4_1515"><sup><small>12:2:4:1515.</small></sup></span>  The Abhi<i>g</i>it is the same as this right ear; the first Svarasâman is this white part of the eye, the second the black part, and the third the pupil; the Vishuvat is the nose, the first backward Svarasâman is this pupil of the eye, the second the black, and the third the white part thereof.

<span id="v12_2_4_1616"><sup><small>12:2:4:1616.</small></sup></span>  The Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it is the same as this left ear; the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and Abhiplava have been told; the Go and Âyus are the two downward breathings which there are (in the body); the Da<i>s</i>arâtra the limbs, the Mahâvrata is the mouth; and the Udayanîya Atirâtra the up-breathing, for by means of the up-breathing men go upwards (ud-yanti): such is that year as established in the body; and, verily, whosoever thus knows that year as established in the body, establishes himself by offspring and cattle in this, and by immortality in the other, world.



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_12_1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XII, 1. First Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_12_3">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XII, 3. Third Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^440]: 145:2 Or, a descent, a passage leading down to a bathing-place.

[^441]: 146:1 Gâdham eva pratish<i>th</i>â,—it may be remarked that this is just the form in which an appositional compound is analyzed by native grammarians, as if it were ‘gâdha-pratish<i>th</i>â,’ a foothold which is just a ford, a ford-foothold, as indeed it is written in paragraph 9. Cf. p. 66, note 4.

[^442]: 146:2 Or, bathe,—‘prasnâti,’ indeed, would really seem to mean here ‘he swims forward.’

[^443]: 147:1 Lit., by the month, i.e. by monthly instalments; cf. Tâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ya Br. IV, 2, 9.

[^444]: 147:2 On Soma-days with all the (six) P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-sâmans, see part iii, introd., p. xxi.

[^445]: 148:1 The difference between the Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>aha and the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha was thus explained in part iii, introd., p. xxi, note 2:—'In both kinds of sha<i>d</i>aha, the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotras (at the Mâdhyandina-savana) are performed in the ordinary way—viz. either in the Agnish<i>t</i>oma or the Ukthya way (see ib., p. xvi, note 2, as the correct reference is);—but whilst, in the Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>aha, the Rathantara and B<i>ri</i>hat-sâmans are used for the Hot<i>ri</i>'s P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotra on alternate days, the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha requires a different P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-sâman on each of the six days. The two kinds of sha<i>d</i>ahas also differ entirely in regard to the sequence of Stomas prescribed for the performance of the Stotras.' It is this difference in the ‘sequence of Stomas’ which is referred to in our passage. On the six days of the Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>aha, the sequence of Stomas (the first four of which, viz. Triv<i>ri</i>t, Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a, Saptada<i>s</i>a, and Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, are only used) varies from day to day in this way: 1. <i>G</i>yotish<i>t</i>oma; 2. Gosh<i>t</i>oma; 3. Âyush<i>t</i>oma; 4. Gosh<i>t</i>oma; 5. Âyush<i>t</i>oma; 6. <i>G</i>yotish<i>t</i>oma (for the difference between these, see part iv, p. 287, note 2). It will thus be seen that the Abhiplava has the ‘<i>g</i>yotih (stoma)’ on both sides, on the first and the last days. For the Hot<i>ri</i>'s P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotra on these successive days the Rathantara-sâman and B<i>ri</i>hat-sâman are used; and, as the Gosh<i>t</i>oma and Âyush<i>t</i>oma are Ukthya-days, the usual practice which requires the B<i>ri</i>hat-sâman for such days, is not followed; just as the final <i>G</i>yotish<i>t</i>oma in this case requires the B<i>ri</i>hat-sâman.—As regards the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha, each successive day requires for its stotras a single Stoma, in the ascending order: Triv<i>ri</i>t, Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a, Saptada<i>s</i>a, Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, Tri<i>n</i>ava, Trayastri<i>m</i><i>s</i>a;—a different P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-sâman being used for the Hot<i>ri</i>'s P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotra p. 149 on each of the six days. Here only the first day has the same Stoma at the beginning, as the <i>G</i>yotish<i>t</i>oma,—whence it has ‘<i>g</i>yotis’ on one side only.

[^446]: 149:1 This ‘p<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>yapratish<i>th</i>ite’ looks rather strange,—perhaps the correct reading is ‘p<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>apratish<i>th</i>ite,’ ‘established on the p<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-sâmans’; unless, indeed, ‘pratish<i>th</i>ita’ has to be understood here to refer to the Abhiplava, as the established, or ordinary, Sha<i>d</i>aha, which doubtless would make the best sense,—‘those two wheels of the gods, the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and the established (Abhiplava-) sha<i>d</i>aha.’

[^447]: 149:2 Or, as we would rather say, whilst revolving, crush the Sacrificer's evil.

[^448]: 149:3 ? Or, possibly, two kinds of threads, those of the warp and the woof (or weft), which are combined into one web. The St. Petersb. p. 150 Dict., on the other hand, takes ‘tantra’ here in the sense of ‘model form, type,’—and, indeed, the one meaning constantly passes into the other. The MS. of the comm. is too corrupt to be of much use.

[^449]: 150:1 This is a doubtful rendering of ‘ekoti.’ Though, doubtless, the juxtaposition of ‘ekoti’ and ‘samânam ûtim’ cannot be accidental, the word ‘ûti’ may probably have a different derivation and meaning in the two occurrences. Cf. Kern, Saddharmapu<i>n</i><i>d</i>arîka, introd., p. xvii; Journ. of the Pâli Text Society, 1885, pp. 32-38.

[^450]: 150:2 During five complete months of the first half, and four complete months of the second half, of the year four Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>ahas and one P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha are performed. Now, the six clays of the Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>aha consist of 1. Agnish<i>t</i>oma; 2-5. Ukthyas; 6. Agnish<i>t</i>oma; and those of the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha of 1. Agnish<i>t</i>oma; 2. 3. Ukthya; 4. Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in; 5.6. Ukthya. For the four Abhiplavas and the one P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya of each month this, accordingly, gives nine Agnish<i>t</i>omas, twenty Ukthyas, and one Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in (counted, however, as an Ukthya in [paragraphs 6](Book_5_12_2#v12_2_2_6) and [7](Book_5_12_2#v12_2_2_7)).

[^451]: 150:3 The reason why the Sun is so often referred to as the twenty-first or twenty-one-fold, is not easy to discover. Possibly it may be from the fact that the Vishuvat day, or central day of the great session and the longest day of the year, is identified with the Sun, p. 151 and that this day is flanked on both sides by ten special days which together with the central day, form a special group of twenty-one days. But, on the other hand, it may be exactly the other way, viz. that this central group was made one of twenty-one nays because of the already recognised epithet of Âditya as the ‘ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a.’ Cf. A. Hillebrandt, Die Sonnwendfeste in Alt-Indien, p. 6 seq.

[^452]: 151:1 Here the twenty-one Ukthyas are symbolically identified with the twenty-one-versed hymn-form; and the nine Agnish<i>t</i>omas (of [paragraph 5](Book_5_12_2#v12_2_2_5)) with the B<i>ri</i>hatî metre which consists of four pâdas of nine syllables each.

[^453]: 151:2 This number is evidently arrived at by counting the twenty Ukthyas as Agnish<i>t</i>omas (hence 9 + 20), and adding thereto five more Agnish<i>t</i>omas obtained by the calculation referred to in paragraph 12 (see note thereon), according to which the characteristic Stotras and Sastras of the Ukthya make one additional Agnish<i>t</i>oma in every four Ukthyas. The Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in, thus, is not taken into account in this calculation.

[^454]: 152:1 Besides the Rathantara and B<i>ri</i>hat, used on alternate days for the Hot<i>ri</i>'s P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotra at the Abhiplava, the Vâmadevya and Kâleya-sâmans, used on each day for the Maitrâvaru<i>n</i>a's and A<i>k</i><i>kh</i>âvâka's P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotras, seem to be counted here as making up the four P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-sâmans of the Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>aha. For the four Stomas, see [p. 148](Book_5_12_2#p148), note.

[^455]: 152:2 See ib., and part iii, introd., p. xxi.

[^456]: 152:3 The ‘iva’ would seem here (as, indeed, pretty frequently) to have the meaning of ‘eva,’ ‘indeed,’ thus—coming considerably after (the gods). Cf. Ait.-Brâhm. IV, 17, 5, where the Aṅgiras are said to have reached heaven sixty years after the Âdityas.

[^457]: 152:4 This etymology is of course not meant to be taken seriously, the word ‘p<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya’ being derived from ‘p<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a,’ ‘back’ ([XII, 1, 4, 1](Book_5_12_1#v12_1_4_1)).

[^458]: 153:1 See [p. 148](Book_5_12_2#p148), note; part iv, p. 287, note 2.

[^459]: 153:2 These two principal P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-sâmans are used on alternate days of the Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>aha for the first (or Hot<i>ri</i>'s) P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotra at the midday-service.

[^460]: 153:3 Viz. with the four Stomas used at the ordinary Agnish<i>t</i>oma-sacrifice.

[^461]: 153:4 Whilst the Agnish<i>t</i>oma includes twelve Stotras and twelve <i>S</i>astras, the Ukthya-sacrifice has three additional (Uktha-) Stotras and Sastras, which in the four Ukthya days of the Abhiplava-sha<i>d</i>aha make up another twelve chants and twelve recitations.

[^462]: 153:5 That is, either a descendant of Ku<i>s</i>âmba; or, as Harisvâmin takes it, a native of the city Kau<i>s</i>âmbî; cf. Weber, Ind. Stud. I, p. 193.—Prak<i>ri</i>sh<i>t</i>abhûpati-ko<i>s</i>âmbînivâsi-kusurabindasyâpatyam; MS. comm.

[^463]: 153:6 Harisvâmin applies to the father the epithet ‘mahâyâ<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>ika,’ or performer of the great sacrifices.

[^464]: 154:1 In the scheme of the Gavâm ayanam, given above ([p. 139](Book_5_12_1#p139), note [1](Book_5_12_1#fn425)), there is one day in excess of the year, viz. either the central Vishuvat day ([XII, 2, 3, 6](Book_5_12_2#v12_2_3_6)) or the final Atirâtra; but by making this latter day identical with the opening Atirâtra, Uddâlaka would seem to bring the whole within the compass of one year of six seasons. In the next paragraph, on the other hand, the same result is obtained by the identification of the second and the last but one days of the session. Another, and perhaps more probable, explanation of Uddâlaka's calculation would, however, be this. In the scheme of the sacrificial session there occur, as not included in the different sacrificial groups or periods (the sha<i>d</i>ahas, svarasâmans, &c.), seven special days—the opening and final Atirâtras, the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a and Mahâvrata days, and the Abhi<i>g</i>it, Vishuvat, and Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it days. These seven days he here successively reduces to six and five days. The further reduction of this number by the identification of the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya and Abhiplava, as well as of the Svarasâman days, requires no explanation. Cf., however, the Addenda.

[^465]: 154:2 For the ‘pâṅkta’ nature of the sacrifice, see III, 1, 4, 19. 20; [XIII, 2, 5, 1](Book_5_13_2#v13_2_5_1), for the five kinds of sacrificial animals, VI, 1, 2, 32 seqq.

[^466]: 155:1 Prof. Oldenberg (Zeitschr. d. Deutschen Morg. Ges., vol. 50, p. 460) takes ‘upanishad’ in the sense of ‘worship’—‘this is the worship to be offered to the year.’ Perhaps ‘meditation’ might be the more appropriate rendering:—‘this is the form in which the year should be meditated upon.’ Cf. X, 4, 5, 1; 5, I, 1.

[^467]: 155:2 The term ‘ârkshyat’ is apparently a future participle of ‘â-ar<i>g</i>,’ p. 156 hence ‘calculated to procure, or win.’ The Ait.-Br. has ‘âkshyat’ instead. The two Sha<i>d</i>ahas (or periods of six days), here counted as such days, would seem to include the six Svarasâman days, and the special named days scattered over the session (the opening and concluding Atirâtra being apparently counted as one).

[^468]: 156:1 <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day is one in which the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a-stoma, or twenty-four-fold hymn-form, is exclusively used in the chanting of the Stotras. The one usually denoted by that term is the second day of the Gavâm ayanam. In the Da<i>s</i>arâtra, or ten-days’ period, there is, however, likewise a day in which the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a-stoma is used exclusively. That period consists of a P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha (six days), three <i>Kh</i>andoma days, and a final Atyagnish<i>t</i>oma, called Avivâkya. The three <i>Kh</i>andoma days (i.e. days fashioned after metres) have assigned to them as their exclusive Stomas the twenty-four-fold, the forty-four-fold, and the forty-eight-fold hymn-forms respectively; the first of them, or the seventh day of the Da<i>s</i>arâtra, being thus a <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day. But in the second half of the year's session the regular order of the days of the minor sacrificial periods—the Sha<i>d</i>ahas and Svarasâmans—is reversed, the last day being performed first; and according to this paragraph the same is optionally to be the case in regard to the three <i>Kh</i>andoma days, the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day being taken either first or last (see, however, parag. 9). Cf. also Haug, Ait.-Br., Transl., p. 347, note (where, in l. 3, read Da<i>s</i>arâtra instead of Dvâda<i>s</i>âha).

[^469]: 157:1 Here, the order of Abhiplava and P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya followed in the first half of the year is reversed.

[^470]: 157:2 The author apparently claims for the pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>avi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a-stoma, or twenty-five-versed hymn-form, the same efficacy as for the <i>k</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a-stoma, the hymn-form of what is practically the first day of the sacrificial session (cf. Tâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ya-Br. XXV, 1, 1, where it is called <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a<i>m</i> prâya<i>n</i>îyam), and which by the number of its stotriyâ-verses, being that of the half-months in the course of the year (24), is supposed to represent the whole year; cf. Ait.-Br. IV, 52.

[^471]: 158:1 See XI, 2, 5, 10 with note. (There is no paragraph XI, 2, 5, 10—JBH.) The Katurvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day is, as it were, a promise on the part of the Sacrificer to perform the sacrificial session; whilst the Prâya<i>n</i>îya Atirâtra not only represents the actual entering on the performance, but, as it were, implies the Udayanîya Atirâtra ([XII, 2, 2, 18](Book_5_12_2#v12_2_2_18)).

[^472]: 160:1 Or, ‘meditate upon these’ (? worship these); see [p. 155](Book_5_12_2#p155), note [1](Book_5_12_2#fn466).

[^473]: 161:1 Hereby the <i>K</i>aturvi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day would seem to be meant (as, indeed, it is also taken by Harisvâmin, see [p. 157](Book_5_12_2#p157), note [2](Book_5_12_2#fn470);\* [p. 167](Book_5_12_3#p167), note [1](Book_5_12_3#fn487).

[^474]: 161:2 The right hand is apparently taken here to represent the four limbs—the arms and legs. In Sanskrit the terms for finger and toe (as for thumb and large toe) are the same.

[^475]: 161:3 That is, apparently the bone joining the palm; though possibly the one forming the extreme end of the finger may be intended. But inasmuch as the morning-service has five stotras as compared with the two of the evening-service the former might be expected to be compared with the larger of the two bones.

[^476]: 161:4 Prof. Weber, Prati<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>âsûtra, p. 97, refers to II, 4, 2, 18, where, in his opinion, the passage ‘(thus) they ladle out (food) for men’ p. 162 points to the fore-finger as the finger used most in eating. This is not improbable, though Sâya<i>n</i>a, as well as the commentary on Katy. IV, 1, 10, it is true, does not interpret the passage in that way.

[^477]: 162:1 Viz. inasmuch as it consists of five pâdas,—instead of three, as in the case of the Gâyatrî, or four, as in that of the others.

[^478]: 162:2 Thus also Harisvâmin (hardly, the palm; but see [p. 161](#p161), note [^475]).

[^479]: 162:3 Viz. in the direction of the two arms and the two legs. There being, in nine of the twelve months of the year, four Abhiplavas and one P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya in each month, the two kinds of six-days’ performances as regards numbers, certainly offer an analogy to the limbs and the body.

[^480]: 162:4 This etymological quibble seems to refer to the fact that the Abhiplavas are performed before the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya in the first half of the year, and after them in the second half; though the same feature of change might, vice versa, be applied to the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya. It is possible, however, that the author may refer here to other characteristic features of the two kinds of Sha<i>d</i>ahas; and it cannot be denied that the Abhiplava days are liable to much greater change than the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya days. The constant change in the p. 163 ‘sequence of stomas’ in the Abhiplava has already been referred to ([p. 148](Book_5_12_2#p148), note [1](Book_5_12_2#fn445)). Another source of change, in the Abhiplava, is the peculiar way in which the Brahmasâman (or Brâhma<i>n</i>â_kh<i>a</i>m_sin's P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>astotra) is varied from day to day. For, whilst during the months preceding the Vishuvat day, the Abhîvarta tune it used for this stotra on each day, but with different Pragâtha verses chanted thereto from day to day; during the second half of the year, on the other hand, the same text (Sâma-veda II, 806) is used throughout, whilst its tune is varied from day to day. Since in the second half of the year the order of the days of the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha must be reversed, whilst this is optionally the case as regards the Abhiplava, this feature can hardly be referred to here.

[^481]: 163:1 The ‘grîvâ<i>h</i>’ thus, as far as man is concerned, include not only the seven cervical vertebrae, but also the upper seven dorsal vertebrae, being those to which the true ribs are attached. It is worth remarking, however, that in large birds such as the eagle, the neck itself consists of fourteen vertebrae.

[^482]: 163:2 The St. Petersb. Dict. takes ‘<i>g</i>atru’ in the sense of ‘tuberculae costarum,’ or tubercles of the ribs, the projections near the ‘heads’ of the ribs where these join the spinal vertebrae; this conjectural meaning being based on VIII, 6, 2, 10, where the ribs are said to be fastened on both sides to the kîkasâ<i>h</i> (? sternum) and the <i>g</i>atrava<i>h</i>. Against this conjecture (as the Dict. remarks) is the circumstance that the <i>g</i>atrava<i>h</i> are here said to form part of the chest; and, besides, the tubercle of the rib is not a separate bone, and would hardly be likely to be specially singled out in this p. 164 connection. Perhaps, therefore, the <i>g</i>atrava<i>h</i> may rather be the costal cartilages connecting the seven true ribs with the sternum, and along with them the ligament of the collar-bone where it joins the sternum; in which case the former passage would have to be understood in the sense that the ribs are on both (the right and left) sides fastened on to the costal cartilages and (through them) to the ‘kîkasâ<i>h</i>,’ the breast-bone, or rather the several bones or plates of which the sternum consists, as articulated with the clavicles and the true ribs. It is possible, however, that ‘kîkasâ<i>h</i>’ may have a different meaning from that here assigned to it, in acc. with the St. Petersb. Dict. Indeed, one would expect the ‘kîkasâ<i>h</i>’ and ‘<i>g</i>atrava<i>h</i>’ on different ends of the ribs.

[^483]: 164:1 The meaning of ‘kuntâpa’ is likewise doubtful. The St. Petersb. Dict. suggests that certain glands may he intended thereby; but possibly the term may refer to the transverse processes (forming spikes, so to speak; cf. kunta) on both sides of the ten lower spinal vertebrae below the vertebra of the last true rib,—i.e. of the five lower dorsal, and the five lumbar vertebrae.

[^484]: 164:2 The clavicle, or collar-bone, would thus seem to be classed along with the ribs. Rather peculiar, in the anatomical phraseology employed in the Brâhma<i>n</i>a, is the collateral use of ‘par<i>s</i>u’ and ‘p<i>ri</i>sh<i>t</i>i’ for ‘rib’; and it is by no means clear that there is no distinction between the two terms. In connection with the Reta<i>h</i>si<i>k</i> bricks the term ‘p<i>ri</i>sh<i>t</i>i’ seems to be invariably used,—cf. VIII, 6, 2, 7, as against ib. paragraph 10 (par<i>s</i>u).

[^485]: 165:1 This is another term, the exact meaning of which is somewhat doubtful. The St. Petersb. Dict. takes ‘karûkara’ to refer to the vertebrae of the spinal column; and if that be correct, the term would seem to include not only the twenty-four joints of the backbone down to the last lumbar vertebrae, but also the appendages of the spine, viz. the sacrum with its five, and the coccyx with its four pieces: this, it is true, yields thirty-three, instead of thirty-two, parts, but it seems scarcely possible in any other way—as, for instance, by taking into account the epiphysial plates between the vertebrae, along with the latter—to arrive at a total approximating that mentioned in the above passage.