---
title: "Book V — XIII, 3. Third Adhyâya."
description: "The Satapatha Brahmana"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T23:38:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XIII, 2. Second Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_4">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XIII, 4. Fourth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="v13_3_1"><sup><small>13:3:1</small></sup></span>

## THIRD ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v13_3_1_11"><sup><small>13:3:1:11.</small></sup></span>  Pra<i>g</i>âpati's eye swelled; it fell out: thence the horse was produced; and inasmuch as it swelled (a<i>s</i>vayat), that is the origin and nature of the horse (a<i>s</i>va). By means of the A<i>s</i>vamedha the gods restored it to its place; and verily he who performs the A<i>s</i>vamedha makes Pra<i>g</i>âpati complete, and he (himself) becomes complete; and this, indeed, is the atonement for everything, the remedy for everything. Thereby the gods redeem all sin, yea, even the slaying of a Brahman [^835] they thereby redeem; and he who performs the A<i>s</i>vamedha redeems all sin, he redeems the slaying of a Brahman.

<span id="v13_3_1_22"><sup><small>13:3:1:22.</small></sup></span>  It was the left eye of Pra<i>g</i>âpati that swelled: hence they cut off the (meat) portions from the left. <span id="p329"><sup><small>[ p. 329 ]</small></sup></span> side of the horse, and from the right side of other victims.

<span id="v13_3_1_33"><sup><small>13:3:1:33.</small></sup></span>  There is a rattan mat, for the horse was produced from the womb of the waters, and the rattan springs from the water: he thus brings it in connection with its own (maternal) womb.

<span id="v13_3_1_44"><sup><small>13:3:1:44.</small></sup></span>  The <i>K</i>atush<i>t</i>oma [^836] is the form of chanting (on <span id="p330"><sup><small>[ p. 330 ]</small></sup></span> the first day); for a bee tore out [^837] (a piece of) the horse's thigh, and by means of the Katush<i>t</i>oma form of chanting the gods restored it: thus when there is the Katush<i>t</i>oma mode of chanting, it is for the completeness of the horse. The last day is an Atirâtra with all the Stomas [^838]\—with a view to his obtaining and securing everything, for an Atirâtra with all the Stomas is everything, and the A<i>s</i>vamedha is everything.


<span id="v13_3_2"><sup><small>13:3:2</small></sup></span>

## SECOND BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v13_3_2_11"><sup><small>13:3:2:11.</small></sup></span>  Now this (Sacrificer), having- conquered by means of the supreme Stoma—the Katush<i>t</i>oma, the K<i>ri</i>ta among dice [^839],—on the next day establishes <span id="p331"><sup><small>[ p. 331 ]</small></sup></span> himself on the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a [^840], as a firm foundation: from the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, as a firm foundation, he subsequently ascends to the next day, the seasons; for the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a (-stotras) are the seasons, and the seasons are the year: it is in the seasons, in the year, he establishes himself.

<span id="v13_3_2_22"><sup><small>13:3:2:22.</small></sup></span>  The <i>S</i>akvarî [^841] (verses) are the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a (-stotra of the second day): there is a different metre for each (verse), for different kinds of animals, both domestic and wild ones, are immolated here on each (day). As to the <i>S</i>akvarî (verses) being the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a, it is for the completeness of the horse (sacrifice) [^842]; and different kinds of animals are immolated on different (days), because different stomas are performed on the different (days of the A<i>s</i>vamedha). <span id="p332"><sup><small>[ p. 332 ]</small></sup></span> 13:3:2:33\. As to this they say, ‘These—to wit, goats and sheep and the wild (beasts)—are not all animals [^843]; but those—to wit, the bovine (victims)—are indeed all animals.’ On the last day he immolates bovine (victims), for they—to wit, bovine (victims)—are all animals: he thus immolates all animals. They are sacred to the All-gods [^844], for the completeness of the horse, for the horse is sacred to the All-gods. They are many-formed (or, many-coloured), whence animals are many-formed; and they are of distinct forms (or colours), whence animals are of distinct forms.


<span id="v13_3_3"><sup><small>13:3:3</small></sup></span>

## THIRD BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v13_3_3_11"><sup><small>13:3:3:11.</small></sup></span>  Inasmuch as there are three Anush<i>t</i>ubh verses [^845] (on the first day), therefore the horse, when standing, stands on three (feet); and inasmuch as (they are made into) four Gâyatrî verses, therefore the horse, when stepping out, scampers off on all (four) feet. For that Anush<i>t</i>ubh, doubtless, is the highest metre, and the horse is the highest of animals; and the Katush<i>t</i>oma is the highest of Stomas: by means of what is highest he thus causes him (the Sacrificer) to reach the highest position.

<span id="v13_3_3_22"><sup><small>13:3:3:22.</small></sup></span>  The <i>S</i>akvarî verses are the (Hot<i>ri</i>'s) P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a (of the second day): there is a different metre for <span id="p333"><sup><small>[ p. 333 ]</small></sup></span> each (verse), for different Stomas are performed on each (day). And as to the <i>S</i>akvarî verse being the P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a (-stotra), it is for the completeness of the horse (sacrifice).

<span id="v13_3_3_33"><sup><small>13:3:3:33.</small></sup></span>  The central day is an Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a one, for the Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a is yonder sun, and so is the A<i>s</i>vamedha by means of its own Stoma he thus establishes it in its own deity.

<span id="v13_3_3_44"><sup><small>13:3:3:44.</small></sup></span>  The Vâmadevya is the Maitrâvaru<i>n</i>a's Sâman [^846]; for the Vâmadevya is Pra<i>g</i>âpati, and the horse is of Pra<i>g</i>âpati's nature: he thus supplies it with its own deity.

<span id="v13_3_3_55"><sup><small>13:3:3:55.</small></sup></span>  The Pârthura<i>s</i>ma is the Brahma-sâman [^847]; for the horse is restrained by means of reins [^848] (ra<i>s</i>mi), but when unrestrained, unchecked, and unsteadied, it would be liable to go to the furthest distance: thus when the Pârthura<i>s</i>ma is the Brahma-sâman, it is for the safe keeping of the horse.

<span id="v13_3_3_66"><sup><small>13:3:3:66.</small></sup></span>  The Sa<i>m</i>k<i>ri</i>ti [^849] is the A<i>kh</i>âvâka's Sâman;— <span id="p334"><sup><small>[ p. 334 ]</small></sup></span> that A<i>s</i>vamedha, indeed, is, as it were, a disused sacrifice, for what is performed thereof, and what is not [^850]? When the Sa<i>m</i>k<i>ri</i>ti is the A<i>kh</i>âvâka's Sâman, it is for (bringing about) the completeness of the horse (sacrifice). The last day is an Atirâtra with all the (six) Stomas, in order to his (the Sacrificer's) obtaining everything, for an Atirâtra with all the Stomas is everything, and the A<i>s</i>vamedha is everything.

<span id="v13_3_3_77"><sup><small>13:3:3:77.</small></sup></span>  The fire-altar is the twenty-one-fold one [^851], the Stoma the twenty-one-fold one, and there are twenty-one sacrificial stakes; even as bulls or stallions [^852] would clash together, so do these Stomas [^853], the <span id="p335"><sup><small>[ p. 335 ]</small></sup></span> twenty-one-versed, run counter to one another: were he to bring them together, the Sacrificer would suffer harm, and his sacrifice would be destroyed.

<span id="v13_3_3_88"><sup><small>13:3:3:88.</small></sup></span>  There may, indeed, be a twelvefold altar, and eleven stakes. When the altar is a twelvefold one—twelve months being a year—it is the year, the sacrifice, he obtains. When there are eleven stakes, then that Virâ<i>g</i> (metre), the Ekâda<i>s</i>inî [^854], is contrived; and that which is its eleventh (stake) is its teat: thereby he milks it.

<span id="v13_3_3_99"><sup><small>13:3:3:99.</small></sup></span>  As to this they say, ‘If there were a twelvefold altar, and eleven stakes, it would be as if one were to drive on a cart drawn by one beast.’ There are the twenty-one-fold altar, the twenty-one-fold Stoma, and twenty-one stakes: that is as when one drives with side-horses.

<span id="v13_3_3_1010"><sup><small>13:3:3:1010.</small></sup></span>  That twenty-one-fold one, indeed, is the head of the sacrifice; and, verily, he who knows three heads on the A<i>s</i>vamedha, becomes the head of kings. There are the twenty-one-fold altar, the twenty-one-fold Stoma, and twenty-one stakes: these are the three heads on the A<i>s</i>vamedha; and, verily, he who thus knows them becomes the head of kings. And, indeed, he who knows the three tops on the A<i>s</i>vamedha, becomes the top of kings;—there are the twenty-one-fold altar, the twenty-one-fold Stoma, and twenty-one stakes: these, indeed, are the three tops on the A<i>s</i>vamedha; and, verily, he who thus knows them becomes the top of kings.


<span id="p336"><sup><small>[ p. 336 ]</small></sup></span>

<span id="v13_3_4"><sup><small>13:3:4</small></sup></span>

## FOURTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v13_3_4_11"><sup><small>13:3:4:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, the horse is slaughtered for all the deities: were he to make it one belonging to Pra<i>g</i>âpati (exclusively), he would deprive the deities who are co-sharers of their share. Having made ghee (to take the part of) portions (of the horse's body) he makes oblations [^855] to the deities in mentioning them one by one with (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXV, 1-9), ‘The Grass (I gratify) with the teeth, the Lotus with the roots of the hair, . . . :’ the deities who are co-sharers he thus supplies with their share. When he has offered the Ara<i>n</i>yeऽnû<i>k</i>ya (oblations) [^856], he offers the last oblation to <span id="p337"><sup><small>[ p. 337 ]</small></sup></span> Heaven and Earth; for all the gods are established in heaven and on earth: it is them he thereby gratifies. Now the gods and the Asuras were contending together.

<span id="v13_3_4_22"><sup><small>13:3:4:22.</small></sup></span>  They (the gods) spake, ‘We are the Agnaya<i>h</i> Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>ta<i>h</i> [^857] of the horse (sacrifice); let us take out for ourselves a special share: therewith we shall overcome the Asuras.’ They took the blood for themselves in order to overcome their rivals; when he offers the blood to the Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>ts, it is in order to overcome (his own) rivals; and the spiteful rival of him who knows this is undone by himself.

<span id="v13_3_4_33"><sup><small>13:3:4:33.</small></sup></span>  The first oblation (of blood) he offers [^858] in the <span id="p338"><sup><small>[ p. 338 ]</small></sup></span> throat (gullet) of the Gom<i>ri</i>ga [^859]; for Gom<i>ri</i>gas are cattle, and the Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>t is Rudra: he thus <span id="p339"><sup><small>[ p. 339 ]</small></sup></span> shields the cattle from Rudra, whence Rudra does not prowl after the cattle where this oblation is offered at the A<i>s</i>vamedha.

<span id="v13_3_4_44"><sup><small>13:3:4:44.</small></sup></span>  The second oblation [^860] he offers on a horse-hoof; for the one-hoofed (animals) are cattle, and the Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>t is Rudra: he thus shields the cattle from Rudra, whence Rudra does not prowl after the cattle where this oblation is offered at the A<i>s</i>vamedha.

<span id="v13_3_4_55"><sup><small>13:3:4:55.</small></sup></span>  The third oblation he offers in an iron bowl; for the people (subjects) are of iron [^861], and the Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>t is Rudra: he thus shields the people from Rudra, whence Rudra does not prowl after the cattle where this oblation is offered at the A<i>s</i>vamedha.


<span id="v13_3_5"><sup><small>13:3:5</small></sup></span>

## FIFTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v13_3_5_11"><sup><small>13:3:5:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, there are deaths [^862] connected with all the worlds; and were he not to offer oblations to them, Death would get hold of him in every world: <span id="p340"><sup><small>[ p. 340 ]</small></sup></span> when he offers oblations to the Deaths [^863], he wards off Death in every world.

<span id="v13_3_5_22"><sup><small>13:3:5:22.</small></sup></span>  Concerning this they say, ‘If, in offering, he were to name them all, saying, “To such [^864] (a death) hail! To such (a death) hail!” he would make that manifold death his enemy [^865], and would give himself over to Death.’ Only one oblation he offers to one of them, with, ‘To Death, hail!’ for there is indeed but one Death in yonder world, even Hunger [^866]: it is him he wards off in yonder world.

<span id="v13_3_5_33"><sup><small>13:3:5:33.</small></sup></span>  A second oblation he makes with, ‘To Brahman-slaying, hail!’ for, doubtless, a murder other than the slaying of a Brahman is no murder; but that—to wit, the slaying of a Brahman—is manifestly murder: he thus manifestly wards off Death [^867]. <span id="p341"><sup><small>[ p. 341 ]</small></sup></span> 13:3:5:44\. Mu<i>n</i><i>d</i>ibha Audanya [^868] it was who discovered this atonement for the slaying of a Brahman; and when one offers the oblation to the Brahmahatyâ he prepares a remedy for the slayer of a Brahman by satisfying Death himself with an oblation, and making a protection [^869] for him (the slayer). At whosoever's A<i>s</i>vamedha, therefore, this oblation is offered, even if in after-times [^870] any one in his family kills a Brahman, he thereby prepares a remedy (expiation) for him.


<span id="v13_3_6"><sup><small>13:3:6</small></sup></span>

## SIXTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v13_3_6_11"><sup><small>13:3:6:11.</small></sup></span>  When the horse was slaughtered, the life-sap [^871] went out of it; it became the A<i>s</i>vastomîya (set of oblations [^872]): when he offers the A<i>s</i>vastomîya (oblations) he indeed supplies the horse with life-sap.

<span id="v13_3_6_22"><sup><small>13:3:6:22.</small></sup></span>  He performs it with ghee; for ghee is life-sap, and the A<i>s</i>vastomîya is life-sap: by means of life-sap <span id="p342"><sup><small>[ p. 342 ]</small></sup></span> he thus puts life-sap into it. He performs with ghee, for that—to wit, ghee—is the favourite resource of the gods: he thus supplies them with their favourite resource.

<span id="v13_3_6_33"><sup><small>13:3:6:33.</small></sup></span>  Having performed the A<i>s</i>vastomîya (set of) oblations, he offers the Dvipadâs [^873]; for the A<i>s</i>vastomîya is the horse, and the Dvipadâ is man, for man is two-footed (dvipâd), supported on two (feet): he thus supplies him with a support.

<span id="v13_3_6_44"><sup><small>13:3:6:44.</small></sup></span>  Concerning this they say, ‘Is the A<i>s</i>vastomîya to be offered first, or the Dvipadâ?’ The A<i>s</i>vastomîya, surely, is cattle, and the Dvipadâ is man: inasmuch as he performs the Dvipadâs after performing the A<i>s</i>vastomîya, man subsequently establishes himself amongst cattle.

<span id="v13_3_6_55"><sup><small>13:3:6:55.</small></sup></span>  Sixteen A<i>s</i>vastomîya oblations he performs, for animals (cattle) consist of sixteen parts [^874]: that is the measure of cattle, and he thus supplies cattle with their (right) measure; Were he to offer either less or more, he would deprive cattle of their (right) measure. Sixteen he offers, for cattle consist of sixteen parts: that is the measure of cattle, and he thus supplies cattle with their (right) measure. He offers no other as a final oblation [^875]: were he to offer another as a final oblation, he would lose <span id="p343"><sup><small>[ p. 343 ]</small></sup></span> his support. The Dvipadâs he offers last, for Dvipadâs are a support: he thus finds a support (establishes himself). With, ‘To <i>G</i>umbaka hail!’ he offers, at the purificatory bath, the last oblation [^876]; for <i>G</i>umbaka is Varu<i>n</i>a: by sacrifice he thus manifestly redeems himself from Varu<i>n</i>a. He offers it on the head of a white-spotted [^877], baldheaded (man) with protruding teeth [^878] and reddish brown eyes; for that is Varu<i>n</i>a's form: by (that) form (of his) he thus redeems himself from Varu<i>n</i>a.

<span id="v13_3_6_66"><sup><small>13:3:6:66.</small></sup></span>  Having stepped out (of the water) he prepares twelve messes of cooked rice for the priests, or performs twelve ish<i>t</i>is. Concerning this they say, ‘These to wit, ish<i>t</i>is—are a form of sacrifice: were he to perform ish<i>t</i>is, the sacrifice would be ready to incline towards him; but he would become the worse for it, for, surely, of exhausted strength now are the metres (offering formulas) of him who has performed the Soma-sacrifice;—how could he make use of them so soon? For when the sacrifice is complete, Vâ<i>k</i> (speech and sacred writ [^879]) is wholly gained, and, being gained, it now is exhausted in strength, and, as it were, wounded and mangled; but sacrifice is speech: hence he should not make use of it.’ <span id="p344"><sup><small>[ p. 344 ]</small></sup></span> 13:3:6:77\. Having stepped out (of the water) he should certainly prepare twelve messes of rice for the priests; for cooked rice is Pra<i>g</i>âpati, and Pra<i>g</i>âpati is the year, Pra<i>g</i>âpati is the sacrifice: it is the year, the sacrifice, he thus gains, and the sacrifice becomes ready to incline towards him, and he does not become the worse for it.


<span id="v13_3_7"><sup><small>13:3:7</small></sup></span>

## SEVENTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

<span id="v13_3_7_11"><sup><small>13:3:7:11.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Strengthful: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes strong.

<span id="v13_3_7_22"><sup><small>13:3:7:22.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Plenteous: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes plentiful.

<span id="v13_3_7_33"><sup><small>13:3:7:33.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Obtainment: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes obtained.

<span id="v13_3_7_44"><sup><small>13:3:7:44.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Distinction: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes distinct [^880].

<span id="v13_3_7_55"><sup><small>13:3:7:55.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Severance: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes severed [^881].

<span id="v13_3_7_66"><sup><small>13:3:7:66.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Food-abounding: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes abounding in food.

<span id="v13_3_7_77"><sup><small>13:3:7:77.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Sapful: <span id="p345"><sup><small>[ p. 345 ]</small></sup></span> wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes rich in sap (or drink).

<span id="v13_3_7_88"><sup><small>13:3:7:88.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Abounding in holiness: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, the Brâhma<i>n</i>a is born as one rich in holiness.

<span id="v13_3_7_99"><sup><small>13:3:7:99.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Excelling in hitting: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, the Râ<i>g</i>anya is born as one excelling in hitting (the mark).

<span id="v13_3_7_1010"><sup><small>13:3:7:1010.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called the Long (wide) one: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, a wide tract of forest-land will be provided [^882].

<span id="v13_3_7_1111"><sup><small>13:3:7:1111.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Fitness: wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes fit and proper.

<span id="v13_3_7_1212"><sup><small>13:3:7:1212.</small></sup></span>  Verily, this is the sacrifice called Support (foundation): wherever they worship with this sacrifice, everything indeed becomes supported (firmly established).


<span id="v13_3_8"><sup><small>13:3:8</small></sup></span>

## EIGHTH BRÂHMA<i>N</i>A.

### EXPIATORY OFFERINGS.

<span id="v13_3_8_11"><sup><small>13:3:8:11.</small></sup></span>  Now, then, of the expiations. If the sacrificial horse were to couple with a mare, let him in addition prepare a milk (oblation) to Vâyu;—Vâyu doubtless is the transformer of seeds, for Vâyu (the wind) is the vital air, and the vital air is the transformer <span id="p346"><sup><small>[ p. 346 ]</small></sup></span> of seeds: by means of seed he thus puts seed into it.

<span id="v13_3_8_22"><sup><small>13:3:8:22.</small></sup></span>  And if disease were to befal it, let him in addition prepare a pap to Pûshan, for Pûshan rules over beasts (cattle); and, indeed, he thereby gratifies him who owns cattle and rules over cattle; and it (the horse) thereby indeed becomes free from disease.

<span id="v13_3_8_33"><sup><small>13:3:8:33.</small></sup></span>  And if sickness without (visible) injury [^883] were to befal it, let him in addition prepare for (Agni) Vai<i>s</i>vânara a cake on twelve potsherds, with the earth serving for potsherds [^884]; for Vai<i>s</i>vânara is this (earth): he thereby gratifies this (earth), and it (the horse) becomes free from disease.

<span id="v13_3_8_44"><sup><small>13:3:8:44.</small></sup></span>  And if an eye-disease were to befal it, let him in addition prepare a pap to Sûrya;—the Sun, doubtless, is the eye of creatures, for when he rises everything here moves: by means of the eye (of the world) he thus bestows the eye upon it. And as to why it is a pap (<i>k</i>aru), it is because by means of the eye this self (body or mind) moves (<i>k</i>ar).

<span id="v13_3_8_55"><sup><small>13:3:8:55.</small></sup></span>  And if it were to die in water, let him in addition prepare a barley pap to Varu<i>n</i>a, for Varu<i>n</i>a seizes him who dies in water: he thereby thus gratifies that very deity who seizes it, and, thus gratified, he approves his slaughtering another (horse), and he slaughters it as one approved by that (deity). And as to why it is (prepared) of barley, it is because barley belongs to Varu<i>n</i>a.

<span id="v13_3_8_66"><sup><small>13:3:8:66.</small></sup></span>  And if it were to get lost, let him in addition <span id="p347"><sup><small>[ p. 347 ]</small></sup></span> perform an ish<i>t</i>i with three sacrificial dishes—a cake on one potsherd for Heaven and Earth, a milk (oblation) for Vâyu, and a pap for Sûrya;—for whatsoever is lost, is lost within heaven and earth; and the wind blows upon it, and the sun shines upon it; and nothing whatever is lost out of (the reach of) these deities. And even by itself [^885] this (ish<i>t</i>i) is the recoverer of what is lost; and even if any other thing of his were to get lost let him perform this very offering, and he verily finds it. And if enemies were to obtain the horse, or if it were to die (either in any other way) or in water [^886], let them bring another (horse) and consecrate it by sprinkling: this, indeed, is the expiation in that case.



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book V — XIII, 2. Second Adhyâya.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Satapatha_Brahmana/Book_5_13_4">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V — XIII, 4. Fourth Adhyâya.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^839]: 328:1 See [XIII, 3, 5, 3](Book_5_13_3#v13_3_5_3) seq.

[^840]: 329:1 The term Katush<i>t</i>oma originally apparently means a sacrificial performance, or succession of chants, in which four different Stomas, or hymn-forms, are used. Hence, in Tâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ya-Br. VI, 3, 16, the name is applied to the ordinary Agnish<i>t</i>oma, for its twelve Stotras, or chants, require the first four normal Stomas (Triv<i>ri</i>t, Pa<i>ñ</i><i>k</i>ada<i>s</i>a, Saptada<i>s</i>a, Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a). The term has, however, assumed the special meaning of a hymnic performance, the different Stomas of which (begin with the four-versed one, and) successively increase by four verses (cf. [XIII, 5, 1, 1](Book_5_13_5#v13_5_1_1)). In this sense, two different forms of <i>K</i>atush<i>t</i>oma are in use, one being applicable to an Agnish<i>t</i>oma, the other to a Sho<i>d</i>a<i>s</i>in, sacrifice. Whilst this latter form requires only four different Stomas (of 4, 8, 12, 16 verses resp.) and thus combines the original meaning of ‘<i>k</i>atush<i>t</i>oma’ with its special meaning, the Agnish<i>t</i>oma form, used on the first of the three days of the A<i>s</i>vamedha, requires six Stomas, ascending from the four-versed up to the twenty-four-versed one. In regard to this latter occasion, Sâya<i>n</i>a on Tâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ya-Br. XXI, 4, 1, curiously enough, seems to take ‘katush<i>t</i>oma’ in its original senses, since he speaks of this first day of the A<i>s</i>vamedha as an Agnish<i>t</i>oma with four Stomas, beginning with Triv<i>ri</i>t; whilst on ib. XIX, 5, 1 seq. he gives the correct explanation. As to the distribution of the six Stomas over the chants of the first day, see [XIII, 5, 1, 1](Book_5_13_5#v13_5_1_1). The <i>k</i>atush<i>t</i>oma has, however, another peculiarity, which, in Lâ<i>t</i>y. S. VI, 8, 1 (or at least by the commentator Agnisvâmin thereon), is taken as that which has given its name to this form of chanting, viz. that each stotra performed in it is chanted in four, instead of the ordinary three, paryâyas or turns of verses (see part ii, p. 350 note). The Bahishpavamâna-stotra is to be performed on three anush<i>t</i>ubh verses (consisting each of four octosyllabic pâdas) which, however, by taking each time three pâdas to make up a verse, are transformed into four verses, constituting at the same time the four paryâyas of the Stotra. As regards the exact p. 330 text to be used there seems to be some doubt, Sâmav. S. II, 366-8 (pavasva vâ<i>g</i>asâtaye) being mentioned by Sâya<i>n</i>a on Tâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ya-Br. XXI, 4, 5; whilst on XIX, 5, 2 he gives S. V. II, 168-70 (ayam pûshâ rayir bhaga<i>h</i>) as the text to be used—but apparently only when the performance is that of an ekâha (one day's sacrifice) proper, instead of one of the days of an âhîna sacrifice, as is the case in the three days’ A<i>s</i>vamedha. As regards the Â<i>g</i>ya-stotras to be chanted on the eight-versed Stoma, the text of each of them consists of three gâyatrî-verses: these are to be chanted in four turns (paryâya) of two verses each, viz. either 1 and 2, 2 and 3, 1 and 2, 2 and 3;—or 1 and 1, 1 and 2, 2 and 2, 3 and 3;—(or 1 and 1, 1 and 1, 2 and 2, 3 and 3;—or 1 and 1, 2 and 2, 2 and 2, 3 and 3). By similar manipulations the subsequent Stomas are formed.

[^841]: 330:1 Or, wounded, as Sâya<i>n</i>a takes ‘â b<i>ri</i>hat,’ on Tâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ya-Br. XXI, 4, 4 (vra<i>n</i>a<i>m</i> <i>k</i>akâra).

[^842]: 330:2 The Atirâtra sarvastoma is arranged in such a way that the six principal Stomas are used successively first in the ascending, and then again in the descending, or reversed, order as is explained in [XIII, 5, 3, 10](Book_5_13_5#v13_5_3_10).

[^843]: 330:3 For this and the other names of the dice, see part iii, p. 106, note 1.

[^844]: 331:1 Though applying in the first place to the second day of the A<i>s</i>vamedha, as an Ukthya sacrifice which is at the same time an Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a day, i.e. one the stotras of which are all chanted in the twenty-one-versed hymn-form, Ekavi<i>m</i><i>s</i>a, the twenty-first or twenty-one-fold, as is clear from [XIII, 3, 3, 3](Book_5_13_3#v13_3_3_3), here also refers to the sun, of which it is a common epithet (cf. part iii, p. 265, note 2, also [XIII, 4, 4, 11](Book_5_13_4#v13_4_4_11)). This solar name seems to be derived from the fact that the sun is also identified with the central day of the year, the Vishuvant day, which is considered the central day of a twenty-one days’ sacrificial performance—having one p<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>ya-sha<i>d</i>aha, an Abhi<i>g</i>it (or Vi<i>s</i>va<i>g</i>it day resp.) and three svarasâman days before and after it;—see [p. 139](Book_5_12_1#p139), note \*[1](Book_5_12_1#fn425)\*; and A. Hillebrandt, Die Sonnwendfeste in Alt-Indien, p. 6 seqq.

[^845]: 331:2 That is to say, the so-called Mahânâmnî verses (Sâm. V. ed. Bibl. Ind. II, p. 371), chanted on the <i>s</i>âkvara-sâman (see part iii, of this transl., introd. p. xx, note 2), are to be used for the Hot<i>ri</i>'s P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotra. For this purpose the Rathantara-sâman is ordinarily used in the Agnish<i>t</i>oma, and the B<i>ri</i>hat-sâman in the Ukthya, form of sacrifice.

[^846]: 331:3 The commentator takes this as an allusion to the ‘potent’ (<i>s</i>akvara = <i>s</i>akta) nature of the verses.

[^847]: 332:1 That is to say, they do not fitly represent all kinds of animals, as the highest kind of animals, the bovine cattle, may be said to do. The argument as to the ‘sarve pa<i>s</i>ava<i>h</i>’ is, of course, suggested by the ‘a<i>s</i>vasya sarvatvâya’ of the preceding paragraph; and to bring out the parallelism, one might translate,—these . . . . are not complete animals.

[^848]: 332:2 See [XIII, 5, 3, 11](Book_5_13_5#v13_5_3_11).

[^849]: 332:3 That is, for the Bahishpavamâna-stotra of the <i>K</i>atush<i>t</i>oma, see [p. 329](Book_5_13_3#p329), note.

[^850]: 333:1 That is, the hymn-tune of the second P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>a-stotra chanted for the Maitrâvaru<i>n</i>a (who responds thereto by the recitation of the second Nishkevalya-<i>s</i>astra): the Mahâ-Vâmadevya on the text ‘kayâ na<i>s</i> <i>k</i>itra bhuvat’ (S. V. II, 32-34; figured for chanting in Bibl. Ind. ed. III, p. 89) is ordinarily used for this stotra both in the Agnish<i>t</i>oma, and in the Ukthya, form of sacrifice.

[^851]: 333:2 That is, the tune of the third, or Brâhma<i>n</i>â_kh<i>a</i>m_sin's, P<i>ri</i>sh<i>th</i>astotra. For the sâmans commonly used for this stotra see part ii, p. 434, note 1. The Pârthura<i>s</i>ma-sâman may be chanted on either of the texts Sâmav. II, 352-4 (figured ed. Bibl. Ind. vol. V, p. 395) or II, 355-7 (figured vol. V, p. 483). It is the latter text which is to be used on the present occasion. On the legendary origin of this sâman (which is said to represent ‘strength,’ and therefore to be appropriate to a Râ<i>g</i>anya) see Tâ<i>n</i><i>d</i>ya-Br. XIII, 4, 17.

[^852]: 333:3 Or, is fastened by means of a rope.

[^853]: 333:4 The Sa<i>m</i>k<i>ri</i>ti-sâman is used with the texts Sâmav. II, 663-4 (figured ed. Bibl. Ind. V, p. 407), II, 669-70 (ib. p. 482, wrongly p. 334 called Sa<i>m</i>gati), and II, 679-82 (ib. p. 515). It is probably the second of these texts that is to be used here, as it is also used for the same stotra on the second day of the Garga-trirâtra.

[^854]: 334:1 Cp. the corresponding passage, Taitt. S. V, 4, 12, 3, ‘that A<i>s</i>vamedha, indeed, is a disused sacrifice, for, say they, who knows if the whole of it is performed or not?’ Perhaps, however, ‘utsanna-ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>a’ rather means ‘a decayed sacrifice,’ i.e. one which has lost (or in the usual performance is apt to lose) some of its original elements; whence the ‘Sa<i>m</i>k<i>ri</i>ti’ tune is to be used for the purpose of ‘making up’ the lost parts. Part of the commentary in this passage is not clear to me:—uk<i>k</i>ai<i>h</i>kalâpagrâmâdau siddhasthâne satrasthito granthatoऽrthata<i>s</i> <i>k</i>a yat ya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>a utsannaya<i>g</i><i>ñ</i>a esha ya<i>h</i> a<i>s</i>vamedha<i>h</i> katham utsanna ity ata âha, ki<i>m</i> vâ hîti, yasya dharmâ<i>h</i> pûrvayonau (? pûrvayuge) prayu<i>g</i>yante teshâ<i>m</i> kim<i>k</i>it kalau kriyate ki<i>m</i><i>k</i>in na kriyate, tata<i>s</i> <i>k</i>a sa<i>m</i>k<i>ri</i>tir a<i>kh</i>âvâkasâma bhavati.

[^855]: 334:2 That is, an altar measuring twenty-one man's lengths on each of the four sides of its body.

[^856]: 334:3 The commentary seems to take both ‘<i>ri</i>shabha’ and ‘v<i>ri</i>shan’ here in the sense of ‘bulls,’ but cp. Taitt. Br. III, 8, 22, 1, ‘yathâ vâ a<i>s</i>vâ varshabhâ vâ v<i>ri</i>shâ<i>n</i>a<i>h</i> <i>s</i>a<i>m</i> sphurera<i>n</i>’—‘even as if male horses or bulls were to clash together.’

[^857]: 334:4 That is, not only the twenty-one-fold Stoma, but also the other two twenty-one-fold objects, looked upon as Stomas (lit. ‘means of praise’).

[^858]: 335:1 Viz. the set of eleven (stakes), here represented as a cow; but in order to assimilate it to the Virâ<i>g</i>, or metre consisting of ten syllables, the eleventh stake is made the teat or udder of the cow.

[^859]: 336:1 These oblations of ghee, apparently amounting to 132, are made, after the principal flesh-portions have been offered, viz. in the interval between the ghee oblation to Vanaspati (the lord of the forest, or the plant, Soma) and the Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>t oblation, for which see part ii, pp. 208-9; each formula, as a rule, containing the name of some divinity, and that of some part of the body of the horse supposed to be represented by the ghee (by four ladlings of which the offering spoon is filled each time). Mahîdhara, apparently in accordance with the Brâhma<i>n</i>a, supplies ‘pri<i>n</i>âmi (I gratify)’ with each (complete) formula which then concludes with ‘svâhâ (hail)!’ According to other authorities, however, these formulas are each to be divided into two separate dedicatory formulas:—‘To the Grass hail! To the Teeth hail!’ &c.—The last of the 132 oblations (with the formula, To <i>G</i>umbaka, hail!') is, however, withheld for the present to be offered (or perhaps the formula alone is to be muttered) at the end of the purificatory bath (avabh<i>ri</i>tha) towards the end of the sacrifice on the third day.

[^860]: 336:2 The term ‘ara<i>n</i>yeऽnû<i>k</i>ya’ (‘to be recited in the forest’) we met before (IX, 3, 1, 24) as applying to the last of seven cakes offered to the Maruts immediately after the installation of Agni (the sacred fire) on the newly-built altar The formula used for that cake is the so-called Vimukha-verse, Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXXIX, 7. This p. 337 verse is followed in the Sa<i>m</i>hitâ by a series of twenty formulas (ib. 8-9) of a similar nature to those referred to in the preceding note (i.e. consisting each of a deity and a part of the body of the horse—‘Agni I gratify with the heart,’ &c.), and these again by forty-two expiatory formulas (‘To the hair, hail!’ &c., ib. 10-13), ending with, ‘To Yama, hail! To Antaka (the Ender), hail! To Death, hail! To (the) Brahman, hail! To Brahman-slaying, hail! To the All-gods, hail! To Heaven and Earth, hail!’ These sixty-two formulas are used with as many ghee-oblations, which are to be performed immediately after the 131st of the previous set of oblations. Prior, however, again to the last of the forty-two expiatory oblations, (viz. the one made with ‘To Heaven and Earth, hail!’) there is another set of sixteen oblations ([XIII, 3, 6, 1](Book_5_13_3#v13_3_6_1) seqq.), the so-called ‘A<i>s</i>vastomîyâ âhutaya<i>h</i>’ or ‘oblations relating to the Stomas of the horse (sacrifice),’ each of which has a complete couplet for its offering-formula (Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXV, 24-39). At the end of the three sets of oblations the term ‘ara<i>n</i>yeऽnû<i>k</i>ya’ is here extended by the author. At the end of the third set this succession of ghee-oblations is concluded with the last expiatory oblation, that to Heaven. and Earth; whereupon the ordinary flesh-oblation to Agni Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>t is performed.

[^861]: 337:1 I.e. the (three) fires, the makers of good offering.

[^862]: 337:2 The formula for each of these three special blood-oblations—p. 338 offered immediately after the ordinary Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>t oblation, and being, in fact, the special Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>t of the A<i>s</i>vamedha—is ‘Agnibhya<i>h</i> svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>dbhya<i>h</i> svâhâ, i.e. to the (three) Agnis, the makers of good offering, hail!’

[^863]: 338:1 ‘Gom<i>ri</i>ga’ is usually taken by the commentators, and in our dictionaries, as another name of the ‘Gavaya,’ variously called Gayâl, Bos Gavaeus, Bos frontalis, or Bos cavifrons, a species of wild cattle found in various mountain districts of India (especially on the eastern boundaries of Bengal, and in Malabar, as also in Ceylon), and frequently domesticated amongst the hill-tribes, by whom it is valued for its flesh and milk (cf. Colebrooke's paper, As. Res. VIII, p. 511 seqq.). The Gavaya itself is, however, as Colebrooke remarks, confounded by some Sanskrit writers with the ‘<i>Ri</i><i>s</i>ya,’ which he takes to be the buck of the painted, or white-footed (or slate-coloured) Antelope, the Portax pictus (or Antelope picta), also called by the vernacular names of Nîlgau or (Mahr.) Nîlgây, whilst the female is called ‘rohit’ in Sanskrit. All these three animals occur amongst the wild animals to be used as quasi-victims, but ultimately released on the second day of the A<i>s</i>vamedha; and I am inclined to think that they are three different animals. To show that the Ri<i>s</i>ya and the Gavaya cannot be the same animals, Colebrooke already refers to the fact that three <i>Ri</i><i>s</i>yas (consecrated to the Vasus) and three Gavayas (to B<i>ri</i>haspati) occur as victims side by side in Vâ<i>g</i>asaneyi-sa<i>m</i>hitâ XXIV (27 and 28); and in the same way a Gom<i>ri</i>ga, sacred to Pra<i>g</i>âpati and Vâyu, is mentioned immediately after, ib. 30; whilst another, sacred to Pra<i>g</i>âpati, was, as we saw, one of the two animals tied along with the horse to the central stake (see [XIII, 2, 2, 2](Book_5_13_2#v13_2_2_2)). Taitt. S. II, 1, 10, 2, treating of the sacrifice of a Gom<i>ri</i>ga to Vâyu, remarks that it is neither a domestic animal (or cattle, pa<i>s</i>u) nor a wild one; and Sâya<i>n</i>a explains it as a cross between a female deer (or antelope, m<i>ri</i>gî) and a hull that has gone with his cows to graze in the forest; whilst, on Taitt. Br. III, 8, 20, 5, he leaves one to choose between its being a vicious bull (dhûrto balîvarda<i>h</i>), dangerous to men, or an animal ‘of mixed breed, sprung from a cow and a male gazelle or antelope (gohari<i>n</i>ayo<i>h</i>, or possibly, from parent beasts of the bovine and antelope species).’ In this latter passage, the editor p. 339 of the Brâhma<i>n</i>a (in the list of contents, p. 53) takes it to mean ‘wild cattle (Nîlagâo gom<i>ri</i>ga, erroneously explained as a cross between a deer and a cow),’ which would be a probable enough explanation, if the Ri<i>s</i>ya were not the Nîlgau; whilst otherwise the animal might belong to some other species of bovine antelopes no longer found in India.

[^864]: 339:1 Whilst the first of these oblations must take place immediately after the ordinary Svish<i>t</i>ak<i>ri</i>t of the animal sacrifice, the second may be postponed till after the ‘after-offerings’; and the third till after the ‘Patnîsa<i>m</i>yâ<i>g</i>as.’ See also [XIII, 5, 3, 8](Book_5_13_5#v13_5_3_8) seq.

[^865]: 339:2 That is, their value—as compared with that of the king or nobles, and the Brâhma<i>n</i>as—is that of iron, compared with that of gold and silver; cp. [XIII, 2, 2, 19](Book_5_13_2#v13_2_2_19).

[^866]: 339:3 That is, according to Sâya<i>n</i>a, on Taitt. Br. III, 9, 15, 1, causes of death, such as diseases, &c.

[^867]: 340:1 The oblations referred to in this Brâhma<i>n</i>a (§§ 1-4) occur towards the end of the second set of ‘ara<i>n</i>yeऽnû<i>k</i>ya’ oblations mentioned above, [p. 336](Book_5_13_3#p336), note [2](Book_5_13_3#fn856), where the formulas are given. According to Taitt. Br., l.c., however, these final oblations are to be performed—like that to <i>G</i>umbaka (Varu<i>n</i>a)—at the time of the purificatory bath, which, indeed, may also be intended by our Brâhma<i>n</i>a, though Kâtyâyana and Mahîdhara seem to offer no indications to that effect. It is clear that these final oblations must have formed the subject of considerable discussion among the early ritualists.

[^868]: 340:2 That is, according to Sâya<i>n</i>a (Taitt. Br.), ‘To death in the shape of disease, to death in the shape of poverty, &c.’ Harisvâmin, on our passage, has merely, ‘Amushmai pit<i>ri</i>lokâya m<i>ri</i>tyave’—‘To death (in the shape of) the world of the Fathers,’ which is not very clear.

[^869]: 340:3 Or, perhaps, he would make himself many a death-enemy (bahu<i>m</i> m<i>ri</i>tyum amitra<i>m</i> kurvîta), the two nouns being taken as in apposition to each other; cf. [p. 146](Book_5_12_2#p146), note [1](Book_5_12_2#fn441).

[^870]: 340:4 See X, 6, 5, 1.

[^871]: 340:5 Or, he thus wards off what is manifestly Death (Death in person).

[^872]: 341:1 That is, according to Harisvâmin, the son of Udanya (Odana. St. Petersb. Dict.), Taitt. Br. III, 9, 15, 3, has Mu<i>n</i><i>d</i>ibha Audanyava (i.e. the son of Udanyu, Sây.) instead. The Taitt. Br., besides, makes the crime to be expiated here to be, not ‘brahmahatyâ,’ but ‘bhrû<i>n</i>ahatyâ,’ the killing of an embryo. Sâya<i>n</i>a, however, there allows to ‘bhrû<i>n</i>a’ optionally its later meaning of ‘a Brâhma<i>n</i>a versed in the three Vedas and the sacrificial art (kalpa),’ and the Taitt. Br. itself, at all events, takes this oblation to ‘bhrû<i>n</i>ahatyâ’ to atone likewise for the slaying of a Brâhma<i>n</i>a.

[^873]: 341:2 Harisvâmin explains ‘paripâ<i>n</i>am’ by ‘pari<i>s</i>ish<i>t</i>a<i>m</i> vânantam pânam’ (?); whilst Sâya<i>n</i>a, in Taitt. Br., takes it in the sense of ‘sarvata<i>h</i> pâtram,’ i.e. having made the Sacrificer ‘a thoroughly worthy person.’

[^874]: 341:3 Harisvâmin here unwarrantably takes ‘aparîshû’ in the sense of ‘in past times.’

[^875]: 341:4 Or, sacrificial essence.

[^876]: 341:5 See [p. 336](Book_5_13_3#p336), note [2](Book_5_13_3#fn856).

[^877]: 342:1 The formulas of the six dvipâdâs—i.e. (verses) consisting of two pâdas—are found Vâ<i>g</i>. S. XXV, 46-47.

[^878]: 342:2 See [XII, 8, 3, 13](Book_5_12_8#v12_8_3_13); for a highly artificial explanation of the sixteen parts of the man Pra<i>g</i>âpati, probably intended here, X, 4, 1, 17. Elsewhere those of animals are explained as including head, neck, trunk, tail, the four legs and eight claws; see Weber, Ind. Stud. IX, p. 111, note.

[^879]: 342:3 This would seem to be directed against the practice of performing the oblation to Heaven and Earth immediately after the A<i>s</i>vastomîyâs, see [p. 336](Book_5_13_3#p336), note [2](Book_5_13_3#fn856).

[^880]: 343:1 See [p. 336](Book_5_13_3#p336), note [1](Book_5_13_3#fn855).

[^881]: 343:2 ? Or, pale. Sâya<i>n</i>a, on Taitt. Br. III, 9, 15, 3, explains ‘<i>s</i>ukla’ by ‘<i>k</i>itrin’ (? having white spots, or affected with white leprosy). Harisvâmin does not explain the word.

[^882]: 343:3 Harisvâmin explains ‘viklidha’ by ‘dantura,’ i.e. one who has projecting teeth; whilst Sâya<i>n</i>a, l.c., explains it by either ‘given to perspiring (svedana<i>s</i>îla<i>s</i>arîra),’ or ‘moist-bodied (? leprous, or, old, in bodily decay, viklinnadeha).’

[^883]: 343:4 Cf. V, 5, 5, 12 ‘that triple Veda is the thousandfold progeny of Vâ<i>k</i>.’

[^884]: 344:1 Svakarmasu bhâgena sthâpitam (? confined respectively to its own functions), comm.

[^885]: 344:2 Harisvâmin supplies ‘akâryebhya<i>h</i>’—is kept away from what it is forbidden to do, or from what is not one's business.

[^886]: 345:1 That is, as would seem, either as a protection from neighbouring countries, or as room for spreading, and as pasture-land. Cf., however, [XIII, 2-4, 2, 4](Book_5_13_2#v13_2_2_4), where, as in Ait. Br. III, 44; VI, 23, such a belt of jungle is referred to as a source of danger to the inhabitants of a country.

[^887]: 346:1 Viz. such as fever, comm.

[^888]: 346:2 That is, spreading them on the earth, or on clods of earth, comm.

[^889]: 347:1 That is, even independently of the horse-sacrifice.

[^890]: 347:2 That is to say, if it were to die by getting drowned, or in any other way.