---
title: "Chapter I. Prayer of Union"
description: "The Interior Castle"
published: true
date: 2025-1-18T14:49:11Z
tags: Christianity, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-18T14:49:11Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Interior_Castle/4_3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter III. Prayer of Quiet</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Interior_Castle">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Interior_Castle/5_2">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter II. Effects of Union</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p119">[<sup><small>p. 119</small></sup>]</span>

THE FIFTH MANSIONS

BEGINS TO TREAT OF THE UNION OF THE SOUL WITH GOD IN PRAYER. HOW TO BE SURE THAT WE ARE NOT DECEIVED IN THIS MATTER.

_1\. Graces of the fifth mansions. 2. Contemplation to be striven for. 3. Physical effects of the Prayer of union. 4. Amazement of the intellect. 5. The Prayer of union and of quiet contrasted. 6. Divine and earthly union. 7. Competent directors in these matters. 8. Proof of union. 9. Assurance left in the soul. 10. Divine union beyond our Power to obtain_.

1\. OH, my sisters, how shall I describe the riches, treasures, and joys contained in the fifth mansions! Would it not be better to say nothing about them? They are impossible to depict, nor can the mind conceive, nor any comparisons portray them, all earthly things being too vile to serve the purpose. Send me, O my Lord, light from heaven that I may give some to these Thy servants, some of whom by Thy good will often enjoy these delights, lest the devil in the guise of an angel of light should deceive those whose only desire is to please Thee.

2\. I said ‘some,’ but in reality there are very _few_ [^153] who never enter this mansion: some more and some less, but most of them may be said at least <span id="p120">[<sup><small>p. 120</small></sup>]</span> to gain admittance into these rooms. I think that certain graces I am about to describe are bestowed on only a few of the nuns, but if the rest only arrive at the portal they receive a great boon from God, for ‘many are called, but few are chosen.’ [^154] All we who wear the holy habit of the Carmelites are called to prayer and contemplation. This was the object of our Order, [^155] to this lineage we belong. Our holy Fathers of Mount Carmel sought in perfect solitude and utter contempt of the world for this treasure, this precious pearl, [^156] of which we speak, and we are their descendants. How little do most of us care to prepare our souls, that our Lord may reveal this jewel to us! Outwardly we may appear to practise the requisite virtues, but we have far more to do than this before it is possible to attain to contemplation, to gain which we should neglect no means, either small or great. Rouse yourselves, my sisters, and since some foretaste of heaven may be had on earth, beg our Lord to give us grace not to miss it through our own fault. Ask Him to show us where to find it—ask Him to give us strength of soul to dig until we find this hidden treasure, which lies buried within our hearts, as I wish to show you if it please God to enable me. I said ‘strength of _soul_,’ that you might understand that strength of _body_ is not indispensable when our Lord God chooses to withhold it. He makes it impossible for no one to gain these riches, <span id="p121">[<sup><small>p. 121</small></sup>]</span> but is content that each should do his best. Blessed be so just a God!

3\. But, daughters, if you would purchase this treasure of which we are speaking, God would have you keep back nothing from Him, little or great. He will have it all; [^157] in proportion to what you know you have given will your reward be great or small. There is no more certain sign whether or not we have reached the prayer of union. Do not imagine that this state of prayer is, like the one preceding it, a sort of drowsiness (I call it ‘drowsiness’ because the soul seems to slumber, being neither quite asleep nor wholly awake). In the prayer of union the soul is asleep, fast asleep, as regards the world and itself: in fact, during the short time this state lasts it is deprived of all feeling whatever, being unable to think on any subject, even if it wished. No effort is needed here to suspend the thoughts: if the soul can love it knows not how, nor whom it loves, nor what it desires. In fact, it has died entirely to this world, to live more truly than ever in God. This is a delicious death, for the soul is deprived of the faculties it exercised while in the body: [^158] delicious because, (although not really the case), it seems to have left its mortal covering to abide more entirely in God. So completely does this take place, that I know not whether the body retains sufficient life to continue breathing; on <span id="p122">[<sup><small>p. 122</small></sup>]</span> consideration, I believe it does not; at any rate, if it still breathes, it does so unconsciously.

4\. The mind entirely concentrates itself on trying to understand what is happening, which is beyond its power; it is so astounded that, if consciousness is not completely lost, at least no movement is possible: the person may be compared to one who falls into a dead faint with dismay. [^159]

5\. Oh, mighty secrets of God! Never should I weary of trying to explain them if I thought it possible to succeed! I would write a thousand foolish things that one might be to the point, if only it might make us praise God more. I said this prayer produced no drowsiness in the mind; on the other hand, in the prayer (of quiet) described in the last mansion, until the soul has gained much experience it doubts what really happened to it. ‘Was it nothing but fancy, or was it a sleep? Did it come from God or from the devil, disguised as an angel of light?’ The mind feels a thousand misgivings, and well for it that it should, because, at I said, nature may sometimes deceive us in this case. Although there is little chance of the poisonous reptiles entering here, yet agile little lizards will try to slip in, though they can do no harm, especially if they remain unnoticed. These, as I said, are trivial fancies of the imagination, which are often very troublesome. However active these small lizards may be, they cannot enter the fifth mansion, for neither the imagination, the understanding, nor the memory has power to hinder the graces bestowed on it. <span id="p123">[<sup><small>p. 123</small></sup>]</span> 6\. I dare venture to assert that, if this is genuine union with God, the devil cannot interfere nor do any harm, for His Majesty is so joined and united with the essence of the soul, that the evil one dare not approach, nor can he even understand this mystery. This is certain, for it is said that the devil does not know our thoughts, much less can he penetrate a secret so profound that God does not reveal it even to us. [^160] Oh, blessed state, in which this cursed one cannot injure us! What riches we receive while God so works in us that neither we ourselves nor any one else can impede Him! What will He not bestow, Who is so eager to give, and Who can give us all He desires! You may perhaps have been puzzled at my saying ‘if this is genuine union with God,’ as if there might be other unions. There are indeed—not with God, but with vanities—when the devil transports the soul passionately addicted to them, but the union differs from that which is divine and the mind misses the delight and satisfaction, peace and happiness of divine union. These heavenly consolations are above all earthly joys, pleasure, and satisfaction. As great a difference exists between their origin and that of worldly pleasures as between their opposite effects, as you know by experience.

7\. I said somewhere [^161] that the one seems only to touch the surface of the body, while the other penetrates to the very marrow: I believe this is <span id="p124">[<sup><small>p. 124</small></sup>]</span> correct, and I cannot express myself better. I fancy that you are not yet satisfied on this question, but are afraid of deception, for spiritual matters are very hard to explain. Enough, however, has been said for those who have received this grace, as the difference between divine union and any other is very striking. However, I will give you a clear proof which cannot mislead you, nor leave any doubt whether the favour comes from God or no. His Majesty brought it back to my memory this very day; it appears to me to be an unmistakable sign. In difficult questions, although I think I understand them and am speaking the truth, I always say ‘it appears to me’; for, in case my opinion is wrong, I am most willing to submit to the judgment of theologians. Although they may not have had personal experience in such matters, yet in some way I do not understand, God Who sets them to give light to His Church enables them to recognize the truth when it is put before them. If they are not thoughtless and indevout, but servants of God, they are never dismayed at His mighty works, knowing perfectly well that it is in His power to perform far greater wonders. If some of the marvels told are new to them, yet they have read of others of the same kind, showing the former to be possible. I have had great experience as to this and have also met with timid, half-instructed people whose ignorance has cost me very dear. [^162] I am convinced that those who refuse to believe that God can do far more than this, and that He is pleased now, as in the past, to communicate <span id="p125">[<sup><small>p. 125</small></sup>]</span> Himself to His creatures, shut fast their hearts against receiving such favours themselves. Do not imitate them, sisters: be convinced that it is possible for God to perform still greater wonders. Do not concern yourselves as to whether those who receive these graces are good or wicked; as I said, He knows best and it is no business of yours: you should serve Him with a single heart and with humility, and should praise Him for His works and wonders. [^163]

8\. Let us now speak of the sign which proves the prayer of union to have been genuine. As you have seen, God then deprives the soul of all its senses that He may the better imprint in it true wisdom: it neither sees, hears, nor understands anything while this state lasts, which is never more than a very brief time; [^164] it appears to the soul to be much shorter than it really is. God visits the soul in a manner which prevents its doubting, on returning to itself, that it dwelt in Him and that He was within it, and so firmly is it convinced of this truth that, although years may pass before this favour recurs, the soul can never forget it nor doubt the fact, [^165] setting aside the effects left by this prayer, to which I will refer later on. The conviction felt by the soul is the main point.

9\. But, you may ask, how can a person who is incapable of sight and hearing see [^166] or know these <span id="p126">[<sup><small>p. 126</small></sup>]</span> things? I do not say that she saw it at the time, but that she perceives it clearly afterwards, not by any vision but by a certitude which remains in the heart which God alone could give. I know of some one who was unaware of God's being in all things by presence, power and essence, yet was firmly convinced of it by a divine favour of this sort. [^167] She asked an ill-instructed priest of the kind I mentioned to tell her in what way God dwelt within us: he was as ignorant on the subject as she had been before our Lord revealed to her the truth, and answered that the Almighty was only present in us by grace. [^168] Yet so strong was her <span id="p127">[<sup><small>p. 127</small></sup>]</span> conviction of the truth learnt during her prayer that she did not believe him and questioned other spiritual persons on the subject, who confirmed her in the true doctrine, much to her joy. Do not mistake and imagine that this certainty of God's having visited the soul concerns any corporal presence such as that of our Lord Jesus Christ Who dwells in the Blessed Sacrament, although we do not see Him: it relates solely to the Divinity. If we did not see it, how can we feel so sure of it? That I do not know: it is the work of the Almighty and I am certain that what I say is the fact. I maintain that a soul which does not feel this assurance has not been united to God entirely, but only by one of its powers, or has received one of the many other favours God is accustomed to bestow on men. In all such matters we must not seek to know how things happened: our understanding could not grasp them, therefore why trouble ourselves on the subject? It is enough to know that it is He, the all-powerful God, Who has performed the work. We can do nothing on our own part to gain this favour; it comes from God alone; therefore let us not strive to understand it.

10\. Concerning my words: ‘We can do nothing on our own part,’ I was struck by the words of the Bride in the Canticles, which you will remember to have heard: ‘The King brought me into the cellar of wine,’ [^169] (or ‘placed me’ I think she says): she does not say she went of her own accord, <span id="p128">[<sup><small>p. 128</small></sup>]</span> although telling us how she wandered up and down seeking her Beloved. [^170] I think the prayer of union is the ‘cellar’ in which our Lord places us when and how He chooses, but we cannot enter it through any effort of our own. His Majesty alone can bring us there and come into the centre of our souls. In order to declare His wondrous works more clearly, He will leave us no share in them except complete conformity of our wills to His and abandonment of all things: He does not require the faculties or senses to open the door to Him; they are all asleep. He enters the innermost depths of our souls without a door, as He entered the room where the disciples sat, saying ‘Pax vobis,’ [^171] and as He emerged from the sepulchre without removing the stone that closed the entrance. You will see farther on, in the seventh mansion, far better than here, how God makes the soul enjoy His presence in its very centre. O daughters, what wonders shall we see, if we keep ever before our eyes our own baseness and frailty and recognize how unworthy we are to be the handmaids of so great a Lord, Whose marvels are beyond our comprehension! May He be for ever praised! Amen.


## Footnotes

[^153]: 119:1 _Found_. ch. iv. 8.

[^154]: 120:2 St. Matt. xx. 16: ‘Multi enim sunt vocati, pauci vero electi.’

[^155]: 120:3 Maneant singuli in cellulis suis, vel juxta eas, die ac nocte in lege Domini meditantes et in orationibus vigilantes.' (_Carmelite Rule_).

[^156]: 120:4 St. Matt, xiii. 46.

[^157]: 121:5 ‘The reason why there are so few contemplatives is that there are so few persons who wholly withdraw themselves from transitory and created things’ (_Imitation_, bk. iii. ch. xxxi. 1). See also _Way of Perf_. ch. xvi. 5. _Life_, ch. xi. 2-4; xxii. 18, 19.

[^158]: 121:6 _Way of Perf._ ch. xxv. 1. _Life_, ch. xvi. _Rel_. I. i; viii. 7.

[^159]: 122:7 _Life_, ch. xvii. 2.

[^160]: 123:8 According to St. Thomas, angels—whether good or bad—do not know the thoughts of man unless they become manifest by some exterior sign. S. Theol. I. q. lvii. art. 4. See also St. John of the Cross, _Dark Night_, bk. II, ch. xxiii. 2, 5.

[^161]: 123:9 Mansion iv. ch. i, 5.

[^162]: 124:10 _Life_, ch. viii. 15.

[^163]: 125:11 _Life_, ch. xviii. 16.

[^164]: 125:12 _Life_, ch. xx. 13, 24.

[^165]: 125:13 Philippus a SS. Trinitate, _l.c._, pars iii. tr. i. disc. iv. art, 2, where he adds some further signs. Anton. a Sp. S., _l.c._, tract. i. no. 116 and 117.

[^166]: 125:14 ‘The soul does not see the good Master who teaches it, although p. 126 clearly conscious of His presence.’ (_Concept_. ch. iv. 3.)

[^167]: 126:15 ‘There are three ways in which God is present in the soul. The first is His presence in essence, not in holy souls only, but in wretched and sinful souls as well, and also in all created things; for it is by this presence that He gives life and being, and were it withdrawn at once all things would return to nothing. This presence never fails in the soul. The second is His presence by grace, whereby He dwells in the soul, pleased and satisfied with it. This presence is not in all souls; for those who fall into mortal sin lose it, and no soul can know in a natural way whether it has it or not. The third is His presence by spiritual affection. God is wont to show His presence in many devout souls in divers ways, in refreshment, joy and gladness.’ (St. John of the Cross, _Spiritual Canticle_, stanza xi. 2.)
  ‘In every soul, even that of the greatest sinner in the world, God dwells and is substantially present. This way of union or presence of God, in the order of nature, subsists between Him and all His creatures; by this He preserves them in being, and if He withdraws it they immediately perish and cease to be. And so, when I speak of the union of the soul with God, I do not mean this substantial presence which is in every creature, but that union and transformation of the soul in God by love which is only then accomplished when there subsists the likeness which love begets.’ (St. John of the Cross, _Ascent_, bk. ii. ch. v. 3.)
  Fr. Gracian, _Peregrinacion de Anastasio_ (Burgos, 1905), p. 171.

[^168]: 126:16 _Life_, ch. xviii. 20. _Rel_. ix. 17; xi. 8. St. Teresa was so deeply impressed by the ignorance of this priest that she very frequently referred to it.

[^169]: 127:17 Cant. i. 3: ‘Introduxit me rex in cellaria sua.’ _Castle_, M. v. ch. i. _Way of Perf._ ch. xviii. I. _Concep_. ch. iv. 4-8; v. 5; vi. 7; vii. 2-5. Life, ch. xviii. 17.

[^170]: 128:18 _Cant_. iii. 2: ‘Per vicos et plateas quæram quem diligit anima mea.’

[^171]: 128:19 St. John, xx. 19.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Interior_Castle/4_3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter III. Prayer of Quiet</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Interior_Castle">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Interior_Castle/5_2">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter II. Effects of Union</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
