---
title: "Fourth Week"
description: "The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola"
published: true
date: 2025-1-17T22:3:42Z
tags: Christianity, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-17T22:3:42Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Spiritual_Exercises_of_St_Ignatius_of_Loyola/3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Third Week</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Spiritual_Exercises_of_St_Ignatius_of_Loyola">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Spiritual_Exercises_of_St_Ignatius_of_Loyola/5">
          <span class="pr-2">Three Methods of Prayer</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h1"></span>

## THE FIRST CONTEMPLATION

### HOW CHRIST OUR LORD APPEARED TO OUR LADY

**Prayer**. The usual Preparatory Prayer.

**First Prelude**. The first Prelude is the narrative, which is here how, after Christ expired on the Cross, and the Body, always united with the Divinity, remained separated from the Soul, the blessed Soul, likewise united with the Divinity, went down to Hell, and taking from there the just souls, and coming to the Sepulchre and being risen, He appeared to His Blessed Mother in Body and in Soul.

**Second Prelude**. The second, a composition, seeing the place; which will be here to see the arrangement of the Holy Sepulchre and the place or house of Our Lady, looking at its parts in particular; likewise the room, the oratory, etc.

**Third Prelude**. The third, to ask for what I want, and it will be here to ask for grace to rejoice and be glad intensely at so great glory and joy of Christ our Lord.

**First Point, Second Point, and Third Point.** Let the first, second and third Points be the same usual ones which we took in the Supper of Christ our Lord.

**Fourth Point**. The fourth, to consider how the Divinity, which seemed to hide Itself in the Passion, now appears and shows Itself so marvellously in the most holy Resurrection by Its true and most holy effects.

**Fifth Point**. The fifth is to consider the office of consoling which Christ our Lord bears, and to compare how friends are accustomed to console friends.

**Colloquy**. I will finish with a Colloquy, or Colloquies, according to the subject matter, and an OUR FATHER.

**First Note.** In the following Contemplations let one go on through all the Mysteries of the Resurrection, in the manner which follows below, up to the Ascension inclusive, taking and keeping in the rest the same form and manner in all the Week of the Resurrection which was taken in all the Week of the Passion. So that, for this first Contemplation, on the Resurrection, let one guide himself as to the Preludes according to the subject matter; and as to the five Points, let them be the same; and let the Additions which are below be the same; and so in all which remains, he can guide himself by the method of the Week of the Passion, as in repetitions, the five Senses, in shortening or lengthening the Mysteries.

**Second Note.** The second note: Commonly in this FOURTH WEEK, it is more suitable than in the other three past to make four Exercises, and not five: the first, immediately on rising in the morning; the second, at the hour of Mass, or before dinner, in place of the first repetition; the third, at the hour of Vespers, in place of the second repetition; the fourth, before supper, bringing the five Senses on the three Exercises of the same day, noting and lingering on the more principal parts, and where one has felt greater spiritual movements and relish.

**Third Note.** The third: Though in all the Contemplations so many Points were given in certain number — as three, or five, etc., the person who is contemplating can set more or fewer Points, according as he finds it better for him. For which it is very helpful, before entering on the Contemplation, to conjecture and mark in certain number the Points which he is to take.

**Fourth Note**. In this FOURTH WEEK, in all the ten Additions the second, the sixth, the seventh and the tenth are to be changed.

The second will be, immediately on awaking, to put before me the Contemplation which I have to make, wanting to arouse feeling and be glad at the great joy and gladness of Christ our Lord.

The sixth, to bring to memory and think of things that move to spiritual pleasure, gladness and joy, as of heavenly glory.

The seventh, to use light or temporal comforts — as, in summer, the coolness; and in winter, the sun or heat — as far as the soul thinks or conjectures that it can help it to be joyful in its Creator and Redeemer.

The tenth: in place of penance, let one regard temperance and all moderation; except it is question of precepts of fasting or of abstinence which the Church commands; because those are always to be fulfilled, if there is no just impediment.

<span id="h2"></span>

## CONTEMPLATION TO GAIN LOVE

**Note**. First, it is well to remark two things: the first is that love ought to be put more in deeds than in words.

The second, love consists in interchange between the two parties; that is to say in the lover's giving and communicating to the beloved what he has or out of what he has or can; and so, on the contrary, the beloved to the lover. So that if the one has knowledge, he give to the one who has it not. The same of honors, of riches; and so the one to the other.

### CONTEMPLATION TO GAIN LOVE

**Prayer**. The usual Prayer.

**First Prelude**. The first Prelude is a composition, which is here to see how I am standing before God our Lord, and of the Angels and of the Saints interceding for me.

**Second Prelude**. The second, to ask for what I want. It will be here to ask for interior knowledge of so great good received, in order that being entirely grateful, I may be able in all to love and serve His Divine Majesty.

**First Point**. The First Point is, to bring to memory the benefits received, of Creation, Redemption and particular gifts, pondering with much feeling how much God our Lord has done for me, and how much He has given me of what He has, and then the same Lord desires to give me Himself as much as He can, according to His Divine ordination.

And with this to reflect on myself, considering with much reason and justice, what I ought on my side to offer and give to His Divine Majesty, that is to say, everything that is mine, and myself with it, as one who makes an offering with much feeling:

Take, Lord, and receive all my liberty, my memory, my intellect, and all my will — all that I have and possess. Thou gavest it to me: to Thee, Lord, I return it! All is Thine, dispose of it according to all Thy will. Give me Thy love and grace, for this is enough for me.

**Second Point**. The second, to look how God dwells in creatures, in the elements, giving them being, in the plants vegetating, in the animals feeling in them, in men giving them to understand: [^20] and so in me, giving me being, animating me, giving me sensation and making me to understand; [^21] likewise making a temple of me, being created to the likeness and image of His Divine Majesty; reflecting as much on myself in the way which is said in the first Point, or in another which I feel to be better. In the same manner will be done on each Point which follows.

**Third Point**. The third, to consider how God works and labors for me in all things created on the face of the earth — that is, behaves like one who labors — as in the heavens, elements, plants, fruits, cattle, etc., giving them being, preserving them, giving them vegetation and sensation, etc.

Then to reflect on myself.

**Fourth** Point. The fourth, to look how all the good things and gifts descend from above, as my poor power from the supreme and infinite power from above; and so justice, goodness, pity, mercy, etc.; as from the sun descend the rays, from the fountain the waters, etc.

Then to finish reflecting on myself, as has been said.

I will end with a Colloquy and an OUR FATHER.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Spiritual_Exercises_of_St_Ignatius_of_Loyola/3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Third Week</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Spiritual_Exercises_of_St_Ignatius_of_Loyola">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/The_Spiritual_Exercises_of_St_Ignatius_of_Loyola/5">
          <span class="pr-2">Three Methods of Prayer</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^20]: 21 Giving them to understand _is an addition, very probably in St. Ignatius' hand._

[^21]: 22 Making me to understand; likewise is in _the Saint's handwriting, correcting a word erased, probably_ understanding.