---
title: "The Patterns of Revelation"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-02-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-02-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2003 Linda Buselli<br>© 2003 The Urantia Book Fellowship</p>

To a _Urantia Book_ reader, the subject of revelation has many meanings and many levels within each meaning. Most modern religions already have their holy scriptures, consider them inviolate, and do not really expect any new “scriptures” to be revealed. Yet within the last century, a spiritual awakening has swept the world, bringing with it not only _The Urantia Book,_ but a number of other writings believed to be new revelations of God. What is this spiritual awakening and what is _The Urantia Book's_ place in it?

To gain a clearer view of the present, it might be helpful to review the main features of the first four epochal revelations. There are decided differences between the first two and the second two. Both the arrival of the Planetary Prince and his staff and the later coming of Adam and Eve involved large numbers of people settled in one place. Both revelatory groups, the Prince's staff and the Adamites, were not able to communicate much of religion to the primitive peoples they encountered. They taught very simple spiritual concepts and spent most of their time civilizing and socializing these tribes. Gifted individuals from the different tribes were brought to a central place, trained, and then sent back to their people to uplift them.

By contrast, the epochal revelations of Machiventa and Jesus were bestowals of a single individual and occurred within a much shorter time frame than the first two. Machiventa established Salem as a base of operations, brought students in, trained them, and sent them out as missionaries. But Jesus went one step further; he never established a center or “school” at all. He trained the apostles and disciples and they went out into the world much as Machiventa's missionaries had done. The pattern of epochal revelation was changing.

Two thousand years later, another giant step was taken with the publication of _The Urania Book_ This was not only a totally new type of revelation for Urantia, but it was a rare departure from the general method of bringing a revelation to any inhabited world. We can suppose that the isolation of Urantia from the universe circuits would make it very difficult for the usual pattern of revelation to be followed, but why would the revelators choose to give us these truths in this manner? There may have been a number of reasons. (I do so love to speculate on how our unseen friends might. think.)

1. Civilization had progressed markedly in 2000 years, even in the previous decades. Word-of-mouth dissemination had been incredibly enhanced by modern means of communication, travel, etc. The world had become a global community, albeit the neighbors weren't getting along well together.
2. The choice of the English language for the revelation may have been made because English has more than three times the vocabulary of any other language on earth and can express greater subtlety in meanings. It is spoken in some form in every country in the world and was the language of the largest democratic nation.
3. The Revelatory Commission knew that eastern thought and western thought were about to meet. Between the late 1950s and the early 1960s, the Dalai Lama was driven out of Tibet, giving eastern religious thought more attention in the west; and Pope John XXIII convened Vatican II, opening up Christian theology and mysticism to the world. Since then, there has been an explosion of interest in things spiritual, and a mingling of eastern and western concepts. Genuine spiritual seekers are willing to examine the values and truths in both, and much confusion has resulted. For myself, _The Urantia Book_ has served as a unifier and an expansion of these varied viewpoints, and it has long been known that the book is intended to serve as a tool to get Urantia through this period of confusion and chaos between the secular and the spiritual.

Present readers and those who come after us will have to deal with the following issues.

## Language

Just as English is the most widely spoken language on the planet, it may also be the most quickly changing one. One of the reasons its vocabulary is so extensive is that it adapts words from other languages, and even invents its own, at a very rapid rate. The English language is only about one thousand years old, and it continues to evolve rapidly. Even in the fifty years since the publication of _The Urantia Book_, some of the terms in the book have begun to change slightly in meaning, or in usage; for instance, let's take the term “weeping.” While it is still clearly understood, it has been replaced in ordinary speech by other terms, such as “crying,” or “sobbing.” Also, words such as “galaxy” are being used somewhat differently than in the 1920s, which has caused some confusion among readers who are interested in astronomy. Most people associate the word “psychic” with mindal phenomena or ESP; however, the book uses the term “psyche” or “psychic” in its original meaning in the Greek language, which is “spirit” or “soul.” Thus, the seven psychic circles deal not just with intellectual understanding, but with the growth of the soul. We might be more likely to term them “soul circles” in the use of language today.

English has no singular gender-neutral pronoun for persons. This means, in order to be politically correct, one must use he/she, etc. Some people already prefer “humankind” to “mankind,” and the head of a committee is a “chair” rather than a “chairman.” This difficulty will bring increasing problems as social conditions change.

Translators will always face the problem of variations in local or regional dialects. We have two Spanish translations of the book now, reflecting differences in usage between Spain and Latin America. Also, the literal translation from one language to another can be very misleading, depending on idiomatic terms.

As all of these languages change, updates will have to be made to maintain the clarity of the concepts presented in the book; and this will create problems in precise definitions. This will also be difficult for those who want the original text kept inviolate, for it will become less and less readable over a long period of time unless it can be expressed in the language of each new generation. We've been told _The Urantia Book_ is to provide spiritual guidance for the next thousand years; but a thousand years from now, perhaps much sooner, the English of the book may well be unrecognizable.

## Dissemination

In all four of the earlier epochal revelations, truth was carried by word of mouth. Eventually, in the third and fourth revelations, “scriptures” were produced; but the written word has always been subject to errors in interpretation and translation, as cited above. We have six different bibles in our house, and that means for any given verse, we can find six separate versions.

However, worldwide electronic communication offers us some very promising ways of disseminating the teachings of _The Urantia Book_. Thousands of people contact our website each day, and websites are interconnecting at an astonishing rate. We have a powerful new tool for transmitting the teachings of the book at a faster rate than ever before.

## Recurring Patterns

All five epochal revelations have certain aspects in common:

1. The new truth revealed is not very far above the level understood by the people of that day and age, and makes use of their writings, “scriptures,” when available. It builds upon the best of what already exists in the thought patterns of the people. In other words, every new revelation refers to previous human sources as a matter of course. This is noticeable in Michael's bestowal, as he quoted from the Hebrew scriptures he considered appropriate. Also, he was l x into a society that was looking for a son of God; and the mystery cult of Mithraism had prepared the minds of many Gentiles for the birth of a divine son. In fact, some of the beliefs and practices of both groups are still visible in the practice of Christianity today.
    The scientific and advanced philosophic content of _The Urantia Book_ is closely linked to the knowledge and science of its day. As we are becoming aware, much of the philosophy expressed was derived from leading Christian writers of that generation; and some of the scientific theories, such as plate tectonics and plasma physics had already been proposed, if not popularly accepted by the scientific community.
2. Aside from the leaders such as Machiventa and Jesus, the teachers of truth were ordinary men and women who had been inspired to disseminate it. In both the third and the fourth epochal revelations, priesthoods eventually arose. But _The Urantia Book_ arrived during a burgeoning wave of new types of revelation and individual spiritual practices. Without ecclesiastic sanction or connections, the book appealed to independent spiritual seekers who were free to interpret its truths in their own ways.
3. Truth was dispersed by many different individuals using diverse languages and practices. With _The Urantia Book_, translations were delayed, perhaps to keep the original text pure; but we are now reaching out to the many peoples of the world in their own languages, thus following the established pattern in a new way.
4. Every revelation has brought dynamic changes to the society in which it has been revealed...but not right away. Individuals take a long time to assimilate truth into their private lives; and enormous amounts of time have been required to have the new truth gradually infiltrate the cultures involved. Christianity took over 300 years to bend the will of the Roman Empire to its cause.
5. No epochal revelation yet has remained “pure” for the reasons listed above. _“Each of the apostolic teachers taught his own view of the gospel of the kingdom...Though they all taught the_ same truth, _each apostle presented his own personal interpretations of the Master's teaching And Jesus upheld this presentation of the diversity of personal experience in the things of the kingdom...”_ [[UB 148:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/148#p1_2)]
6. Celestial help has been given between epochal revelations, as it has been deemed necessary. Van remained behind following the Lucifer rebellion and prepared the way for Adam and Eve. We have virtually no information about what happened between the Adan tie default and Machiventa's incarnation. However the succession of Hebrew prophets was supported and encouraged by the Melchizedek receivers until Michael's arrival. There was also a worldwide appearance of prophets and religious teachers during the 6th century BC. And _The Urantia Book_ itself tells us that“ _Jesus did not found the so-called Christian church, but he has, in every manner consistent with his nature,_ fostered _it as the best existent exponent of his lifework on earth._” [[UB 195:10.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_9)] Perhaps our unseen fiends have been and will continue to foster _The Urantia Book_.

## Looking Ahead

_The Urantia Book_ will have an important role in the spiritual awakening of this planet. Since we cannot see how this will work out, we must be careful not to limit our vision for either the immediate or the distant future. Just as the teachers of former revelations could not know the permutations their teachings would take, we cannot predict how these truths will be interpreted and taught by our successors.

> “However wise it may be to glean wisdom from the past, it is folly to regard the past as the exclusive source of truth. Truth is relative and expanding, it _lives_ always in the present, achieving new expression in each generation of men—even in each human life.” [[UB 79:8.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/79#p8_8)]

The patterns of revelation seem to remain the same; it is the expression of them that has altered, dependent on the reasons listed above and others unknown to us. The one factor we can confidently expect to be present throughout the future is change. “_All static, dead, concepts are potentially evil. The finite shadow of relative and living truth is continually moving. Static concepts invariably retard science, politics, society, and religion._” [[UB 130:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p4_15)] and “_The fact of God, the divine late, is changeless; the truth of God, his relation to the universe, is a relative revelation which is ever adaptable to the constantly evolving universe._” [[UB 102:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/102#p7_2)]

Change is one of the most difficult steps for us to take. Our inability to change delays our reception of truth, both as individuals and as entire cultures; our openness to change gives our Adjusters more leeway in their tasks and allows for more rapid cultural adaptations. We are living in a changing society, one that is searching for truth, that is perhaps more open to advanced spiritual teachings than it has been for some time. We will have to be adaptable to new ways of expressing ourselves and sharing our experiences within the context of our new opportunities for communication.

> Truth is living; the Spirit of Truth is ever leading the children of light into new realms of spiritual reality and divine service. You are not given truth to crystallize into settled, safe, and honored forms.... What a sorry sight for successive generations of the professed followers of Jesus to say, regarding their stewardship of divine truth: ‘Here, Master, is the truth you committed to us a hundred or a thousand years ago. We have lost nothing; we have faithfully preserved all you gave us; we have allowed no changes to be made in that which you taught us; here is the truth you gave us.’ [[UB 176:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p3_7)]

Is _The Urantia Book_ a revelation? Yes. Does the discovery of human source material dilute the meaning of that term? No. I suspect that it is our own erroneous definitions of what constitutes a “revelation” that have led to the disappointment of some readers. After all, the apostles also had a great deal of trouble understanding the real nature of many of Jesus' teachings. The authors of _The Urantia Book_ have done exactly what they said they would do. They have followed an established pattern of revelation: _“...we are to be guided by the mandate of the superuniverse rulers which directs that we shall, in all our efforts to reveal truth and co-ordinate essential knowledge, give preference to the highest existing human concepts pertaining to the subjects to be presented. We may resort to pure revelation only when the concept of presentation has had no adequate previous expression by the human mind.”_ [[UB 0:12.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_10)]

And from a midwayer: _“The memoranda which I have collected... embrace thought gems and superior concepts of Jesus' teachings assembled from more than two thousand human beings who have lived on earth from the days of Jesus down to the time of the inditing of these revelations, more correctly restatements. ... I well know that those concepts which have had origin in the human mind will prove more acceptable and helpful to all other human minds....In many ways I have served more as a collector and editor than as an original narrator.”_ [[UB 121:8.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/121#p8_13),14]

_The Urantia Book,_ like previous revelations, is a repository of both human wisdom and advanced spiritual insights. It is not just a revelation in and of itself, but _it precipitates revelation in us._ It engenders within the human soul that which will help to usher in light and life. It must be given new life and _new_ meaning in each generation. The truth of the revelation of the book is not in the precise words written on its pages, but in the living human experience of its ideals.

> Linda Buselli has been studying and teaching _The Urantia Book_ for over 30 years. She is currently serving as a Fellowship General Councilor and Chair of the Publications Committee.
{.is-info}

## References

- Article obtained from: https://urantia-book.org/archive/newsletters/herald/