---
title: "The Dual Nature of Supremacy"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-01-25T11:16:41.388Z
tags:
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-01-25T11:12:37.284Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1999 Linda Buselli<br>© 1999 The Urantia Book Fellowship</p>

“For every action there is an equal and opposite re action.” This axiom of physics has profoundly influenced our view of the physical world. But if, in fact, this is a “truth” of the universe, then it must be true at all levels of reality. In my attempt to understand the nature of the Supreme, I have found this idea is crucial to grasping how supremacy works, not just in physical manifestations of the Almighty Supreme, but in spirit, mind, and even personality.  

The fact that supremacy must encompass all finite possibilities indicates that it must be an experience of all levels of any given possibility, from one extreme to the other, from one sub-infinite near-absolute to its opposite. We find this expressed in _The Urantia Book_ in the ascending and descending sons, the passive/aggressive encircuitments of the angelic orders, and even our gender of nativity of which traces remain all the way to Paradise and thereafter. 

> Human beings have learned that the motion of the invisible may sometimes be discerned by observing its effects on the visible; and we in the universes have long since learned to detect the movements and trends of Supremacy by observing the repercussions of such evolutions in the personalities and patterns of the grand universe. ([UB 115:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/115#p6_7)) 

Perhaps because I am a woman and feel that there is gender bias in _The Urantia Book,_ I have spent a great deal of time and thought on this subject. Not long ago, I decided to begin with the relationship between the Creator Son and the Divine Minister, as representatives of the universe concepts of male/female, aggressive/passive, etc.; and I have come to discover a deeper meaning and purpose for these designations. 

One of the more puzzling aspects of the Creator Son/ Creative Spirit partnership has been the relationship between the personality prerogatives of the Son versus the virtually non-personal aspects of the Divine Minister, especially at the beginning of the formation of the local universe. “_In the local universes even the Creators evolve: The presence of the Conjoint Actor evolves from a living power focus to the status of the divine personality of a Universe Mother Spirit; the Creator Son evolves from the nature of existential Paradise divinity to the experiential nature of supreme sovereignty._” ([UB 116:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/116#p4_8)) It seems that as he grows from individual personality expression to the group consciousness gained by the experience of living the lives of his creatures, she moves from group consciousness and expression to a more individual personality expression. This observation gives rise to several possibilities of interpretation and expression regarding the actualizing of potentials of personality in the aggressive/passive, male/ female, yin/yang roles, i.e., one of the dual motions of growth now occurring in Supremacy.

## Interdependency

The Creator Son and Creative Spirit are associated in a unique way from the moment of their creation. “_When a Creator Son is personalized by the Universal Father and the Eternal Son, then does the Infinite Spirit individualize a new and unique representation of himself to accompany this Creator Son to the realms of space, there to be his companion, first, in physical organization and, later, in creation and ministry to the creatures of the newly projected universe._” ([UB 34:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p0_1)) And “_The birth of a co-ordinate Creator Son signalizes the birth within the person of the Infinite Spirit of the potential of the future local universe consort of this Paradise Son._” ([UB 17:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p6_3)) 

In the growth and fulfillment of finite actualization of time- space potential within a local universe, the Creator Son and the Creative Spirit must function together. He is limited by space, she, by time, but “_...when these two function in administrative union, they are practically independent of time and space within the confines of their local creation. Therefore, as practically observed throughout a local universe, the Creator Son and the Creative Spirit usually function independently of both time and space since there is always available to each the time and space liberation of the other._” ([UB 34:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p3_6))  

## Dual motions of consciousness 

The Creative Deities represent two extremes of consciousness within the Supreme Mind. The Creator Son is highly individual. “_...each is unique, diverse, exclusive, and original in nature as well as in personality._” ([UB 21:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_10)) On the other hand, the Creative Spirit begins as a scarcely individuated being but is “... _group conscious of destiny._ ” ([UB 17:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p6_4)) As the Creator Son expands his consciousness of the experiences of his diverse beings through living the life of seven of his created beings, the Creative Spirit grows toward a more personal expression of consciousness with each of his bestowals. As his group consciousness expands, her individual conscious expression increases. They grow together but from opposite ends of the spectrum of personal consciousness and expression. Thus is the growth of both equal in the evoluionary growth of Supreme consciousness within their local universe.  

## Reflections at a planetary level

All of these motions of experiential growth within Supremacy are reciprocal, and reflect on all levels of timespace reality, from the material to mind, to spirit experience. _“In the present universe age this dual motion is revealed in the descending and ascending personalities of the grand universe.”_ ([UB 115:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/115#p6_5)). It is also revealed in many other types of relationships including aggressive/passive roles, and a myriad of spiritual and mindal phenomena within both ascending and descending personalities. 

In considering the aggressive/passive roles, we find both types of consciousness, individual personality expression and a more group-conscious expression. On Urantia, although each displays qualities of both types of consciousness, males are generally considered “aggressive”, females, “passive;” that is, males tend to display a more aggressive individual personality expression, and women tend to be more group conscious, “family” oriented. Perhaps this is the source of “women’s intuition”, an awareness at some level of mind of the mindedness of others. 

It may also be applied to the consciousness of entire planets. The Urantia races are considered sons of God and as such are highly individual persons. We are a Father-fusion world; the Adjusters are seeking union with unique personalities who are evolving toward the consciousness of relationships, the group consciousness required for the growth of Supremacy. “_A seventh or sixth circler can be almost as truly God-knowing — sonship conscious — as a second or first circler, but such lower circle beings are far less conscious of experiential relation to the Supreme Being, universe citizenship._” ([UB 110:6.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_16)) Our progression through the mansion worlds will be quite involved with our “socialization” and ability to work with groups of diverse types of beings. 

Now let us consider spirit-fusion planets. We are told their inhabitants are mortal, as we are, and will ascend through the local universe as we do. What then, is different? May we postulate that their personality expression develops, as does that of the Creative Spirit, from group consciousness toward personal expression? I have always theorized that Ellanora of Panoptia was able to prevent a single soul from her planet being lost during the Lucifer rebellion because of the function of a group consciousness on her world. Perhaps Ellanora’s leadership indicates that she was a highly developed, i.e., more individually personalized member of her race and therefore able to exert her influence more strongly through the planetary mind circuit. I cannot imagine such an event occurring on Urantia with its highly individualized minds. In our society we are only beginning to realize how important group awareness and cooperation will be to our planetary future. 

Also, we are told that the Adjusters gain valuable experience working with spirit-fusion candidates, but the Adjuster does not return upon the resurrection of these individuals. However, the Adjuster would have gained experience with group mind which would be of value in its purpose of helping us evolve to a greater group consciousness; and after fusion, this would be of particular benefit on the training worlds of the constellation. According to _The Urantia Book_ , the Adjusters _“..labor with the material mind for the purpose of constructing, by adjustment and spiritualization, a new mind for the new worlds and the new name of your future career. Their mission chiefly concerns the future life, not this life.”_ ([UB 108:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p5_5)) We cannot automatically assume that the previous experiences of our Adjusters were concerned only with helping us through this mortal experience; they plan much farther ahead than that.  

## Evolutionary completion of The Supreme

The existence of this opposite but coordinate pattern of growth seems to be an inherent function of Supremacy. In terms of the relationship of the Creator Son and Creative Spirit and their destiny, some speculations might be made even now. _“...sometime in the far-distant future, in the now mobilizing universes of outer space, we believe that the liaison between a sevenfold Master Son and a seventh-stage Creative Spirit may attain to absonite levels of service..”_ ([UB 21:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p6_3)) We know that in the present universe age _“The Universe Mother Spirit..never leaves the local universe headquarters world....The Holy Spirit of the Divine Minister would become nonfunctional if her personal presence should be removed from Salvington. Her spirit presence seems to be fixed on the universe headquarters world... The Universe Mother Spirit acts as the universe focus and center of the Spirit of Truth as well as of her own personal influence, the Holy Spirit.”_ ([UB 34:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p4_7)) However, from [UB 55:10.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p10_11) “ _If the Creator Sons are destined to the outer universes, the Divine Ministers will undoubtedly accompany them._” How then, might things develop that would enable her to join the Master Son in the outer space levels? 

In the discussion of the local universe stage of light and life, _The Urantia Book_ tells us: “ _On attaining this fourth stage of development the Creator Son becomes administratively free; the Divine Minister is progressively blending her ministry with that of the superuniverse Master Spirit and the Infinite Spirit._” ([UB 55:10.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p10_9)) As Michael becomes administratively free, she is also freeing herself of her control over the energy and mind circuits of the local universe. “ _At the same time new status would be imparted to all orders of permanent citizenship, such as Material Sons, univitatia, midsoniters, susatia and Spirit-fused mortals._” ([UB 55:10.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p10_10)) Please note that the Spirit-fused mortals are the only representatives of ascending evolutionary sons in this group. Are they to represent her presence in the future universe age in some undisclosed manner? 

We are also told “..the orders of creatures native to the local universes are quite varied. No two are administered or inhabited by dual-origin native beings who are in all respects identical. Within any superuniverse, one half of their inherent attributes are quite alike, being derived from the uniform Creative Spirits; the other half vary, being derived from the diversified Creator Sons.” ([UB 21:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_10)) When the Supreme Being factualizes, the authors of _The Urantia Book_ “_... believe that the present demarcations between the seven superuniverses will gradually disappear, and that the entire grand universe will function as a perfected whole._” ([UB 117:7.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/117#p7_15)) Is it possible that these spirit-fused mortals will contribute to the uniform administration of the grand universe in future ages? 

The Supreme seems to grow from all possible expe riential starting points in fulfillment of his destiny, and we participate in that growth, not only as ascending sons, but in many other manifestations such as gender identification, consciousness, personality types, varying situations of planetary origin ó an almost endless profusion of differential values and experiences. And all expressions of finite reality are essential to Supremacy. It is only our spiritual and intellectual immaturity which designates one destiny, or expression of the Supreme, as of more value than another. We are all equally necessary to the comple tion of the God of time and space and we will become more experientially appreciative of this as we progress through the ages. 

> Linda Buselli has been a reader for 28 years, and she and her husband Bob served as Area Coordinator for Indiana for many years. She is a member of the Publications Committee and now resides in Dallas, Tx. Both children, Michael (24) and Gina (22) are active in the Urantia movement. 
{.is-info}

> The Supreme is the beauty of physical harmony, the truth of intellectual meaning, and the goodness of spiritual value. He is the sweetness of true success and the joy of everlasting achievement. He is the oversoul of the grand universe, the consciousness of the finite cosmos, the completion of finite reality, and the personification of Creator-creature experience. Throughout all future eternity God the Supreme will voice the reality of volitional experience in the trinity relationships of Deity. [UB 117:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/117#p1_1)

## References

- Article obtained from: https://urantia-book.org/archive/newsletters/herald/
