---
title: "I. The System of the Universe Originates in the Self"
description: "The Secrets of the Self"
published: true
date: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/Prologue">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Prologue</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/2">
          <span class="pr-2">II. The Life of the Self Comes From Forming Desires</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p16">[<sup><small>p. 16</small></sup>]</span>

_Showing that the system of the universe originates in the Self, and that the continuation of the life of all individuals depends on strengthening the Self_.

The form of existence is an effect of the Self,
Whatsoever thou seest is a secret of the Self.
When the Self awoke to consciousness,
<span id="v190"><sup><small>190</small></sup></span>  It revealed the universe of Thought.
A hundred worlds are hidden in its essence:
Self-affirmation brings Not-self to light.
By the Self the seed of hostility is sown in the world:
It imagines itself to be other than itself.

<span id="p17">[<sup><small>p. 17</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v195"><sup><small>195</small></sup></span>  It makes from itself the forms of others
In order to multiply the pleasure of strife.
It is slaying by the strength of its arm
That it may become conscious of its own strength.
Its self-deceptions are the essence of Life;
<span id="v200"><sup><small>200</small></sup></span>  Like the rose, it lives by bathing itself in blood.
For the sake of a single rose it destroys a hundred rose-gardens
And makes a hundred lamentations in quest of a single melody.
For one sky it produces a hundred new moons,
And for one word a hundred discourses.
<span id="v205"><sup><small>205</small></sup></span>  The excuse for this wastefulness and cruelty
Is the shaping and perfecting of spiritual beauty.

<span id="p18">[<sup><small>p. 18</small></sup>]</span>

The loveliness of Shírín justifies the anguish of Farhád, [^31]
The fragrant navel justifies a hundred musk-deer.
’Tis the fate of moths to consume in flame:
<span id="v210"><sup><small>210</small></sup></span>  The suffering of moths is justified by the candle.
The pencil of the Self limned a hundred to-days
In order to achieve the dawn of a single morrow.
Its flames burned a hundred Abrahams [^32]
That the lamp of one Mohammed might be lighted.
<span id="v215"><sup><small>215</small></sup></span>  Subject, object, means, and causes—
They all exist for the purpose of action.

<span id="p19">[<sup><small>p. 19</small></sup>]</span>

The Self rises, kindles, falls, glows, breathes,
Burns, shines, walks, and flies.
The spaciousness of Time is its arena,
<span id="v220"><sup><small>220</small></sup></span>  Heaven is a billow of the dust on its road.
From its rose-planting the world abounds in roses;
Night is born of its sleep, day springs from its waking.
It divided its flame into sparks
And taught the understanding to worship particulars.
<span id="v225"><sup><small>225</small></sup></span>  It dissolved itself and created the atoms,
It was scattered for a little while and created the sands.
Then it wearied of dispersion
And by re-uniting itself it became the mountains.
’Tis the nature of the Self to manifest itself:
<span id="v230"><sup><small>230</small></sup></span>  In every atom slumbers the might of the Self.

<span id="p20">[<sup><small>p. 20</small></sup>]</span>

Power that is unexpressed and inert
Chains the faculties which lead to action.
Inasmuch as the life of the universe
comes from the strength of the Self,
Life is in proportion to this strength.
<span id="v235"><sup><small>235</small></sup></span>  When a drop of water gets the Self's lesson by heart,
It makes its worthless existence a pearl.
Wine is formless because its self is weak;
It receives a form by favour of the cup.
Although the cup of wine assumes a form,
<span id="v240"><sup><small>240</small></sup></span>  It is indebted to us for its motion.
When the mountain loses its self, it turns into sands
And complains that the sea surges over it;
But the wave, so long as it remains a wave in the sea's bosom,
Makes itself a rider on the sea's back.

<span id="p21">[<sup><small>p. 21</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v245"><sup><small>245</small></sup></span>  Light has been a beggar since the eye first rolled
And moved to and fro in search of beauty;
But forasmuch as the grass found a
means of growth in its self,
Its aspiration clove the breast of the garden.
The candle too concatenated itself
<span id="v250"><sup><small>250</small></sup></span>  And built itself out of atoms;
Then it made a practice of melting
itself away and fled from its self
Until at last it trickled down from its own eye, like tears.
If the bezel had been more self-secure by nature,
It would not have suffered wounds,
<span id="v255"><sup><small>255</small></sup></span>  But since it derives its value from the superscription,
Its shoulder is galled by the burden of another's name.
Because the earth is firmly based on self-existence,

<span id="p22">[<sup><small>p. 22</small></sup>]</span>

The captive moon goes round it perpetually.
The being of the sun is stronger than that of the earth:
<span id="v260"><sup><small>260</small></sup></span>  Therefore is the earth bewitched by the sun's eye.
The glory of the plane fixes our gaze,
The mountains are enriched by its majesty:
Its raiment is woven of fire,
Its origin is one self-assertive seed.
<span id="v265"><sup><small>265</small></sup></span>  When Life gathers strength from the Self,
The river of Life expands into an ocean.

<span id="p23">[<sup><small>p. 23</small></sup>]</span>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/Prologue">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Prologue</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/2">
          <span class="pr-2">II. The Life of the Self Comes From Forming Desires</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^31]: 18:1 Shírín was loved by the Persian emperor Khusrau Parwíz. Farhád fell in love with her and cast himself down a precipice on hearing a false rumour of her death.

[^32]: 18:2 Abraham is said to have been cast on a burning pile by order of Nimrod and miraculously preserved from harm.