---
title: "X. Inner Meanings of the Names of Ali"
description: "The Secrets of the Self"
published: true
date: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/9">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">IX. The Three States in the Education of the Self</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/11">
          <span class="pr-2">XI. The Young Man of Merv and Saint Ali Hujwírí</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p85">[<sup><small>p. 85</small></sup>]</span>

_Setting forth the inner meanings of the names of Ali_.

<span id="v965"><sup><small>965</small></sup></span>  Ali is the first Moslem and the King of men,
In Love's eyes Ali is the treasure of the Faith.
Devotion to his family inspires me with life
So that I am as a shining pearl.
Like the narcissus, I am enraptured with gazing;
<span id="v970"><sup><small>970</small></sup></span>  Like perfume, I am straying through his pleasure-garden.
If holy water gushes from my earth, he is the source;

<span id="p86">[<sup><small>p. 86</small></sup>]</span>

If wine pours from my grapes, he is the cause.
I am dust, but his sun hath made me as a mirror:
Song can be seen in my breast.
<span id="v975"><sup><small>975</small></sup></span>  From Ali's face the Prophet drew a fair omen,
By his majesty the true religion is glorified.
His commandments are the strength of Islam:
All things pay allegiance to his House.
The Apostle of God gave him the name Bú Turáb;
<span id="v980"><sup><small>980</small></sup></span>  God in the Koran called him "the Hand of Allah.”
Every one that is acquainted with Life's mysteries
Knows what is the inner meaning of the names of Ali.
The dark clay, whose name is the body—
Our reason is ever bemoaning its iniquity.

<span id="p87">[<sup><small>p. 87</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v985"><sup><small>985</small></sup></span>  On account of it our sky-reaching thought plods o’er the earth;
It makes our eyes blind and our ears deaf.
It hath in its hand a two-edged sword of lust:
Travellers’ hearts are broken by this brigand.
Ali, the Lion of God, subdued the body's clay
<span id="v990"><sup><small>990</small></sup></span>  And transmuted this dark earth to gold.
Murtazá, by whose sword the splendour of Truth was revealed,
Is named Bú Turáb from his conquest of the body. [^75]
Man wins territory by prowess in battle,
<span id="v995"><sup><small>995</small></sup></span>  But his brightest jewel is mastery of himself.
Whosoever in the world becomes a Bú Turáb
Turns back the sun from the west; [^76]

<span id="p88">[<sup><small>p. 88</small></sup>]</span>

Whosoever saddles tightly the steed of the body
Sits like the bezel on the seal of sovereignty:
Here the might of Khaibar is under his feet, [^77]
And hereafter his hand will distribute
<span id="v1000"><sup><small>1000</small></sup></span>  the water of Kauthar. [^78]
Through self-knowledge he acts as God's Hand,
And in virtue of being God's Hand he reigns over all.
His person is the gate of the city of the sciences:
Arabia, China, and Greece are subject to him.
<span id="v1005"><sup><small>1005</small></sup></span>  If thou wouldst drink clear wine from thine own grapes,
Thou must needs wield authority over thine own earth.

<span id="p89">[<sup><small>p. 89</small></sup>]</span>

To become earth is the creed of a moth;
Be a conqueror of earth; that alone is worthy of a man.
Thou art soft as a rose. Become hard as a stone,
<span id="v1010"><sup><small>1010</small></sup></span>  That thou mayst be the foundation of the wall of the garden!
Build thy clay into a Man,
Build thy Man into a World!
If thou art unfit to be either a wall or a door,
Some one else will make bricks of thine earth.
<span id="v1015"><sup><small>1015</small></sup></span>  O thou who complainest of the cruelty of Heaven,
Thou whose glass cries out against the injustice of the stone,
How long this wailing and crying and lamentation?
How long this perpetual beating of thy breast?
The pith of Life is contained in action,
<span id="v1020"><sup><small>1020</small></sup></span>  To delight in creation is the law of Life.

<span id="p90">[<sup><small>p. 90</small></sup>]</span>

Arise and create a new world!
Wrap thyself in flames, be an Abraham! [^79]
To comply with this ill-starred world
Is to fling away thy buckler on the field of battle.
<span id="v1025"><sup><small>1025</small></sup></span>  The man of strong character who is master of himself
Will find Fortune complaisant.
If the world does not comply with his humour,
He will try the hazard of war with Heaven;
He will dig up the foundations of the universe
<span id="v1030"><sup><small>1030</small></sup></span>  And cast its atoms into a new mould.
He will subvert the course of Time
And wreck the azure firmament.
By his own strength he will produce
A new world which will do his pleasure.
If one cannot live in the world as
<span id="v1035"><sup><small>1035</small></sup></span>  beseems a man,

<span id="p91">[<sup><small>p. 91</small></sup>]</span>

It is true life to give up one's soul.
He that hath sound intelligence
Will prove his strength by great enterprises.
’Tis sweet to use love in hard tasks
<span id="v1040"><sup><small>1040</small></sup></span>  And, like Abraham, to gather roses from flames. [^80]
The potentialities of men of action
Are displayed in willing acceptance of what is difficult.
Mean spirits have no weapon but spite,
This is their one rule of life.
<span id="v1043"><sup><small>1043</small></sup></span>  But Life is power made manifest,
And its mainspring is the desire for victory.
Mercy out of season is a coldness of Life's blood,
A break in the rhythm of Life's music.
Whoever is sunk in the depths of ignominy
<span id="v1050"><sup><small>1050</small></sup></span>  Calls his weakness contentment.

<span id="p92">[<sup><small>p. 92</small></sup>]</span>

Weakness is the plunderer of Life,
Its womb is teeming with fears and lies.
Its soul is empty of virtues,
Its milk is a fattening for vices.
<span id="v1055"><sup><small>1055</small></sup></span>  O man of sound judgement, beware!
This spoiler is lurking in ambush.
Be not his dupe, if thou art wise:
Chameleon-like, he changes colour every moment.
Even by keen observers his form is not discerned:
<span id="v1060"><sup><small>1060</small></sup></span>  Veils are thrown over his face.
Now he is muffled in pity and gentleness,
Now he wears the cloak of humility.
Sometimes he is disguised as a victim of oppression,
Sometimes as one whose sins are to be excused.
<span id="v1065"><sup><small>1065</small></sup></span>  He appears in the shape of self-indulgence
And robs the strong man's heart of courage.

<span id="p93">[<sup><small>p. 93</small></sup>]</span>

Strength is the twin of Truth;
If thou knowest thyself, strength is the Truth-revealing glass.
Life is the seed, and power the crop:
<span id="v1070"><sup><small>1070</small></sup></span>  Power explains the mystery of truth and falsehood.
The false claimant, if he be possessed of power,
Needs no argument for his claim.
Falsehood derives from power the authority of truth,
And by falsifying truth deems itself true.
<span id="v1075"><sup><small>1075</small></sup></span>  Its creative word transforms poison into nectar;
It says to Good, “Thou art bad,” and Good becomes Evil.
O thou that art heedless of the trust committed to thee,
Esteem thyself superior to both worlds! [^81]

<span id="p94">[<sup><small>p. 94</small></sup>]</span>

Gain knowledge of Life's mysteries!
<span id="v1080"><sup><small>1080</small></sup></span>  Be a tyrant! Ignore all except God!
O man of understanding, open thine eyes, ears, and lips! [^82]
If then thou seest not the Way of Truth, laugh at me!

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/9">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">IX. The Three States in the Education of the Self</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/11">
          <span class="pr-2">XI. The Young Man of Merv and Saint Ali Hujwírí</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^75]: 87:1 Murtazá, “he whom with God is pleased,” is a name of Ali. Bú Turáb means literally "father of earth.”

[^76]: 87:2 A miracle of the Prophet.

[^77]: 88:1 The fortress of Khaibar, a village in the Hijáz, was captured by the Moslems in a.d. 628. Ali performed great feats of valour on this occasion.

[^78]: 88:2 A river of Paradise.

[^79]: 90:1 See note on l. 213.

[^80]: 91:1 The burning pyre on which Abraham was thrown lost its heat and was transformed into a rose-garden.

[^81]: 93:1 The “trust” which God offered to Man and which Man accepted, after it had been refused by Heaven and Earth (Koran, ch. 33, v. 72), is the divine vicegerency, _i.e._ the duty of displaying the divine attributes.

[^82]: 94:1 A parody of the verse in the Masnaví quoted above. See l. 603.