---
title: "XIV. The Sheikh and the Brahmin, and the Ganges and the Himalaya"
description: "The Secrets of the Self"
published: true
date: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/13">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XIII. Story of the Diamond and the Coal</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/15">
          <span class="pr-2">XV. On Jihad</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p108">[<sup><small>p. 108</small></sup>]</span>

_Story of the Sheikh and the Brahmin, followed by a conversation between Ganges and Himalaya to the effect that the continuation of social life depends on firm attachment to the characteristic traditions of the community_.

At Benares lived a venerable Brahmin,
Whose head was deep in the ocean of Being and Not-being.
He had a large knowledge of philosophy
But was well-disposed to the seekers after God.
<span id="v1235"><sup><small>1235</small></sup></span>  His mind was eager to explore new problems,
His intellect moved on a level with the Pleiades;

<span id="p109">[<sup><small>p. 109</small></sup>]</span>

His nest was as high as that of the Anká; [^87]
Sun and moon were cast, like rue, on the flame of his thought. [^88]
For a long time he laboured and sweated,
<span id="v1240"><sup><small>1240</small></sup></span>  But philosophy brought no wine to his Cup.
Although he set many a snare in the gardens of learning,
His snares never caught a glimpse of the Ideal bird;
And notwithstanding that the nails of his thought were dabbled with blood,
The knot of Being and Not-being remained untied.
<span id="v1245"><sup><small>1245</small></sup></span>  The sighs on his lips bore witness to his despair,
His countenance told tales of his distraction.
One day he visited an excellent Sheikh,

<span id="p110">[<sup><small>p. 110</small></sup>]</span>

A man who had in his breast a heart of gold.
The Sheikh laid the seal of silence on his lips
<span id="v1250"><sup><small>1250</small></sup></span>  While he lent his ear to the Sage's discourse.
Then he said: "O wanderer in the lofty sky,
Pledge thyself to be true, for a little, to the earth!
Thou hast lost thy way in wildernesses of speculation,
Thy fearless thought hath passed beyond Heaven.
<span id="v1255"><sup><small>1255</small></sup></span>  Be reconciled with earth, O sky-traveller!
Do not wander in quest of the essence of the stars!
I do not bid thee abandon thine idols.
Art thou an unbeliever? Then be worthy of the badge of unbelief! [^89]

<span id="p111">[<sup><small>p. 111</small></sup>]</span>

O inheritor of ancient culture,
<span id="v1260"><sup><small>1260</small></sup></span>  Turn not thy back on the path thy fathers trod!
If a people's life is derived from unity,
Unbelief too is a source of unity.
Thou that art not even a perfect infidel
Art unfit to worship at the shrine of the spirit.
<span id="v1265"><sup><small>1265</small></sup></span>  We both are far astray from the road of devotion:
Thou art far from Ázar, and I from Abraham. [^90]
Our Majnún hath not fallen into melancholy for his Lailá's sake:
He hath not become perfect in the madness of love.
When the lamp of Self expires,
<span id="v1270"><sup><small>1270</small></sup></span>  What is the use of heaven-surveying imagination?"
Once on a time, laying hold of the skirt of the mountain,

<span id="p112">[<sup><small>p. 112</small></sup>]</span>

Ganges said to Himalaya:
“O thou mantled in snow since the morn of creation,
Thou whose form is girdled with streams,
<span id="v1275"><sup><small>1275</small></sup></span>  God made thee a partner in the secrets of heaven,
But deprived thy foot of graceful gait.
He took away from thee the power to walk:
What avails this sublimity and stateliness?
Life springs from perpetual movement:
<span id="v1280"><sup><small>1280</small></sup></span>  Motion constitutes the wave's whole existence.”
When the mountain heard this taunt from the river,
He puffed angrily like a sea of fire,
And answered: "Thy wide waters are my looking-glass;
Within my bosom are a hundred rivers like thee.

<span id="p113">[<sup><small>p. 113</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v1285"><sup><small>1285</small></sup></span>  This graceful gait of thine is an instrument of death:
Whoso goeth from Self is meet to die.
Thou hast no knowledge of thine own case,
Thou exultest in thy misfortune: thou art a fool!
O born of the womb of the revolving sphere,
<span id="v1290"><sup><small>1290</small></sup></span>  A fallen-in bank is better than thou!
Thou hast made thine existence an offering to the ocean,
Thou hast thrown the rich purse of thy life to the highwayman.
Be self-contained like the rose in the garden,
Do not go to the florist in order to smell sweet!
<span id="v1295"><sup><small>1295</small></sup></span>  To live is to grow in thyself
And gather roses from thine own flower-bed.
Ages have gone by and my foot is fast in earth:

<span id="p114">[<sup><small>p. 114</small></sup>]</span>

Dost thou fancy that I am far from my goal?
My being grew and reached the sky,
<span id="v1300"><sup><small>1300</small></sup></span>  The Pleiads sank to rest under my skirts;
Thy being vanishes in the ocean,
But on my crest the stars bow their heads.
Mine eye sees the mysteries of heaven,
Mine ear is familiar with angels’ wings.
<span id="v1305"><sup><small>1305</small></sup></span>  Since I glowed with the heat of unceasing toil,
I amassed rubies, diamonds, and other gems.
I am stone within, and in the stone is fire .
Water cannot pass over my fire!”
Art thou a drop of water? Do not break at thine own feet,
<span id="v1310"><sup><small>1310</small></sup></span>  But endeavour to surge and wrestle with the sea.
Desire the water of a jewel, become a jewel!

<span id="p115">[<sup><small>p. 115</small></sup>]</span>

Be an ear-drop, adorn a beauty!
Oh, expand thyself! Move swiftly!
Be a cloud that shoots lightning and sheds a flood of rain!
<span id="v1315"><sup><small>1315</small></sup></span>  Let the ocean sue for thy storms as a beggar,
Let it complain of the straitness of thy skirts!
Let it deem itself less than a wave
And glide along at thy feet!

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/13">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XIII. Story of the Diamond and the Coal</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/15">
          <span class="pr-2">XV. On Jihad</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^87]: 109:1 A mysterious bird, of which nothing is known except its name.

[^88]: 109:2 Rue-seed is burned for the purpose of fumigation.

[^89]: 110:1 “The badge of unbelief”: here the original has _zunnár_ (ζωνάριον), _i.e._ the sacred thread worn by Zoroastrians and other non-Moslems.

[^90]: 111:1 Ázar, the father of Abraham, was an idolater.