---
title: "XVI. Precepts of Bábá Sahrá’í"
description: "The Secrets of the Self"
published: true
date: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/15">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XV. On Jihad</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/17">
          <span class="pr-2">XVII. Time is a Sword</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p122">[<sup><small>p. 122</small></sup>]</span>


_Precepts written for the Moslems of India by Mír Naját Nakshband, who is generally known as Bábá Sahrá’í_. [^95]

O thou that hast grown from earth, like a rose,
Thou too art born of the womb of Self.
Do not abandon Self! Persist therein!
<span id="v1390"><sup><small>1390</small></sup></span>  Be a drop of water and drink up the ocean!
Glowing with the light of Self as thou art,
Make Self strong, and thou wilt endure.

<span id="p123">[<sup><small>p. 123</small></sup>]</span>

Thou gett’st profit from this trade,
Thou gain’st riches by preserving this commodity.
<span id="v1395"><sup><small>1395</small></sup></span>  Thou hast being, and art thou afraid of not-being?
O foolish one, thy understanding is at fault.
Since I am acquainted with the harmony of Life,
I will tell thee what is the secret of Life
To sink into thyself like the pearl,
<span id="v1400"><sup><small>1400</small></sup></span>  Then to emerge from thine inward solitude;
To collect sparks beneath the ashes,
And become a flame and dazzle men's eyes.
Go, burn the house of forty years’ tribulation,
Move round thyself! Be a circling flame!
<span id="v1405"><sup><small>1405</small></sup></span>  What is Life but to be freed from moving round others

<span id="p124">[<sup><small>p. 124</small></sup>]</span>

And to regard thyself as the Holy Temple?
Beat thy wings and escape from the attraction of Earth;
Like birds, be safe from falling.
Unless thou art a bird, thou wilt do wisely
<span id="v1410"><sup><small>1410</small></sup></span>  Not to build thy nest on the top of a cave.
O thou that seekest to acquire knowledge,
I say o’er to thee the message of the Sage of Rúm: [^96]
“Knowledge, if it lie on thy skin, is a snake;
Knowledge, if thou take it to heart, is a friend.”
<span id="v1415"><sup><small>1415</small></sup></span>  Hast thou heard how the Master of Rúm
Gave lectures on philosophy at Aleppo?—
Fast in the bonds of intellectual proofs,

<span id="p125">[<sup><small>p. 125</small></sup>]</span>

Drifting o’er the dark and stormy sea of understanding;
A Moses unillumined by Love's Sinai,
<span id="v1420"><sup><small>1420</small></sup></span>  Ignorant of Love and of Love's passion.
He discoursed on Scepticism and Neoplatonism,
And strung many a brilliant pearl of metaphysic.
He unravelled the problems of the Peripatetics,
The light of his thought made clear whatever was obscure.
<span id="v1425"><sup><small>1425</small></sup></span>  Heaps of books lay around and in front of him,
And on his lips was the key to all their mysteries.
Shams-i Tabríz, directed by Kamál, [^97]
Sought his way to the college of Jaláluddín Rúmí
And cried out, "What is all this noise and babble?

<span id="p126">[<sup><small>p. 126</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v1430"><sup><small>1430</small></sup></span>  What are all these syllogisms and judgements and demonstrations?”
“Peace, O fool!" exclaimed the Maulavi,
“Do not laugh at the doctrines of the sages.
Get thee out of my college!
This is argument and discussion: what hast thou to do with it?
<span id="v1435"><sup><small>1435</small></sup></span>  My discourse is beyond thy understanding,
It will not brighten the glass of thy perception.”
These words increased the anger of Shams-i Tabríz
And caused a fire to burst forth from his soul.
The lightning of his look fell on the earth,
<span id="v1440"><sup><small>1440</small></sup></span>  And the glow of his breath made the dust spring into flames.
The spiritual fire burned the intellectual stack

<span id="p127">[<sup><small>p. 127</small></sup>]</span>

And clean consumed the book of philosophy.
The Maulavi, being a stranger to Love's miracles
And unversed in Love's harmonies,
<span id="v1445"><sup><small>1445</small></sup></span>  Cried, "How didst thou kindle this fire,
Which hath burned the books of the philosophers?”
The Sheikh answered, "O unbelieving Moslem,
This is vision and ecstasy: what hast thou to do with it?
My state is beyond thy thought,
<span id="v1450"><sup><small>1450</small></sup></span>  My flame is the Alchemist's elixir."
Thou hast drawn thy substance from the snow of philosophy,
The cloud of thy thought sheds nothing but hailstones.
Kindle a fire in thy rubble,
Foster a flame in thy earth!
<span id="v1455"><sup><small>1455</small></sup></span>  The Moslem's knowledge is perfected by spiritual fervour,

<span id="p128">[<sup><small>p. 128</small></sup>]</span>

The meaning of Islam is _Renounce what shall pass away_.
When Abraham escaped from the bondage of “that which sets,” [^98]
He sat unhurt in the midst of flames. [^99]
Thou hast cast knowledge of God behind thee
<span id="v1460"><sup><small>1460</small></sup></span>  And squandered thy religion for the sake of a loaf.
Thou art hot in pursuit of antimony,
Thou art unaware of the blackness of thine own eye.
Seek the Fountain of Life from the sword's edge,
And the River of Paradise from the dragon's mouth,
<span id="v1465"><sup><small>1465</small></sup></span>  Demand the Black Stone from the door of the house of idols,
And the musk-deer's bladder from a mad dog,

<span id="p129">[<sup><small>p. 129</small></sup>]</span>

But do not seek the glow of Love from the knowledge of to-day,
Do not seek the nature of Truth from this infidel's cup!
Long have I been running to and fro,
<span id="v1470"><sup><small>1470</small></sup></span>  Learning the secrets of the New Knowledge:
Its gardeners have put me to the trial
And have made me intimate with their roses.
Roses! Tulips, rather, that warn one not to smell them—
Like paper roses, a mirage of perfume.
<span id="v1475"><sup><small>1475</small></sup></span>  Since this garden ceased to enthral me,
I have nested on the Paradisal tree.
Modern knowledge is the greatest blind—
Idol-worshipping, idol-selling, idol-making!
Shackled in the prison of phenomena,
<span id="v1480"><sup><small>1480</small></sup></span>  It has not overleaped the limits of the sensible.

<span id="p130">[<sup><small>p. 130</small></sup>]</span>

It has fallen down in crossing the bridge of Life,
It has laid the knife to its own throat.
Having fire, it is yet cold as the tulip;
Having flame, it is yet cold as hail.
<span id="v1485"><sup><small>1485</small></sup></span>  Its nature remains untouched by the glow of Love,
It is ever engaged in a joyless search.
Love is the Plato that heals the sicknesses of the mind: [^100]
The mind's melancholy is cured by its lancet.
The whole world bows in adoration to Love,
<span id="v1490"><sup><small>1490</small></sup></span>  Love is the Mahmúd that conquers the Somnath of intellect. [^101]
Modern science lacks this old wine in its cup,
Its nights are not loud with passionate prayer.

<span id="p131">[<sup><small>p. 131</small></sup>]</span>

Thou hast misprized thine own cypress
And deemed tall the cypress of others.
<span id="v1495"><sup><small>1495</small></sup></span>  Like the reed, thou hast emptied thyself of Self
And given thine heart to the music of others.
O thou that begg’st morsels from another's table,
Wilt thou seek thine own kind in another's shop?
The Moslem's feast is burned up by the lamps of strangers,
<span id="v1500"><sup><small>1500</small></sup></span>  His mosque is consumed by the Christian monastery.
When the deer fled from the sacred territory of Mecca,
The hunter's arrow pierced her side. [^102]
The leaves of the rose are scattered, like its scent:
O thou that hast fled from thy Self, come back to it!

<span id="p132">[<sup><small>p. 132</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v1505"><sup><small>1505</small></sup></span>  O trustee of the wisdom of the Koran,
Find thy lost unity again!
We, who keep the gate of the citadel of Islam,
Have become unbelievers by neglecting
the watchword of Islam.
The ancient Saki's bowl is shattered,
<span id="v1510"><sup><small>1510</small></sup></span>  The wine-party of the Hijáz is broken up.
The Ka‘ba is filled with our idols,
Infidelity mocks at our Islam.
Our Sheikh hath gambled Islam away for love of idols
And made a rosary of the _zunnár_. [^103]
<span id="v1515"><sup><small>1515</small></sup></span>  Our spiritual directors owe their rank to their white hairs
And are the laughing-stock of children in the street;
Their hearts bear no impress of the Faith
But house the idols of sensuality.

<span id="p133">[<sup><small>p. 133</small></sup>]</span>

Every long-haired fellow wears the garb of a dervish—
<span id="v1520"><sup><small>1520</small></sup></span>  Alas for these traffickers in religion!
Day and night they are travelling about with disciples,
And ignoring their religious duties.
Their eyes are without light, like the narcissus,
Their breasts devoid of spiritual wealth.
<span id="v1525"><sup><small>1525</small></sup></span>  Preachers and Stiffs, all worship worldliness alike;
The prestige of the pure religion is ruined.
Our preacher fixed his eyes on the pagoda
And the mufti of the Faith sold his decision.
After this, O friends, what are we to do?
<span id="v1530"><sup><small>1530</small></sup></span>  Our guide turns his face towards the wine-house.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/15">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XV. On Jihad</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/17">
          <span class="pr-2">XVII. Time is a Sword</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^95]: 122:1 This appears to be a pseudonym assumed by the author.

[^96]: 124:1 Jaláluddín Rúmí.

[^97]: 125:1 Bábá Kamâluddín Jundí. For Shams-i Tabríz and his relation to Jaláluddín Rúmí see my _Selected Poems from the Díváni Shamsi Tabríz_ (Cambridge, 1898).

[^98]: 128:1 Abraham refused to worship the sun, moon, and stars, saying, “I love not them that set” (Koran, ch. 6, v. 76).

[^99]: 128:2 See [p. 91](./iq13.htm#p91), note.

[^100]: 130:1 In the Masnaví Love is called "the physician of our pride and self-conceit, our Plato and our Galen.”

[^101]: 130:2 The famous idol of Somnath was destroyed by Sultan Mahmúd of Ghazna.

[^102]: 131:1 The pilgrims are forbidden to kill game.

[^103]: 132:1 See [p. 110](./iq17.htm#p110), note.