---
title: "XVIII. An Invocation"
description: "The Secrets of the Self"
published: true
date: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/17">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XVII. Time is a Sword</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p141">[<sup><small>p. 141</small></sup>]</span>

_An invocation_.

O Thou that art as the soul in the body of the universe,
Thou art our soul and thou art ever fleeing from us.
Thou breathest music into Life's lute;
<span id="v1620"><sup><small>1620</small></sup></span>  Life envies Death when death is for thy sake.
Once more bring comfort to our sad hearts,
Once more dwell in our breasts!
Once more let us hear thy call to honour,
Strengthen our weak love.
<span id="v1625"><sup><small>1625</small></sup></span>  We are oft complaining of destiny,

<span id="p142">[<sup><small>p. 142</small></sup>]</span>

Thou art of great price and we have naught.
Hide not thy fair face from the empty-handed!
Sell cheap the love of Salmán and Bilál! [^108]
Give us the sleepless eye and the passionate heart,
<span id="v1630"><sup><small>1630</small></sup></span>  Give us again the nature of quicksilver!
Show unto us one of thy manifest signs,
That the necks of our enemies may be bowed!
Make this chaff a mountain crested with fire,
Burn with our fire all that is not God!
<span id="v1635"><sup><small>1635</small></sup></span>  When the people let the clue of Unity go from their hands,
They fell into a hundred mazes.
We are dispersed like stars in the world;
Though of the same family, we are strange to one another.

<span id="p143">[<sup><small>p. 143</small></sup>]</span>

Bind again these scattered leaves,
<span id="v1640"><sup><small>1640</small></sup></span>  Revive the law of love!
Take us back to serve thee as of old,
Commit thy cause to them that love thee!
We are travellers: give us devotion as our goal!
Give us the strong faith of Abraham!
<span id="v1645"><sup><small>1645</small></sup></span>  Make us know the meaning of “There is no god,”
Make us acquainted with the mystery of “except Allah”!
I who burn like a candle for the sake of others
Teach myself to weep like the candle.
O God! a tear that is heart-enkindling,
<span id="v1650"><sup><small>1650</small></sup></span>  Passionful, wrung forth by pain, peace-consuming,
May I sow in the garden, and may it grow into a fire
That washes away the fire-brand from the tulip's robe!

<span id="p144">[<sup><small>p. 144</small></sup>]</span>

My heart is with yestereve, my eye is on to-morrow:
Amidst the company I am alone.
<span id="v1655"><sup><small>1655</small></sup></span>  "Every one fancies he is my friend,
But my secret thoughts have not escaped from my heart.”
Oh, where in the wide world is my comrade?
I am the Bush of Sinai: where is my Moses?
I am tyrannous, I have done many a wrong to myself,
<span id="v1660"><sup><small>1660</small></sup></span>  I have nourished a flame in my bosom,
A flame that seized the furniture of judgement,
And cast fire on the skirt of discretion,
And lessoned with madness the reason,
And burned up the existence of knowledge:
<span id="v1665"><sup><small>1665</small></sup></span>  Its blaze enthrones the sun in the sky,
And lightnings encircle it with adoration for ever.
Mine eye fell to weeping, like dew,

<span id="p145">[<sup><small>p. 145</small></sup>]</span>

Since I was entrusted with that hidden fire.
I taught the candle to burn openly,
<span id="v1670"><sup><small>1670</small></sup></span>  While I myself burned unseen by the world's eye.
At last flames breathed from every hair of me,
Fire dropped from the veins of my thought:
My nightingale picked up the spark-grains
And created a fire-tempered song.
<span id="v1675"><sup><small>1675</small></sup></span>  Is the breast of this age without a heart?
Majnún trembles lest Lailá's howdah be empty.
It is not easy for the candle to throb alone:
Ah, is there no moth worthy of me?
How long shall I wait for one to share my grief?
<span id="v1680"><sup><small>1680</small></sup></span>  How long must I search for a confidant?

<span id="p146">[<sup><small>p. 146</small></sup>]</span>

O Thou whose face lends light to the moon and the stars,
Withdraw thy fire from my soul!
Take back what Thou hast put in my breast,
Remove the stabbing radiance from my mirror,
<span id="v1685"><sup><small>1685</small></sup></span>  Or give me one old comrade
To be the mirror of mine all-burning love!
In the sea wave tosses side by side with wave:
Each hath a partner in its emotion.
In heaven star consorts with star,
<span id="v1690"><sup><small>1690</small></sup></span>  And the bright moon lays her head on the knees of Night.
Morning touches Night's dark side,
And To-day throws itself against To-morrow.
One river loses its being in another,
A waft of air dies in perfume.
<span id="v1695"><sup><small>1695</small></sup></span>  There is dancing in every nook of the wine-house,
Madman dances with madman.

<span id="p147">[<sup><small>p. 147</small></sup>]</span>

Howbeit in thine essence Thou art single,
Thou hast decked out for Thyself a whole world.
I am as the tulip of the field,
<span id="v1700"><sup><small>1700</small></sup></span>  In the midst of a company I am alone.
I beg of Thy grace a sympathising friend,
An adept in the mysteries of my nature,
A friend endowed with madness and wisdom,
One that knoweth not the phantom of vain things,
<span id="v1705"><sup><small>1705</small></sup></span>  That I may confide my lament to his soul
And see again my face in his heart.
His image I will mould of mine own clay,
I will be to him both idol and worshipper.

THE END

_Printed by_ R. & R. Clark, Limited, _Edinburgh_.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/17">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XVII. Time is a Sword</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


<br>

## Footnotes

[^108]: 142:1 Salmán was a Persian, Bílál an Abyssinian. Both had been slaves and were devoted henchmen of the Prophet.