---
title: "VI. Negation of the Self"
description: "The Secrets of the Self"
published: true
date: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">V. Strengthened by Love it Gains Dominion Over the Forces of the Universe</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/7">
          <span class="pr-2">VII. We Must be on Guard Against Platonism</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p48"><sup><small>[ p. 48 ]</small></sup></span>

_A tale of which the moral is that negation of the Self is a doctrine invented by the subject races of mankind in order that by this means they may sap and weaken the character of their rulers_.

Hast thou heard that in the time of old
The sheep dwelling in a certain pasture
So increased and multiplied
<span id="v540"><sup><small>540</small></sup></span>  That they feared no enemy?
At last, from the malice of Fate,
Their breasts were smitten by a shaft of calamity.
The tigers sprang forth from the jungle
And rushed upon the sheepfold.

<span id="p49"><sup><small>[ p. 49 ]</small></sup></span>

<span id="v545"><sup><small>545</small></sup></span>  Conquest and dominion are signs of strength,
Victory is the manifestation of strength.
Those fierce tigers beat the drum of sovereignty,
They deprived the sheep of freedom.
Forasmuch as tigers must have their prey,
<span id="v550"><sup><small>550</small></sup></span>  That meadow was crimsoned with the blood of the sheep.
One of the sheep which was clever and acute,
Old in years, cunning as a weather-beaten wolf,
Being grieved at the fate of his fellows
And sorely vexed by the violence of the tigers,
<span id="v555"><sup><small>555</small></sup></span>  Made complaint of the course of Destiny
And sought by craft to restore his fortunes.
The weak man, in order to preserve himself,

<span id="p50"><sup><small>[ p. 50 ]</small></sup></span>

Seeks devices from skilled intelligence.
In slavery, for the sake of repelling harm,
<span id="v560"><sup><small>560</small></sup></span>  The power of scheming becomes quickened,
And when the madness of revenge gains hold,
The mind of the slave meditates rebellion.
“Ours is a hard knot," said this sheep to himself,
“The ocean of our griefs hath no shore.
<span id="v565"><sup><small>565</small></sup></span>  By force we sheep cannot escape from the tiger:
Our legs are silver, his paws are steel.
’Tis not possible, however much one exhorts and counsels,
To create in a sheep the disposition of a wolf.
But to make the furious tiger a sheep—that is possible;
<span id="v570"><sup><small>570</small></sup></span>  To make him unmindful of his nature—that is possible.”

<span id="p51"><sup><small>[ p. 51 ]</small></sup></span>

He became as a prophet inspired,
And began to preach to the blood-thirsty tigers.
He cried out, "O ye insolent liars,
Who wot not of a day of ill luck that shall continue for ever! [^53]
<span id="v575"><sup><small>575</small></sup></span>  I am possessed of spiritual power,
I am an apostle sent by God for the tigers.
I come as a light for the eye that is dark,
I come to establish laws and give commandments.
Repent of your blameworthy deeds!
<span id="v580"><sup><small>580</small></sup></span>  O plotters of evil, bethink yourselves of good!
Whoso is violent and strong is miserable:
Life's solidity depends on self-denial.
The spirit of the righteous is fed by fodder:
The vegetarian is pleasing unto God.

<span id="p52"><sup><small>[ p. 52 ]</small></sup></span>

<span id="v585"><sup><small>585</small></sup></span>  The sharpness of your teeth brings disgrace upon you
And makes the eye of your perception blind.
Paradise is for the weak alone,
Strength is but a means to perdition.
It is wicked to seek greatness and glory,
<span id="v590"><sup><small>590</small></sup></span>  Penury is sweeter than princedom.
Lightning does not threaten the corn-seed:
If the seed become a stack, it is unwise.
If you are sensible, you will be a mote of sand, not a Sahara,
So that you may enjoy the sunbeams.
<span id="v595"><sup><small>595</small></sup></span>  O thou that delightest in the slaughter of sheep,
Slay thy self, and thou wilt have honour!
Life is rendered unstable
By violence, oppression, revenge, and exercise of power.

<span id="p53"><sup><small>[ p. 53 ]</small></sup></span>

Though trodden underfoot, the grass grows up time after time
<span id="v600"><sup><small>600</small></sup></span>  And washes the sleep of death from its eye again and again.
Forget thy self, if thou art wise!
If thou dost not forget thy self, thou art mad.
Close thine eyes, close thine ears, close thy lips, [^54]
That thy thought may reach the lofty sky!
<span id="v605"><sup><small>605</small></sup></span>  This pasturage of the world is naught, naught:
O fool, do not torment thyself for a phantom!”
The tiger-tribe was exhausted by hard struggles,
They had set their hearts on enjoyment of luxury.
This soporific advice pleased them,
<span id="v610"><sup><small>610</small></sup></span>  In their stupidity they swallowed the charm of the sheep.

<span id="p54"><sup><small>[ p. 54 ]</small></sup></span>

He that used to make sheep his prey
Now embraced a sheep's religion.
‘flee tigers took kindly to a diet of fodder:
At length their tigerish nature was broken.
<span id="v615"><sup><small>615</small></sup></span>  The fodder blunted their teeth
And put out the awful flashings of their eyes.
By degrees courage ebbed from their breasts,
The sheen departed from the mirror.
That frenzy of uttermost exertion remained not,
<span id="v620"><sup><small>620</small></sup></span>  That craving after action dwelt in their hearts no more.
They lost the power of ruling and the resolution to be independent,
They lost reputation, prestige, and fortune.
Their paws that were as iron became strengthless;

<span id="p55"><sup><small>[ p. 55 ]</small></sup></span>

Their souls died and their bodies became tombs.
<span id="v625"><sup><small>625</small></sup></span>  Bodily strength diminished while spiritual fear increased:
Spiritual fear robbed them of courage.
Lack of courage produced a hundred diseases—
Poverty, pusillanimity, lowmindedness.
The wakeful tiger was lulled to slumber by the sheep's charm:
<span id="v630"><sup><small>630</small></sup></span>  He called his decline Moral Culture.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">V. Strengthened by Love it Gains Dominion Over the Forces of the Universe</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/7">
          <span class="pr-2">VII. We Must be on Guard Against Platonism</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^53]: 51:1 These expressions are borrowed from the Koran.

[^54]: 53:1 Quoted from the Masnaví.