---
title: "VII. We Must be on Guard Against Platonism"
description: "The Secrets of the Self"
published: true
date: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-22T18:54:30Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/6">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">VI. Negation of the Self</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/8">
          <span class="pr-2">VIII. The True Nature of Poetry and the Reform of Islamic Literature</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p56">[<sup><small>p. 56</small></sup>]</span>

_To the effect that Plato, whose thought has deeply influenced the mysticism and literature of Islam, followed the sheep's doctrine, and that we must be on our guard against his theories_. [^55]

Plato, the prime ascetic and sage,
Was one of that ancient flock of sheep.

<span id="p57">[<sup><small>p. 57</small></sup>]</span>

His Pegasus went astray in the darkness of philosophy
And galloped over the mountains of Being.
<span id="v635"><sup><small>635</small></sup></span>  He was so fascinated by the Ideal
That he made head, eye, and ear of no account.
“To die,” said he, “is the secret of Life:
The candle is glorified by being put out.”
He dominates our thinking,
<span id="v640"><sup><small>640</small></sup></span>  His cup sends us to sleep and takes the world away from us.
He is a sheep in man's clothing,
The soul of the Sufi bows to his authority.
He soared with his intellect to the highest heaven,
He called the world of phenomena a myth.
<span id="v645"><sup><small>645</small></sup></span>  ’Twas his work to dissolve the structure of Life

<span id="p58">[<sup><small>p. 58</small></sup>]</span>

And cut the bough of Life's fair tree asunder.
The thought of Plato regarded loss as profit,
His philosophy declared that being is not-being.
His nature drowsed and created a dream,
<span id="v650"><sup><small>650</small></sup></span>  His mind's eye created a mirage.
Since he was without any taste for action,
His soul was enraptured by the non-existent.
He disbelieved in the material universe
And became the creator of invisible Ideas.
<span id="v655"><sup><small>655</small></sup></span>  Sweet is the world of phenomena to the living spirit,
Dear is the world of Ideas to the dead spirit:
Its gazelles have no grace of movement,
Its partridges are denied the pleasure of walking daintily.

<span id="p59">[<sup><small>p. 59</small></sup>]</span>

Its dewdrops are unable to quiver,
<span id="v660"><sup><small>660</small></sup></span>  Its birds have no breath in their breasts,
Its seed does not desire to grow,
Its moths do not know how to flutter.
Our philosopher had no remedy but flight:
He could not endure the noise of this world.
<span id="v665"><sup><small>665</small></sup></span>  He set his heart on the glow of a quenchèd flame
And depicted a world steeped in opium.
He spread his wings towards the sky
And never came down to his nest again.
His phantasy is sunk in the jar of heaven:
<span id="v670"><sup><small>670</small></sup></span>  I know not whether it is the dregs or the bricks. [^56]
The peoples were poisoned by his intoxication:
He slumbered and took no delight in deeds.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/6">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">VI. Negation of the Self</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Secrets_of_the_Self/8">
          <span class="pr-2">VIII. The True Nature of Poetry and the Reform of Islamic Literature</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^55]: 56:1 The direct influence of Platonism on Moslem thought has been comparatively slight. When the Moslems began to study Greek philosophy, they turned to Aristotle. The genuine writings of Aristotle, however, were not accessible to them. They studied translations of books passing under his name, which were the work of Neoplatonists, so that what they believed to be Aristotelian doctrine was in fact the philosophy of Plotinus, Proclus, and the later Neoplatonic school. Indirectly, therefore, Plato has profoundly influenced the intellectual and spiritual development of Islam and may be called, if not the father of Mohammedan mysticism, at any rate its presiding genius.

[^56]: 59:1 _I.e._ it is worthless in either case. The egg-shaped wine jar is supported by bricks in order to keep it in an upright position.