---
title: "XI."
description: "Hebraic Literature"
published: true
date: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
tags: Judaism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/10">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">X.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/12">
          <span class="pr-2">XII.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Go and learn from the tariff of donkey-drivers, ten miles for one zouz, eleven for two zouzim.

_Chaggigah_, fol. 9, col. 2.

<span id="p120">[<sup><small>p. 120</small></sup>]</span>

When Israel went up to Jerusalem to attend the festivals, they had to stand in the Temple court closely crowded together, yet when prostrated there was a wide space between each of them (Rashi says about four ells), so that they could not hear each other's confession, which might have caused them to blush. They had, however, when prostrated, to extend eleven ells behind the Holy of Holies.

_Yoma_, fol. 21, col. I,

In the days of Joel, the son of Pethuel, there was a great dearth, because (as is said in Joel i. 4) “That which the palmerworm hath left hath the locust eaten,” etc. That year the month of Adar (about March) passed away and no rain came. When some rain fell, during the following mouth, the prophet said unto Israel, “Go ye forth and sow.” They replied, “Shall he who has but a measure or two of wheat or barley eat and live or sow it and die?” Still the prophet urged, “Go forth and sow.” Then they obeyed the prophet, and in eleven days the seed had grown and ripened; and it is with reference to that generation that it is said (Ps. cxxvi. 5), “They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.”

_Taanith_, fol. 5, col. 1.

What is a female in her minority? One who is between eleven years and one day, and twelve years and one day. When younger or older than these ages she is to be treated in the usual manner.

_Yevamoth_, fol. 100, col. 2.

Whoever gives a prutah to a poor man has six blessings bestowed upon. him, and he that speaks a kind word to him realizes eleven blessings in himself (see Isa. lviii. 7, 8).

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 9, col. 2.

On the next page of the same tract it is said, “For one prutah given as alms to, a poor man one is made partaker of the beatific vision.” (See also Midrash Tillim on Ps. xvii. 15.)

The prutah was the smallest coin then current. It is estimated to have been equal to about one-twentieth of an English penny. In some quarters of Poland the Jews have small thin bits of brass, with the Hebrew word prutah impressed upon them, for the uses in charity on the part of those among them that cannot afford to give a kreutzer to a poor man. The poor, when they have collected a number of these, change them into larger coin at the almoner's appointed by the congregation. Thus even the poor are enabled to give alms to the poor. (See my “Genesis,” p. 277, No. 31.)

<span id="p121">[<sup><small>p. 121</small></sup>]</span>

Rabbi Yochanan said eleven sorts of spices were mentioned to Moses on Sinai. Rav Hunna asked, 'What Scripture text proves this?“ (Exod. xxx. 34), ”Take unto thee sweet spices“ (the plural implying two), ”stacte, myrrh, and galbanum“ (these three thus making up five), ”sweet spices“ (the repetition doubling the five into ten), ”with pure frankincense" (which makes up eleven).

_Kerithoth_, fol. 6, col. 2.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/10">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">X.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/12">
          <span class="pr-2">XII.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
