---
title: "XIII."
description: "Hebraic Literature"
published: true
date: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
tags: Judaism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/12">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XII.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/20">
          <span class="pr-2">XIV. to XX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

XIII.

There were thirteen horn-shaped collecting-boxes, and thirteen tables, and thirteen devotional bowings in the Temple service. Those who belonged to the houses of Rabbi Gamliel and of Rabbi Chananiah, the president of the priests, bowed fourteen times. This extra act of bowing was directed to the quarter of the wood store, in consequence of a tradition they inherited from their ancestors that the Ark of the Covenant was hidden in that locality. The origin of the tradition was this:—A priest, being once engaged near the wood store, and observing that part of the plaster differed from the rest, went to tell his companions, but died before he had time to relate his discovery. Thus it became known for certain that the Ark was hidden there.

_Shekalim_, chap. 3, hal. i.

<span id="p132">[<sup><small>p. 132</small></sup>]</span>

It is more than probable that the Chananiah, mentioned above, is the person alluded to in the Acts, chap. xxiii. 2, as “the high priest Ananias.” For the tradition about the Ark. see also 2 Macc. ii. 4, 5.

There were thirteen horn-shaped collecting-boxes in the Temple, and upon them were inscribed new shekels, old shekels, turtle-dove offerings, young-pigeon offerings, fire-wood, contributions for Galbanus, gold for the mercy-seat; and six boxes were inscribed for voluntary contributions. New shekels were for the current year, old shekels were for the past one.

_Yoma_, fol. 55, col. 2.

Once on account of long-continued drought Rabbi Eliezer proclaimed thirteen public fasts, but no rain came. At the termination of the last fast, just as the congregation was leaving the synagogue, he cried aloud, “Have you then prepared graves for yourselves?” Upon this all the people burst into bitter cries, and rain came down directly.

_Taanith_, fol. 25, col. 2.

A boy at thirteen years of age is bound to observe the usual fasts in full, _i. e._, throughout the whole day. A girl is bound to do so when only twelve. Rashi gives this as the reason:—A boy is supposed to be weaker than a girl on account of the enervating effect of much study.

_Kethuboth_, fol. 5, col. 1.

A poor man once came to Rava and begged for a meal. “On what dost thou usually dine?” asked Rava. “On stuffed fowl and old wine,” was the reply. “What!” said Rava, “art thou not concerned about being so burdensome to the community?” He replied, “I eat nothing belonging to them, only what the Lord provides;” as we are taught (Ps. cxlv. 15), “The eyes of all wait upon Thee, and Thou givest them their meat in his season.” It is not said in their season, for so we learn that God provides for each individual in his season of need.“ While they were thus talking, in came Rava's sister, who had not been to see him for thirteen years, and she brought him as a present a stuffed fowl and some old wine also. Rava marveled at the coincidence, and turning to his poor visitor said, ”I beg thy pardon, friend; rise, I pray thee, and eat.”

_Ibid._, fol. 67, col. 2.

<span id="p133">[<sup><small>p. 133</small></sup>]</span>

So great is circumcision that thirteen covenants were made concerning it. Tosafoth says that covenant is written thirteen times in the chapter of circumcision.

_Nedarim_, fol. P, col. 2.

Rabbi (the Holy) says sufferings are to be borne with resignation. He himself bore them submissively for thirteen years; for six he suffered from lithiasis, and for seven years from stomatitis (or, as some say, six years from the former and seven from the latter). His groans were heard three miles off.

_Bava Metzia_, fol. 85, col. 1.

The Rabbis have taught thirteen things respecting breakfast (morning-morsel):—It counteracts the effects of heat, cold or draught; it protects from malignant demons; it makes wise the simple by keeping the mind in a healthy condition; it enables a man to come off clear from a judicial inquiry; it qualifies him both to learn and to teach the law; it makes him eagerly listened to, to have a retentive memory, etc.

_Ibid._, fol. 107, col. 2.

The land of Israel is in the future to be divided among thirteen tribes, and not, as at first, among twelve.

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 122, col. 1.

Rabbi Abhu once complimented Rav Saphra before the Minim by singling him out in their hearing as a man distinguished by his learning, and this led them to exempt him from tribute for thirteen years. It so happened that these Minim once posed Saphra about that which is written in Amos iii. 2, “You only have I known of all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.” “Ye say you are God's friends, but when one has a friend does he pour out his wrath upon him?” To this Rav Saphra make no reply. They then put a rope round his neck and tormented him. When he was in this sorry plight, Rabbi Abhu came up and inquired why they tormented him thus. To this they made answer, “Didst thou not tell us that he was a very learned man, and he does not even know how to explain a text of Scripture?” “Yes, I did so say,” replied Rabbi Abhu; “he is an adept in the Talmud only, but not in the Scriptures.” “Thou knowest the Scriptures;” they replied, "and why ought he not to <span id="p134">[<sup><small>p. 134</small></sup>]</span> know them as well?“ ”I have daily intercourse with you,“ said the Rabbi, ”and therefore I am obliged to study the Scriptures, but he, having no intercourse with you, has no need to trouble himself, and does not at all care about them.”

_Avodah Zarah_, fol. 4, col. 1.

In order to understand aright the grounds on which Rabbi Abhu would fain excuse Rav Saphra for not caring at all about the Scriptures, certain passages from both Talmuds should be read, which, in the usual metaphorical style of the Rabbis, set forth the respective merits of Scripture and Tradition. The three times three in Sophrim (chap. 15), in which the Scripture is compared to water, the Mishna to wine, and the Gemara to mulled wine, and that in which the Scripture is likened to salt, the Mishna to pepper, and the Gemara to spice, and so on, are too well known to need more than passing mention; but far less familiar and much more explicit is the exposition of Zech. viii. 10, as given in T. B. Chaggigah, fol. 10, col. 1, where, commenting on the Scripture text, “Neither, was there any peace to him that went out or came in,” Rav expressly says, “He who leaves a matter of Halachah for a matter of Scripture shall never more have peace;” to which Shemuel adds, “Aye, and he also who leaves the Talmud for the Mishna;” Rabbi Yochanan chiming in with “even from Talmud to Talmud;” as if to say, “And he who turns from the Babli to the Yerushalmi, even he shall have no peace.” If we refer to the Mishna (chap. 1, hal. 7) of Berachoth in the last-named Talmud, we read there that Rabbi Tarphon, bent, while on a journey, on reading the Shema according to the school of Shammai, ran the risk of falling into the hands of certain banditti whom he had not noticed near him. “It would have served you right,” remarked one, “because you did not follow the rule of Hillel.” In the Gemara to this passage Rabbi Yochanan says, “The words of the scribes are more highly valued than the words of the law, for, as Rabbi Yuda remarks, ”If Rabbi Tarphon had not read the Shema at all he would only have broken a positive command,“ but since he transgressed the rule of Hillel he was guilty of death, for it is written, ‘He who breaks down a hedge (the Rabbinic hedge to the law, of course), a serpent shall bite him’” (Eccles. x. 8). Then Rabbi Chanina, the son of Rabbi Ana, in the name of Rabbi Tanchum, the son of Rabbi Cheyah, says, “The words of the elders are more important than the words of the prophets.” A prophet and an elder, whom do they resemble? They are like two ambassadors sent by a king to a province. About the one he sends word saying, “If he does not present credentials with my signature and seal, trust him not;” whereas the other is accredited without any such token; for in regard to the prophet it is written (Deut. Xiii. 2), “He giveth thee a sign or token;” while in reference to the elders it is written (Deut. xvii. ii), "According to the decision which they may say unto thee shalt thou do; thou shalt <span id="p135">[<sup><small>p. 135</small></sup>]</span> not depart from the sentence which they may tell thee, to the right or to the left.“ Rashi's comment on this text is worth notice: ”Even when they tell thee that right is left and left is right." In a word, a wise man (_i. e._, a Rabbi) is better than a prophet. (_Bava Bathra_, fol. 12, col. 1.)

Oved, the Galilean, has expounded that there are thirteen _vavs_ (_i. e._, the letter _vav_ occurs thirteen times) in connection with wine. _Vav_ in Syriac means woe.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 70, col. 1.

The Rabbis have a curious Haggada respecting the origin of the culture of the vine. Once while Noah was hard at work breaking up the fallow ground for a vineyard, Satan drew near and inquired what he was doing. On ascertaining that the patriarch was about to cultivate the grape, which he valued both for its fruit and its juice, he at once volunteered to assist him at his task, and began to manure the soil with the blood of a lamb, a lion, a pig, and a monkey. “Now,” said he, when his work. was done, “of those who taste the juice of the grape, some will become meek and gentle as the lamb, some bold and fearless as the lion, some foul and beastly as the pig, and others frolicsome and lively as the monkey.” This quaint story may be found more fully detailed in the Midrash Tanchuma (see Noah) and the Yalkut on Genesis. The Mohammedan legend is somewhat similar. It relates how Satan on the like occasion used the blood of a peacock, of an ape, of a lion, and of a pig, and it deduces from the abuse of the vine the curse that fell on the children of Ham, and ascribes the color of the purple grape to the dark hue which thenceforth tinctured all the fruit of their land as well as their own complexions.

At thirteen years of age, a boy becomes bound to observe the (613) precepts of the law.

_Avoth_, chap. 5.

Rabbi Ishmael says the law is to be expounded according to thirteen logical rules.

_Chullin_, fol. 63, col. 1.

The thirteen rules of Rabbi Ishmael above referred to are not to be found together in any part of the Talmud, but they are collected for repetition in the Liturgy, and are as follows:—

1\. inference is valid from minor to major.

2\. From similar phraseology.

3\. From the gist or main point of one text to that of other passages.

4\. Of general and particular.

5\. Of particular and general.

6\. From a general, or a particular and a general, the ruling both of the former and the latter is to be according to the middle term, _i. e._, the one which is particularized. <span id="p136">[<sup><small>p. 136</small></sup>]</span> 7\. From a general text that requires a particular instance, and _vice versâ_.

8\. When a particular rule is laid down for something which has already been included in a general law, the rule is to apply to all.

9\. When a general rule has an exception, the exception mitigates and does not aggravate the rule.

10\. When a general rule has an exception not according therewith, the exception both mitigates and aggravates.

11\. When an exception to a general rule is made to substantiate extraneous matter, that matter cannot be classed under the said general rule, unless the Scripture expressly says so.

12\. The ruling is to be according to the context, or to the general drift of the argument.

13\. When two texts are contradictory, a third is to be sought that reconciles them.

Rabbi Akiva was forty years of age when he began to study, and after thirteen years of study he began publicly to teach.

_Avoth d'Rab. Nathan_.

Thirteen treasurers and seven directors were appointed to serve in the Temple. (More there might be, never less.)

_Tamid_, fol. 27, col. 1.

Thirteen points of law regulate the decisions that require to be made relative to the carcass of a clean bird.

_Taharoth_, chap. 1, mish. 1.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/12">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XII.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/20">
          <span class="pr-2">XIV. to XX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
