---
title: "III."
description: "Hebraic Literature"
published: true
date: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
tags: Judaism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">II.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/4">
          <span class="pr-2">IV.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

The night is divided into three watches, and at each watch the Holy One—blessed be He!—sits and roars like a lion; as it is written (Jer. xxv. 30), “The Lord will roar from on high, . . . roaring, He will roar over his habitation.” The marks by which this division of the night is recognized are these:—In the first watch the ass brays; in the second the dog barks; and in the third the babe is at the breast and the wife converses with her husband.

_Berachoth_, fol. 3, col. 1.

The Rabbis have taught that there are three reasons why a person should not enter a ruin:—1. Because he may be suspected of evil intent; 2. Because the walls might tumble upon him.; 3. And because of evil spirits that frequent such places.

_Ibid._, fol. 3, col. 1.

He who three times a day repeats David's psalm of praise (Ps. cxlv.) may be sure of an inheritance in the world to come.

_Ibid._, fol. 4, col. 2.

Three precious gifts were given to Israel, but none of them without a special affliction: these three gifts were the law, the land of Israel, and the world to come.

_Ibid._, fol. 5, col. 1.

These are also from the Talmud anent Israel and the Israelites.

All Israelites are princes.

_Shabbath_, fol. 57, col. 1.

All Israelites are holy.

_Ibid._, fol. 86, col. 1.

Happy are ye, O Israel! for every one of you, from the least to the greatest, is a great philosopher. (_Eiruvin_, fol. 53, col. 1.) The Machzor for Pentecost says, Israelites are as “full of meritorious works as a pomegranate is full of pips.”

See also _Chaggigah_, fol. 27, col. 1.

As it is impossible for the world to be without air, so also is it impossible for the world to be without Israel.

_Taanith_, fol. 3, col. 2.

<span id="p31"><sup><small>[ p. 31 ]</small></sup></span>

If the ox of an Israelite bruise the ox of a Gentile, the Israelite is exempt from paying damages; but should the ox of a Gentile bruise the ox of an Israelite, the Gentile is bound to recompense him in full.

_Bava Kama_, fol. 38, col. 1.

When an Israelite and a Gentile have a lawsuit before thee, if thou canst, acquit the former according to the laws of Israel, and tell the latter such is our law; if thou canst get him off in accordance with Gentile law, do so, and say to the plaintiff such is your law; but if he cannot be acquitted according to either law, then bring forward adroit pretexts and secure his acquittal. These are the words of the Rabbi Ishmael. Rabbi Akiva says, “No false pretext should be brought forward, because, if found out, the name of God would be blasphemed; but if there be no fear of that, then it may be adduced.”

_Ibid._, fol. 113, col. 1.

If one find lost property in a locality where the majority are Israelites, he is bound to proclaim it; but he is not bound to do so if the majority be Gentiles.

_Bava Metzia_, fol. 24, col. 1.

(Prov. xiv. 34), “Almsgiving exalteth a nation, but benevolence is a sin to nations.” “Almsgiving exalteth a nation,” that is to say, the nation of Israel; as it is written (2 Sam. vii. 23), “And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel?” but “benevolence” is a sin to nations, that is to say, for the Gentiles to exercise charity and benevolence is sin.

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 10, col. 2.

If a Gentile smite an Israelite, he is guilty of death; as it is written (Exod. ii. 12), “And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw there was no man, he slew the Egyptian.”

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 58, col. 2.

All Israelites have a portion in the world to come; as it is written (Isa. lx. 21), “And thy people are all righteous: they shall inherit the land.”

_Ibid._, fol. 90, col. 1.

“And they shall fall one on account of another” (Lev. xxvi. 37),—one on account of the sins of another. This teaches us that all Israel are surety for one another.

_Shevuoth_, fol. 39, col. 1.

<span id="p32"><sup><small>[ p. 32 ]</small></sup></span>

If one find a foundling in a locality where the majority are Gentiles, then the child is (to be reckoned) a Gentile; if the majority be Israelites, it is to be considered as an Israelite; and so also it is to be, providing the numbers are equal.

_Machsheerin_, chap. 2, Mish. 7.

“One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh, but the earth abideth forever” (Eccl. i. 4). One empire cometh and another passeth away, but Israel abideth forever.

_Perek Hashalom_.

The world was created only for Israel: none are called the children of God but Israel; none are beloved before God but Israel.

_Gerim_, chap. 1.

The Jew that has no wife abideth without joy, without a blessing, and without any good. Without joy, as it is written (Deut. xiv. 26), “And thou shalt reject, thou and thy household;” without blessing, as it is written (Ezek. xliv. 30), 'That He may cause a blessing to rest on thy household;“ without any good, for it is written (Gen. ii. 8), ”It is not good that man should be alone.”

_Yevamoth_, fol. 62, col. 2.

The Jew that has no wife is not a man; for it is written (Gen. V. 2), “Male and female created He them and called their name man.” To which Rabbi Eleazar adds, “So every one who has no landed property is no man; for it is written (Ps. cxv. 16), 'The heaven, even the heavens, are the Lord's, but the earth (the land, that is), hath He given to the children of man.'”

_Yevamoth_, fol. 63, col. 1.

Three things did Moses ask of God:—1. He asked that the Shechinah might rest upon Israel 2. That the Shechinah might rest upon none but Israel and 3. That God's ways might be made known unto him; and all these requests were granted.

_Berachoth_, fol. 7, col. 1.

What was the Shechinah? Was it the presence of a Divine person or only of a Divine power? The following quotations will show what is the teaching of the Talmud on the matter, and will be read with interest by the theologian, whether Jew or Christian.

Where do we learn that when ten persons pray together the Shechinah is with them? In Ps. lxxxii. 1, where it is written, “God standeth in the congregation of the mighty.” And where do we <span id="p33"><sup><small>[ p. 33 ]</small></sup></span> learn that when two sit together and study the law the Shechinah is with them? In Mal. iii. 16, where it is written, “Then they that feared the Lord spake often one to another, and the Lord. hearkened and heard it.” (_Berachoth_, fol. 6, col. 1.)

Where do we learn that the Shechinah does strengthen the sick? In Ps. xli. 3, where it is written, “The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing.” (_Shabbath_, fol. 12, col. 2.)

He who goes from the Synagogue to the lecture-room, and from the lecture-room back to the Synagogue, will become worthy to receive the presence of the Shechinah; as it is written (Ps. lxxxiv. 1), “They go from strength to strength; every one of them in Zion appeareth before God.” (_Moed Katan_, fol. 29, col. 1.)

Rabbi Yossi says, “The Shechinah never came down here below, nor did Moses and Elijah ever ascend on high, because it is written (Ps. cxv. 16), 'The heaven, even the heavens, are the Lord's, but the earth hath he given to the children of men.'” (_Succah_, fol. 5, col. 1.)

Esther “stood in the inner court of the King's house” (Esth. v. 1). Rabbi Levi says, “When she reached the house of the images the Shechinah departed from her. Then she exclaimed, ”My God! my God! why hast thou forsaken me?" (_Meggillah_, fol. 15, col. 2.)

“But ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God are alive every one of you this day” (Deut. iv. 4). Is it possible to cleave to the Shechinah? Is it not written (_ibid._, verse 24), “For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire?” The reply is:—He that bestows his daughter in marriage on a disciple of the wise (that is, a Rabbi), or does business on behalf of the disciples of the wise, or maintains them from his property, Scripture accounts it as if he did cleave to the Shechinah. (_Kethuboth_, fol. iii, col. 25.)

He who is angry has no regard even for the Shechinah; as it is written (Ps. x. 4), “The wicked, when his anger rises, does not inquire after God; God is not in all his thoughts.” (_Nedarim_, fol. 22, col. 2.)

He who visits the sick should not sit upon the bed, nor even upon a stool or a chair beside it, but he should wrap his mantle round him and sit upon the floor, because of the Shechinah which rests at the head of the bed of the invalid; as it is written (Ps. xli. 3), “The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing.” (_Ibid._, fol. 40, col. 1.)

When Israel went up out of the Red Sea, both the babe on its mother's lap and the suckling at the breast saw the Shechinah, and said, “This is my God, and I will prepare Him a habitation;” as it is written (Ps. Viii. 2), “Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou hast ordained strength.” (Soteh, fol. 30, col. 2.)

Where do we read that the Shechinah is present everywhere? In Zech. ii. 3, where it is written, “And behold the angel that talked with me went forth, and another angel went out to meet him.” It is not said went out after him, but “went out to meet him.” From this <span id="p34"><sup><small>[ p. 34 ]</small></sup></span> we know that the Shechinah is present everywhere. (_Rava Bathra_, fol. 25, col. 1.)

Rabbi Akiva says, “For three things I admire the Medes:—1. When they carve meat, they do it on the table; 2. When they kiss, they only do so upon the hand; 3. And when they consult, they do so only in the field.”

_Berachoth_, fol. 8, col. 2.

The stone which Og, king of Bashan, meant to throw upon Israel is the subject of a tradition delivered on Sinai. “The camp of Israel I see,” he said, “extends three miles; I shall therefore go and root up a mountain three miles in extent and throw it upon them.” So off he went, and finding such a mountain, raised it on his head, but the Holy One—blessed be He!—sent an army of ants against him, which so bored the mountain over his head that it slipped down upon his shoulders, from which he could not lift it, because his teeth, protruding, had riveted it upon him. This explains that which is written (Ps. iii. 7), “Thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly;” where read not “Thou hast broken,” but “Thou hast ramified,” that is, “Thou hast caused to branch out.” Moses being ten ells in height, seized an axe ten ells long, and springing up ten ells, struck a blow on Og's ankle and killed him.

_Ibid._, fol. 54, col. 2.

This same story is given with more than Talmudic exaggeration in the Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel, while the author of the Book of Jasher (chap. lxv., verses 23, 24) makes the camp and the mountain forty miles in extent. The giant here figures in antediluvian tradition. He is said to have been saved at the Flood by laying hold of the ark, and being fed day by day through a hole in the side of the ark by Noah himself. A tradition which says the soles of his feet were forty miles long at once explains all the extraordinary feats ascribed to him.

Rav Yehudah used to say, “Three things shorten a man's days and years:—1. Neglecting to read the law when it is given to him for that purpose; seeing it is written (Deut. xxx. 20), ‘For He (who gave it) is thy life and the length of thy days.’ 2. Omitting to repeat the customary benediction over a cup of blessing; for it is written (Gen. xii. 3), ‘And I will bless them that bless thee.’ <span id="p35"><sup><small>[ p. 35 ]</small></sup></span> 3. And the assumption of a Rabbinical air; for Rabbi Chama bar Chanena says, ‘Joseph died before any of his brethren, because he domineered over them.’”

_Berachoth_, fol. 55, col. 1.

The first of these refers to the reading of the law in public worship, the second to a practice after meals when more than two adult Jews were present, and the third to the dictatorial air often assumed by the Rabbis.

Three things proceed by pre-eminence from God Himself:—Famine, plenty, and a wise ruler. Famine (2 Kings Viii. 2): “The Lord hath called for a famine;” plenty (Ezek. xxxvi. 29): “I will call for corn and increase it;” a wise ruler; for it is written (Exod. xxxi. 2), “I have called by name Bezaleel.” Rabbi Yitzchak says, “A ruler is not to he appointed unless the community be first consulted. God first consulted Moses, then Moses consulted the nation concerning the appointment of Bezaleel.”

_Ibid._, fol., 55, col. 1.

Three dreams come to pass:—That which is dreamed in the morning; that which is also dreamed by one's neighbor; and a dream which is interpreted within a dream; to which some add, one that is dreamed by the same person twice; as it is written (Gen. xli. 32), “And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice.”

_Ibid._, fol. 55, col. 2.

Three things tranquilize the mind of man:—Melody, scenery, and sweet odor. Three things develop the mind of man:—A fine house, a handsome wife, and elegant furniture.

_Ibid._, fol. 57, col. 2.

The Rabbis have taught that there are three sorts of dropsy:—Thick, resulting from sin; bloated, in consequence of insufficient food; and thin, due to sorcery.

_Shabbath_, fol. 33, col. 1.

These three grow stronger as they grow older:—The fish, the serpent, and the pig.

_Ibid._, fol. 77, col. 2.

It were better to cut the hands off than to touch the eye, or the nose, or the mouth, or the ear, etc., with them without having first washed them. Unwashed hands may cause blindness, deafness, foulness of breath, or a polypus.

<span id="p36"><sup><small>[ p. 36 ]</small></sup></span>

It is taught that Rabbi Nathan has said, “The evil spirit Bath Chorin, which rests upon the hands at night, is very strict; he will not depart till water is poured upon the hands three times over.”

_Ibid._, fol. 109, col. 1.

The great importance of this ceremonial washing of the hands will appear from the following anecdote, which we quote _verbatim_ from another part of the Talmud:—“It happened once, as the Rabbis teach, that Rabbi Akiva was immured in a prison, and Yehoshua Hagarsi was his attendant. One day the gaoler said to the latter as he entered, ‘What a lot of water thou hast brought to-day! Dost thou need it to sap the walls of the prison?’ So saying, he seized the vessel and poured out half of the water. When Yehoshua brought in what was left of the water to Rabbi Akiva, the latter, who was weary of waiting, for he was faint and thirsty, reproachfully said to him, ‘Yehoshua, dost thou forget that I am old, and my very life depends upon thee?’ When the servant related what had happened, the Rabbi asked for the water to wash his hands, ‘Why, master,’ said Yehoshua, 'there's not enough for thee to drink, much less to cleanse thy hands with.' To which the Rabbi replied, 'What am I to do? They who neglect to wash their hands are judged worthy of death; ‘tis better that I should die by my own act from thirst than act against the rules of my associates.’ And accordingly it is related that he abstained from tasting anything till they brought him water to wash his hands.” (_Eiruvin_, fol. 21, col. 2. See also _Maimonides, Hilc. Berach._, vi. 19.)

From the context of the passage just quoted we cull the following, which proves that the Talmud itself bases the precept concerning the washing of hands on oral tradition and not on the written law:—“Rav Yehudah ascribes this saying to Shemuel, that when Solomon gave to the traditional rules that regulated the washing of hands and other ceremonial rites the form and sanction of law, a Bath Kol came forth and said (Prov. xxiii. 15), ‘My Son, if thy heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine;’ and again it said (Prov. xxvii, 11), ‘My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that reproacheth me.’” (See Prov. xxx. 5, 6.)

There is a great deal in the Talmud about washing the hands, in addition to what is said in the treatise Yadaim, which is entirely devoted to the subject. But this topic is subordinate to another, namely, the alleged inferiority of the precepts of the Bible to the prescriptions of the Rabbis, of which the punctilious rules regulative of hand washing form only a small fraction. This is illustrated by an anecdote from the Talmudic leaflet entitled Callah, respecting Rabbi Akiva, whose fame extends from one end of the world to the other. (See _Yevamoth_, fol. 16, col. 2).

Once upon a time, as the Elders were sitting together, two lads passed by them, one with his head covered and the other bareheaded. Of the latter boy as he passed Rabbi Elazar said, “He is a Mamzer,” <span id="p37"><sup><small>[ p. 37 ]</small></sup></span> and Rabbi Yehoshua, “He is a Ben Haniddah,” but Rabbi Akiva contended, “He is both a Mamzer and a Ben Haniddah.” Upon which the Elders said to Rabbi Akiva, “How darest thou be so bold as dispute the assertion of thy masters?” “Because I can substantiate what I say,” was his answer. He then went to the mother of the lad, and found her selling pease in the market place. “Daughter,” said he to her, “if thou wilt answer all that I ask of thee, I will ensure thee a portion in the life to come.” She replied, “Let me have thy oath and I will do so.” Then taking the oath with his lips but nullifying it in his heart, he asked her, “What sort of a son is thy lad?” She replied, “When I entered my bridal chamber I was a Niddah, and consequently my husband kept away from me.” Thus it was found out that the boy was a Mamzer and a Ben Haniddah; upon which the sages exclaimed, “Great is Rabbi Akiva, for he has overcome his masters;” and as they congratulated him they said, “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who hath revealed His secret unto Akiva the son of Joseph.” Thus did the Rabbi forswear himself, and thus did his companions compliment him on the success of his perjury; yet the Bible says, “Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain” (Exod. xx. 7), and “Keep thou far from a falsehood” (Exod. xxiii. 7).

Here is a companion picture from Yoma, fol. 84, col. 1.—“Rabbi Yochanan was suffering from scurvy, and he applied to a Gentile woman, who prepared a remedy for the fifth and then the sixth day of the week. ‘But what shall I do to-morrow?’ said he; ‘I must not walk so far on the Sabbath.’ ‘Thou wilt not require any more,’ she answered. ‘But suppose I do,’ he replied. ‘Take an oath,’ she answered, ‘that thou wilt not reveal it, and I will tell thee how to compound the remedy.’ This he did in the following words: ‘By the God of Israel, I swear I will not divulge it.’ Nevertheless, when he learned the secret, he went and revealed it. ‘But was not that profaning the name of God?’ asks one. ‘No,’ pleads another Rabbi, ‘for, as he told her afterward, that what he meant was that he would not tell it to the God of Israel.’ The remedy was yeast, water, oil, and salt.”

The anecdote that follows is from Sanhedrin, fol. 97, col. 1:—"In reference to the remark of Ravina, who said, ‘I used to think that there was no truth in the world,’ one of the Rabbis, Toviah (or Tavyoomah, as some say), would protest and say, ‘If all the riches of the world were offered me, I would not tell a falsehood.’ And he used to clench his protestation with the following apologue: 'I once went to a place called Kushta, where the people never swerve from the truth, and where (as a reward for their integrity) they do not die until old age; and there I married and settled down, and had two sons born unto me. One day as my wife was sitting and combing her hair, a woman who dwelt close by came to the door and asked to see her. Thinking that it was a breach of etiquette (that any one should see her at her toilet), I said she was not in. Soon after this my two children died, and the people came to inquire into the cause <span id="p33"><sup><small>[ p. 33 ]</small></sup></span> of their premature decease. When I told them of my evasive reply to the woman, they asked me to leave the town, lest by my misconduct I might involve the whole community in a like calamity, and death might be enticed to their place.”

Food remains for three days in the stomach of the dog, because God knew that his food would be scanty.

_Shabbath_, fol. 155, col. 1.

He who is born on the third day of the week will be rich and amorous.

_Ibid._, fol. 156, col. 1.

Rabbi Abba, in the name of Shemuel, says, 'The schools of Shammai and Hillel were at variance three years, the one party contending and saying, ‘The Halacha is according to us;’ and the other, ‘The Halacha is according to us.’ Then came a voice from the Lord and said, ‘Both these and those are the words of the living God, but yet thee Halacha is according to the school of Hillel.’ What was the merit of the school of Hillel that the Halacha should be pronounced to be according to it? Its disciples were gentle and forbearing, for while they, stood by their own decisions, they also stated those maintained by the school of Shammai, and often even mentioned the tenets of the school of Shammai first and their own afterward. This teaches us that him who humbles himself, God will exalt; and him who exalts himself, God will abase. Whoso pursueth greatness, greatness will flee from him; and whoso, fleeth from greatness, greatness will pursue him.”

_Eiruvin_, fol. 13, col. 2.

There are three entrances to hell:—One in the desert, one in the sea, and one in Jerusalem.

_Ibid._, fol. 19, col. 1.

These three will never see hell:—He who is purified by poverty; he who is purged by a painful flux; and he who is harassed by importunate creditors; and some say, he also who is plagued with a termagant wife.

_Eiruvin_, fol. 41, col. 2.

Three effects are ascribed to Babylonian broth (which was made of moldy bread, sour milk, and salt):—It retards the action of the heart, it affects the eyesight, and emaciates the body.

_P'sachim_, fol. 42, col. 1.

<span id="p39"><sup><small>[ p. 39 ]</small></sup></span>

These three are not permitted to come between two men, nor is a man allowed to pass between any two of these three:—A dog, a palm tree, or a woman; to which some add the pig, and others the serpent as well.

_Ibid._, fol. 111, col. 1.

One part of this regulation is rather hard and should surely be abolished; that, viz, which ordains a woman shall not come between two men or a man pass between two women. The compiler of this Miscellany was once witness to a case which illustrates its inconvenience: it occurred at Tiberias. A pious young Jew who had to traverse a narrow road to pass from the lake to the town was kept standing for a very considerable time under a broiling sun, simply because two young women, to tease him, guarded the entrance, and dared him to pass between them. Of course he dared not accept the challenge, otherwise he would have incurred the penalty of death, according to the judgment of the Talmud; for "Whosoever transgresses any of the words of the Scribes is guilty of death? (_Eiruvin_, fol. 21, col. 2.)

These three will inherit the world to come:—He who dwells in the land of Israel; he who brings up his sons to the study of the law; and he who repeats the ritual blessing over the appointed cup of wine at the close of the Sabbath.

_P'sachim_, fol. 113, col. 1.

There are three whom the Holy One—blessed be He!—Himself proclaims virtuous:—The unmarried man who lives in a city and does not sin; the poor man who restores a lost thing which he has found to its owner; and the rich man who pays the tithes of his increase unostentatiously. Rav Saphra was a bachelor, and he dwelt in a large city. A disciple of the wise once descanted upon the merits of a celibate life in the presence of Rava and this Rav Saphra, and the face of the latter beamed with delight. Remarking which, Rava said to him, “This does not refer to such a bachelor as thou art, but to such as Rabbi Chanena and Rabbi Oshaia.” They were single men, who followed the trade of shoemakers, and dwelt in a street mostly occupied by _meretrices_, for whom they made shoes; but when they fitted these on, they never raised their eyes to look at their faces. For this the women conceived such a respect for them, that when they swore, they swore by the life of the holy Rabbis of the land of Israel.

_P'sachim_, fol. 113, cols. 1, 2.

<span id="p40"><sup><small>[ p. 40 ]</small></sup></span>

There are three whom the Holy One—blessed be He—abhorreth: He who says one thing but thinks another; he who might bear witness in favor of his neighbor but refrains from doing so; and he who, having seen his neighbor act disgracefully, goes and appears singly as a witness against him (thus only condemning, but not convicting, him, as the law requires two witnesses). As, for example, when Toviah transgressed and Zigud appeared against him singly before Rav Pappa, and Rav Pappa ordered this wit ness to receive forty stripes save one in return. “What!” said he, “Toviah has sinned, and should Zigud be flogged?” “Yes,” replied the Rabbi, “for by testifying singly against him thou bringest him only into bad repute.” (See Deut. xlx. 15.)

_P'sachim_, fol. 113, col. 2.

“Toviah has sinned and Zigud is flogged,” has long been a proverb among Jews. There are three whose life is no life:—The sympathetic, the irascible, and the melancholy.

_P'sachim_, fol. 113, col. 2.

There are three which despise their fellows:—Dogs, cocks, and sorcerers. Some say strange women also, and some the disciples of the Babylonian Rabbis.

_Ibid._

These three love their fellows:—Proselytes, slaves, and ravens.

_Ibid._

These three are apt to strut:—Israel among the nations, the dog among animals, the cock among birds. Some say also the goat among small cattle, and some the caper shrub among trees.

_Ibid._, fol. 25, col. 2.

There are three whose life is no life:—He who lives at another's table; he whose wife domineers over him; and he who suffers bodily affliction. Some say also he who has only a single shirt in his wardrobe.

_Ibid._, fol. 32, col. 2.

Three things are said respecting the finger-nails:—He who trims his nails and buries the parings is a pious man; he who burns these is a righteous man; but he who throws them away is a wicked man, for mischance might follow, should a female step over them.

_Moed Katan_, fol. 18, col. 1.

The orthodox Jews in Poland are to this day careful to bury away or burn their nail parings.

<span id="p41"><sup><small>[ p. 41 ]</small></sup></span>

Three classes appear on the day of judgment:—The perfectly righteous, who are at once written and sealed for eternal life; the thoroughly bad, who are at once written and sealed for hell; as it is written (Dan. xii. 2), “And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt;” and those in the intermediate state, who go down into hell, where they cry and howl for a time, whence they ascend again; as it is written (Zech. xiii. 9), “And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried; they shall call on my name, and I will hear them.” It is of them Hannah said (1 Sam. ii. 6), “The Lord killeth and maketh alive; He bringeth down to hell and bringeth up.”

_Rosh Hashanah_, fol. 16, col. 2.

Our Rabbis have taught that there are three voices which can be heard from one end of the world to the other:—The sound emitted from the sphere of the sun; the hum and din of the city of Rome; and the voice of anguish uttered by the soul as it quits the body; but our Rabbis prayed that the soul might be spared this torture, and therefore the voice of its terrors has not since been heard.

_Yoma_, fol. 20, col. 2.

In three particulars is benevolence superior to almsgiving:—Almsgiving is only the bestowment of money, but benevolence can be exercised by personal service as well. Alms can be given only to the poor, but benevolence can be shown no less to the rich. Alms are confined to the living, but benevolence may extend to both the dead and the living.

_Succah_, fol. 49, col. 2.

Three marks characterize the nation of Israel:—They are compassionate, they are modest, and they are benevolent. Compassionate, as it is written (Deut. xiii. 18), “And show thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee.” Modest, as it is written (Exod. XX. 20), “That his fear may be before your faces.” Benevolent, as it is written (Gen. xviii. 19), “For I know him,” etc.

_Yevamoth_, fol. 79, col. 1.

<span id="p42"><sup><small>[ p. 42 ]</small></sup></span>

Dates are good after meals in the morning and in the evening, but hurtful in the afternoon; on the other hand, at noon they are most excellent, and an antidote to these three maladies:—Evil thought, constipation, and hemorrhoids.

_Kethuboth_, fol. 10, col. 2.

Beware of these three things:—Do not sit too much, for it brings on hemorrhoids; do not stand too much, for it is bad for the heart; do not walk too much, for it is hurtful to the eyes. But sit a third, stand a third, and walk a third.

_Ibid._, fol. 111, col. 1.

He who holds his household in terror tempts to the commission of three sins:—Fornication, murder, and Sabbath breaking.

_Gittin_, fol. 6, col. 2.

Three things weaken the strength of man:—Fear, travel, and sin. Fear, as it is written (Ps. xxxviii. 10), “My heart palpitates, my strength faileth me.” Travel, as it is written (Ps. cii. 23), “He hath weakened my strength in the way.” . . . Sin, as it is written (Ps. xxxi. 10), “My strength faileth me, because of my iniquity.”

_Ibid._, fol. 70, col. 2.

Abraham was three years old when he first learned to know his Creator; as it is said (Gen. xxvi. 5), “Because Abraham obeyed my voice.”

_Nedarim_, fol. 32, col. 1.

The conclusion arrived at here is founded on interpreting the Hebrew letters of the word rendered “because,) numerically, in which the value of the letters gives a total of one hundred and seventy-two; so that the sense of the text is, ”Abraham obeyed my voice" one hundred and seventy-two years. Now Abraham died when he was a hundred and seventy-five, therefore he must have been only three when he began to serve the Lord.

As Abraham plays so important a part both in the history and the imagination of the Jewish race, we may quote here a score or so of the Talmudic traditions regarding him. The traditions, as is like, contributed quite as much, if not more, to give character to his descendants as his actual personality and that spirit of faith which was the central fact in his history. Races and nations often draw More inspiration from what they fancy about their ancestry and early history than from what they know; their fables therefore are often more illuminative than the facts.

Abraham was Ethan the Ezrahite, who is mentioned in Ps. lxxxvii. 1.

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 15, col. 1.

<span id="p43"><sup><small>[ p. 43 ]</small></sup></span>

Abraham's mother was Amathlai, the daughter of Karnebo.

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 91, col. 1.

Abraham was the head of a seminary for youth, and kept both laws, the written and the oral.

_Yoma_, fol. 28, col. 2.

Abraham observed the whole ceremonial law, even before it was given on Sinai.

_Kiddushin_, fol. 82, col. 1.

From the day Abraham was compelled to leave the idolatrous worship and country of his fathers, it is reasonable to suppose that his tent would become a rendezvous for his neighbors who shrunk like himself from the abominations around them. There, from his character, by which he recommended himself as the friend of God, he might very naturally be looked upon as a religious teacher, and men might gather together to learn from his lips or profit by his example. Hence, making clue allowance for Eastern hyperbole, the statement of the Book of Jasher (chap. xxvi. verse 36) is not undeserving of credit, where it is said that “Abraham brought all the children of the land to the service of God, and he taught them the ways of the Lord.” The same remark applies to what is said in Targ. Yerushalmi (Gen. xxi.), that Abraham' guests went not away until “he had made them proselytes, and had taught them the way everlasting.” His son Isaac, says the Targ. of Ben Uzziel, went to school at the “Beth Medrasha de Shem Rabba.”

Though Abraham kept all the commandments, he was not perfect till he was circumcised.

_Nedarim_, fol. 31, col. 2.

In whatever sense this may have been written, and whatever the interpretation that may be put upon it, there is one sense in which it is absolutely and eternally true, and that is, that, in order to be perfect, a man's life must be as pronounced on the negative side as the positive, in its denials as in its affirmations, and that it is futile to attempt to obey God unless one at the same time renounce all co-partnery with the devil. Circumcision is the symbol of this renunciation, and it is only as such it has any radical spiritual significance. Till he was circumcised, it is said, God did not speak to Abraham in Hebrew. Not till then is sacredness of speech, any more than sacredness of life, possible. Doubtless among the Jews circumcision was the symbol of their separation from the ethnic religions; and hence the jealousy with which their prophets looked upon any compromise with idolatry. Hatred of that, utter and intense, was the one essential negative pole of genuine Judaism, and circumcision was its sign and seal.

Abraham was the first of the proselytes.

_Succah_, fol. 49, col. 2.

<span id="p44"><sup><small>[ p. 44 ]</small></sup></span>

Abraham it was that ordained the form of prayer for morning worship, which is extant to this very day.

_Berachoth_, fol. 26, col. 2.

As he himself was pious, so were his very camels, for they would not enter into a place where there were idols; as it is written (Gen. xxiv. 30, “I have prepared,” _i. e._, removed the idols from, “the house and room for the camels.”

_Avoth d'Rabbi Nathan_, chap. 8.

Abraham had a daughter, and her name was Bakol.

_Ibid._, fol. 16, col. 2.

Abraham was free from evil passion.

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 17, col. 1.

He was also free from the Angel of Death.

_Ibid._, fol. 17, col. 1.

He delivered to the children he had by Keturah a secret name, with which they learned to practice witchcraft and do the works of the devil.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 91, col. 1.

Though great, he personally waited on his guests, who had the appearance of Arabs and not of angels.

_Kiddushin_, fol. 32, col. 2.

Rabbi Yehudah says Abraham planted an ornamental garden with all kinds of choice fruits in it, and Rabbi Nehemiah says he erected an inn for travelers in order to make known the name of God to all who sojourned in it.

_Soteh_, fol. 10, col. 1.

Both the Targum of Ben Uzziel and the Yerushalmi say that Abraham planted a paradise at Beersheba for the entertainment and delectation of his guests; and in Jasher (chap. xxvii. verse 37) it is said that “Abraham formed a grove and planted a vineyard there, and had always ready in his tent meat and drink for those that passed through the land, so that they might satisfy themselves in his house.”

He ranked as one of the seven shepherds of Israel (Micah v. 5). In this group David was the central figure, with Adam, Seth, and Methusaleh on his right hand, and Abraham, Jacob, and Moses on his left.

_Succah_, fol. 52, col. 2.

The coin of Jerusalem had the impress of David and Solomon on the one side, and the holy city of Jerusalem on the other. But the impress on the coin of our father

<span id="p45"><sup><small>[ p. 45 ]</small></sup></span>

Abraham was an old man and an old woman on one side, and a young man and a damsel on the other.

_Bava Kama_, fol. 37, col. 2.

This, it is to be presumed, must be taken in some symbolical sense, for coins cannot be traced back to a date so early as this; and when Abraham purchased the cave to bury Sarah in from the sons of Heth, we read that he weighed to Ephron the silver.

Abraham pleaded with God on the behalf of Israel and said, “While there is a Temple they will get their sins atoned for, but when there shall be no Temple, what will become of them?” God, in answer to his prayer, assured him that He had prepared a prayer for them, by which, as often as they read it, He would be propitiated and would pardon all their sins.

_Meggillah_, fol. 31, col. 2.

He was punished by his posterity being compelled to serve the Egyptians two hundred and ten years, because he had pressed the Rabbis under his tuition into military service in the expedition he had undertaken to recover Lot from those who had carried him off captive; for it is written (Gen. xiv. 14), “He armed his instructed.” Samuel says Abraham was punished because he perversely distrusted the assurance of God; as it is written (Gen. xv. 8), “Whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?”

_Nedarim_, fol. 31, col. 2.

Abraham was thrown into a fiery furnace by Nimrod, and God would not permit Gabriel to rescue him, but did so Himself; because God is One and Abraham was one, therefore it behooved the One to rescue the one.

_P'sachim_, fol. 118, col. 1.

The fire from which Abraham is here said to be delivered may simply refer to his deliverance by the hand of God from Ur of the Chaldees; Ur meaning “fire,” and being the name of a place celebrated for fire worship. The Midrash (p. 20) says, “When the wicked Nimrod cast Abraham into the furnace, Gabriel said, ‘Lord of the universe! permit me to deliver this holy one from the fire!’ But the Lord made answer, ‘I am the One Supreme in my world, and he is supreme in his; it is fitting therefore that the Supreme should rescue the supreme.’”

Abraham was a giant of giants; his height was as that of seventy-four men put together. His food, his drink, and <span id="p46"><sup><small>[ p. 46 ]</small></sup></span> his strength were in the proportion of seventy-four men's to one man's. He built an iron city for the abode of his seventeen children by Keturah, the walls of which were so lofty that the sun never penetrated them: he gave them a bowl full of precious stones, the brilliancy of which supplied them with light in the absence of the sun.

_Sophrim_, chap. 21.

Abraham our father had a precious stone suspended from his neck, and every sick person that gazed upon it was immediately healed of his disease. But when Abraham died, God hung up the stone on the sphere of the sun.

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 16, col. 2.

Till Abraham's time there was no such thing as a beard; but as many mistook Abraham for Isaac, and Isaac for Abraham, they looked so exactly alike, Abraham prayed to God for a beard to enable people to distinguish him from his son, Isaac, and it was granted him; as it is written (Gen. xxiv. i), “And to Abraham a beard came when he was well stricken in age.”

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 107, col. 2.

Here the word which the translators of the English version render “was old,” is taken in another of its cognate meanings as a beard. The Midrash is a trifle more modest in this legendary assertion. There we read, “Before Abraham there was no special mark of old age,” and that for distinction's sake “the beard was made to turn gray.”

When he died, all the chiefs of the nations of the world stood in a line and exclaimed, “Alas for the world that has lost its leader! Alas for the ship that has lost its helmsman!”

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 91, col. 2.

As Rabbi Banna went about to measure and to mark off the outward and inward dimensions of the different eaves, when he came to the cave of Machpelah he found Eliezar, Abraham's servant, at the entrance, and asked him, “What is Abraham doing?” The answer he received was, “He is asleep in the arms of Sarah.”

_Ibid._, fol. 58, col. 1.

Abraham being greater than Moses, for while the latter is only called by God “My Servant” (Mal. iv. 4), the former is called “My Friend” (Isa. xli. 8), we devote a little more space for a few more extracts from other Jewish sources than the Talmud, in order to make the picture they supply of Abraham's character a little more complete.

<span id="p47"><sup><small>[ p. 47 ]</small></sup></span>

Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri says:—“The Holy one—blessed be He!—took Shem and separated him to be a priest to Himself, that he might serve before Him. He also caused His Shechinah to rest with him, and called his name Melchizedek, priest of the Most High and king of Salem. His brother Japheth even studied the law in his school, until Abraham came and also learned the law in the school of Shem, where God Himself instructed Abraham, so that all else he had learned from the lips of man was forgotten. Then came Abraham and prayed to God that His Shechinah might ever rest in the house of Shem, which also was promised to him; as it is said (Ps. cx. 4), ‘Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek.’”

_Avodath Hakkodesh_, part 3, chap. 20.

Wherever Jacob resided he studied the law as his fathers did. How is this, seeing the law had not yet been given, it is nevertheless written of Abraham (Gen. xxvi. 5), “And he kept my charge?” Whence then did Abraham learn the law? Rabbi Shimon says his reins (literally kidneys) were made like two water-jars, from which the law flowed forth. Where do we learn that it was so? From what is said in Ps. xvi. 7, “My reins also instruct me in the night season.”

_Bereshith Rabba_, chap. 95.

The masters of the Kabbalah, of blessed memory, say that Abraham's Rabbi, _i. e._, teacher, was the angel Zadkiel.

_Rabbi Menachem's comment on the Pent._, Exod. iii. 5.

Adam's book, which contained celestial mysteries and holy wisdom, came down as an heirloom into the hands of Abraham, and he by means of it was able to see the glory of his Lord.

_Zohar Parashah Bereshith_.

Abraham was the author of a treatise on the subject of different kinds of witchcraft and its unholy workings and fruits, as also of the Book of Creation, through holy names (by means of which, namely, anything could be created).

_Nishmath Chayim_, chap. 29.

The whole world once believed that the souls of men were perishable, and that man had no pre-eminence above a beast, till Abraham came and preached the doctrine of immortality and transmigration.

_Ibid._, fol. 171, col. 1.

<span id="p48"><sup><small>[ p. 48 ]</small></sup></span>

A good son delivers his father from the punishment of hell, for thus we find that Abraham our father delivered Terah, as it is said in Gen. xv. 15, “And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace.” This implies that God had communicated to him the tidings that his father had a portion in the world to come and was now “in peace” there.

_Pesikta Zotarta_, fol. 3, col. 2.

Before Abraham was circumcised God spake to him in the Chaldee language, that the angels should not understand it. (This is proved from Gen. xv. i.)

_Yalkut Chadash_, fol. 117.

Rabbi Levi said Abraham sits at the gate of hell and does not permit any circumcised Israelite to enter. But if any appear who happen to have sinned unduly, these he (by an indescribable contrivance) causes to become uncircumcised and lets pass without scruple into the region of torment; and this is what is said in Ps. lv. 20, “He hath put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him: he hath broken his covenant.”

_Yalkut Shimoni_, fol. 33, col. 2, see. 18.

Abraham was circumcised on the Day of Atonement, and God looks that day annually on the blood of the covenant of our father Abraham's circumcision as atoning for all our iniquities, as it is said in Lev. xvi. 30, “For on that day shall he make an atonement for you, to cleanse you from all your sins.”

_Yalkut Chadash_, fol. 121, col. 1, sec. 3.

“And it came to pass that when Abram was come into Egypt” (Gen. xii. 14). And where was Sarah? He confined her in a chest, into which he locked her, lest any one should gaze on her beauty. When he came to the receipt of custom, he was summoned to open the chest, but declined, and offered payment of the duty. The officers said, 'Thou carriest garments;“ and he offered duty for garments. ”Nay, it is gold thou carriest;“ and he offered the impost laid on gold. Then they said, ”It is costly silks, belike pearls, thou concealest;" and he offered the custom on such articles. At length the Egyptian officers insisted, and he opened the box. And when he did so, all the land of Egypt was illumined by her beauty.

_Bereshith Rabba_, chap. 40.

<span id="p49"><sup><small>[ p. 49 ]</small></sup></span>

The question may naturally be asked why Abraham hid his wife from the gaze of others first then and not before. The reply is to be deduced from the following double rendering of Gen. xii. 11:—“Behold now I know that thou art a fair woman.” As if to say, “Usually people lose their good looks on a long journey, but thou art as beautiful as ever.” The second explanation is this:—Abraham was so piously modest that in all his life he never once looked a female in the face, his own wife not excepted. As he approached Egypt and was crossing some water, he saw in it the reflection of her face, and it was then that he exclaimed, “Behold now I know that thou art a fair woman.” As the Egyptians are swarthy, Abraham at once perceived the magnitude of the danger, and hence his precaution to hide her beauty in a chest.

_Zeenah Ureenah_ (1877 in Russia), fol. 28, col. 1.

When Abraham came to the cave of Machpelah to bury Sarah, Adam and Eve rose from their grave and protested against his committing her to the dust in that receptacle. “For,” said they, “we are ever ashamed in the presence of the Holy One—blessed be He!—on account of the sin which we committed, and now comest thou to add to our shame by the contrast therewith of the good works which ye two have done.” On Abraham's assurance that he would intercede with God on their behalf that they should not bear the shame any longer, Adam immediately retired to his sepulchre, but Eve being still unwilling to do so, Abraham took her by the hand and led her back to the side of Adam; and then he buried Sarah.

_Yalkut Chadas_ h, fol. 14, col. 3, see. 68.

Abraham's father, Terah, was both an idolater, a manufacturer of idols, and a dealer in them. Once when Terah had some engagement elsewhere he left his son Abraham to attend to his business. When a customer came to purchase an idol, Abraham asked him, “How old art thou?” “Lo! so many years,” was the ready reply. “What,” exclaimed Abraham, “is it possible that a man of so many years should desire to worship a thing only a day old?” The customer, being ashamed of himself, went his way; <span id="p50"><sup><small>[ p. 50 ]</small></sup></span> and so did all other customers, who underwent a similar inquisition. Once an old woman brought a measure of fine flour and wished to present it as an offering to the gods. This so enraged Abraham that he took a staff and broke all the images, excepting the largest, into whose hands he fixed the staff. When his father came and questioned him about the destruction of the gods, he replied, “An old woman placed an offering of flour before them, which immediately set them all by the ears, for every one was hungrier than another, but the biggest god killed all the rest with this staff which thou now seest he still holds in his hands.” Superstition, especially when combined with mercenary motives, knows neither reason nor human affection, therefore the father handed over his son Abraham to the inquisition of Nimrod, who threw him into the fiery furnace, as recorded elsewhere in this Miscellany. This is an historical fact, to the truth of which the whole orthodox Jewish world will bear testimony, and is solemnly recorded in

_Shalsheleth Hakkabalah_, fol. 2, col. 1.

There are three graces:—The grace of a place in the eyes of its inhabitants; the grace of a woman in the eyes of her husband; the grace of a purchase in the eyes of the buyer.

_Soteh_, fol. 47, col. 1.

A man should divide his capital into three parts, and invest one-third in land, employ one-third in merchandise, and reserve one-third in ready money.

_Bava Metzia_, fol. 42, col. 1.

All who go down to hell shall come up again, except these three:—He who commits adultery; he who shames another in public; and he who gives another a bad name.

_Ibid._, fol. 58, col. 2.

These three complain, but no one sympathizes with them:—He who lends money without witnesses; he who buys to himself a master; and he who is lorded over by his wife.

_Ibid._, fol. 75, col. 2.

There are three things on which the world stands:—The law, the temple service, and benevolence.

_Avoth_, chap. 1.

<span id="p51"><sup><small>[ p. 51 ]</small></sup></span>

If three eat at one table and do not converse together on the law of the Lord, it is as if they ate from the sacrifices for the dead; but they, on the contrary, are as if they partook from a table of the Lord's own furnishing who, while they sit down to meat, season their talk with its holy precepts.

_Avoth_, chap. 3.

There are three crowns:—The crown of the law, the crown of the priesthood, and the crown of royalty; but the crown of a good name surpasses them all.

_Ibid._, chap. 4.

He who possesses these three virtues is a disciple of Abraham our father, and he who possesses the three contrary vices is a son of Balaam the wicked. The disciples of our father Abraham have a kindly eye, a loyal spirit, and a lowly mind. The disciples of Balaam the wicked have an evil eye, a proud spirit, and a grasping soul.

_Ibid._, chap. 5.

Three things are said respecting the children of men:—He who gives alms brings a blessing on himself; he who lends does better; he who gives away half of what he hath to spare does best of all.

_Avoth d'Rab. Nathan_, chap. 41.

There are three classes of disciples, and among them three grades of worth:—He ranks first who asks and answers when asked; he who asks but does not answer ranks next; but he who neither asks nor answers ranks lowest of all.

_Ibid._

Over these three does God weep every day:—Over him who is able to study the law but neglects it; over him who studies it amid difficulties hard to overcome; and over the ruler who behaves arrogantly toward the community he should protect.

_Chaggigah_, fol. 5, col. 2.

Rabbi Yochanan says there are three keys in the hands of the Holy One!—blessed be He!—which He never intrusts to the disposal of a messenger, and they are these:—(1.) The key of rain, (2.) the key of life, and (3.) the key of reviving the dead. The key of rain, for it is written (Deut. xxviii. 12), "The Lord shall open unto thee His good treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto thy <span id="p52"><sup><small>[ p. 52 ]</small></sup></span> land in season;“ the key of life, as it is written (Gen. xxx. 22), ”God hearkened unto her, and opened her womb;“ the key of reviving the dead, for it is written (Ezek. xxxvii. 13), ”When I have opened your graves, and brought you up out of your graves, and shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live," etc.

_Taanith_, fol. 2, cols. 1, 2.

A disciple of the wise who makes light of the washing of hands is contemptible; but more contemptible is he who begins to eat before his guest; more contemptible is that guest who invites another guest; and still more contemptible is he who begins to eat before a disciple of the wise; but contemptible before all these three put together is that guest which troubles another guest.

_Derech Eretz Zuta_, chap. viii.

A roll of the law which has two mistakes to a column should be corrected; but if there be three, it should be stowed away altogether.

_Menachoth_, fol. 29, col. 2.

The wolf, the lion, the bear, the leopard, the panther, the elephant, and the sea-cat, each bear three years.

_Ibid._

Rav Yehudah says, in the name of Rav, "The butcher is bound to have three knives; one to slaughter with, one for cutting up the carcass, and one to cut away the suet. Suet being as unlawful for food as pork.

_Chullin_, fol. 8, col. 2.

Three classes of ministering angels raise a song of praise every day. One class says, Holy! the second responds, Holy! and the third continues, Holy is the Lord of hosts! But in the presence of the Holy One—blessed be He!—Israel is more beloved than the ministering angels; for Israel reiterates the song every hour, while the ministering angels repeat it only once a day, some say once a week, others once a month, others once a year, others once in seven years, others once in a jubilee, and others only once in eternity. Again, Israel mentions The Name after two words, as it is said (Deut. vi. 4), “Hear Israel, Yehovah,” but the ministering angels do not mention The Name till after three, as it is written (Isa. vi. 3), “Holy! holy! holy! Yehovah Zebaoth.” Moreover, the ministering angels do <span id="p53"><sup><small>[ p. 53 ]</small></sup></span> not take up the song above till Israel has started it below; for it is said (Job xxxviii. 7), “When the morning stars sang together, then all the sons of God shouted for joy.”

_Chullin_, fol. 91, col. 2.

The Rabbis have taught, a man should not sell to his neighbor shoes made from the hide of a beast that has died of disease, as if of a beast that had been slaughtered in the shambles, for two reasons: first, because he imposes on him (for the skin of a beast that dies of itself is not so durable as the hide of a slaughtered animal); second, be cause there is danger (for the beast that died of itself might have been stung by a serpent, and the poison remaining in the leather might prove fatal to the wearer of shoes made of that leather). A man should not send his neighbor a barrel of wine with oil floating upon its surface; for it happened once that a man did so, and the recipient went and invited his friends to a feast, in the preparation of which oil was to form a chief ingredient; but when the guests assembled, it was found out that the cask contained wine, and not oil; and because the host had nothing else in preparation for a worthy feast, he went and committed suicide. Neither should guests give anything from what is set before them to the son or daughter of their host, unless the host himself give them leave to do so; for it once happened during a time of scarcity that a man invited three of his friends to dine, and he had nothing but three eggs to place before them. Meanwhile, as the guests were seated at the board, the son of the host came into the room, and first one of the guests gave him his share, and then the other two followed his example. Shortly afterward the host himself came in, and seeing the child with his mouth full and both hands, he knocked him down to the ground, so that he died on the instant. The mother, seeing this, went and threw herself headlong, from the housetop, and the father followed her example. Thus Rabbi Eliezar ben Yacob said, “There perished in this affair three souls of Israel.”

_Ibid._, fol. 94, col. 1.

Once the Roman Government issued a decree that the Israelites should neither observe the Sabbath nor circumcise <span id="p54"><sup><small>[ p. 54 ]</small></sup></span> their sons. Thereupon Reuben the son of Istrubli trimmed his hair as a Gentile, and went among the Roman senators and plied them with wise remonstrance. “If one,” said he, “has an enemy, does he wish him to be poor or rich?” “To be poor,” was the reply. “Then,” he argued, “won't he be poorer if you prohibit him from working on the Sabbath?” “It is well said,” observed the senators; and they at once abolished their decree respecting the Sabbath. Again he asked, “If one has an enemy, does he wish him to be weak or strong?” “Why, weak, to be sure, I was the inevitable answer. ”Then,“ said he, ”let the Jews circumcise their children, then will they be weakened.“ ”The argument is good,“ said they, and the decree against circumcision was rescinded. Again he asked, ”If one has an enemy, does he wish him to increase or decrease?“ ”To decrease, of course,“ said they. In response to his argument the decree against catamenia was accordingly abolished. When, however, they found out that he was a Jew, they at once re-enacted the decrees they had canceled. Upon this the question arose who should go to Rome and appeal against these enactments. It was resolved that Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai, who was reputed experienced in miracles, should go, accompanied by Rabbi Elazar, the son of Rabbi Yossi. . . . As they journeyed along, the question was proposed to them, ”Whence is it proved that the blood of a reptile is unclean?“ Rabbi Elazar replied with a curl of the lip, and quoted Lev. ii. 29. ”And these shall be unclean unto you.“ Rabbi Shimon said unto him, ”By the curl of thy lip art thou recognizable as a disciple of the wise! May the son never return to his father!“ for he was annoyed that he should presume to teach a Halachah in his presence, and then and there he condemned him to death. (See _Berachoth_, fol. 31, col. 2.) Thereupon Ben Temalion (an evil sprite or imp) came, and greeting him, said, ”Do ye wish me to accompany you?“ Rabbi Shimon wept and said, ”Alas! a maid-servant of my ancestor (Abraham) was assisted by three angels, and I have not one to attend me! However, let a miracle be worked for us anyhow." Then the evil spirit entered into the Emperor's daughter, and when the Rabbi was called in to <span id="p55"><sup><small>[ p. 55 ]</small></sup></span> cure the princess, he exorcised the spirit by saying, “Depart, Ben Temalion! Ben Temalion, depart!” and the evil spirit left her. By way of reward the Rabbis were bidden to ask whatsoever they pleased, and admitted into the imperial treasury that they might choose what seemed good to them. Espying there the edict against Israel, they chose it, and tore it to pieces.

_Meyilah_, fol. 17, col. 1, 2.

At the time when the high priest enters to worship, three acolytes take hold of him, one by the right hand and another by the left, while the third lifts the gems attached to the train of his pontifical vestment.

_Tamid_, chap. 7; _Mishna_, 1.

“I once, when a grave-digger,” says Abba Shaul, as the Rabbis relate, “chased a roe which had entered the shin bone of a dead man; and though I ran three miles after it, I could not overtake it, nor reach the end of the bone. When I returned, I was told that it was a bone of Og, king of Bashan.”

_Niddah_, fol. 24, col. 2.

The Rabbis have taught that during the first three months (of pregnancy) the child lies in the lower part (of the uterus); during the next three it occupies the middle part; and during the last three it is in the upper part; and that when the time of parturition comes, it turns over first, and this causes the birth-pains. We are also taught that the pains caused by a female child are greater than those- caused by a male. Rabbi Elazar said, “What Scripture is there for this? ‘When I was made in secret and curiously wrought, in the lowest parts of the earth’ (Ps. cxxxix. 15). It is not said, (I abode,) but, ‘I was curiously wrought.’ Why the difference? Why are the pains caused by a girl greater than those caused by a boy?”

_Ibid._, fol. 31, col. 1.

The Rabbis teach there are three that have a share in a man; God, and his father and mother. The father's part consists of all that is white in him—the bones, the veins, the nails, the brain, and the white of the eye. The mother's part consists of all that is red in him—the skin, the flesh, the hair, and the black part of the eye. God's part consists of the breath, the soul, the physiognomy, <span id="p56"><sup><small>[ p. 56 ]</small></sup></span> sight and hearing, speech, motive power, knowledge, understanding, and wisdom. And when the time comes that the man should depart from the world, God takes away His part, and leaves those which belong to the father and mother. Rav Pappa says, “This is the meaning of the proverb, ‘Shake off the salt and throw the flesh to the dogs.’”

_Niddah_, fol. 31. col. 1.

Rashi's explanatory note is this: “Shake off the salt from the flesh and it becomes fit only for dogs. The soul is the salt which preserves the body; when it departs, the body putrefies”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">II.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/4">
          <span class="pr-2">IV.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
