---
title: "XXI. to XXX."
description: "Hebraic Literature"
published: true
date: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
tags: Judaism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/20">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XIV. to XX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/40">
          <span class="pr-2">XXXI. to XL.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## XXI.

The bathing season at (the hot baths of) Dimsis lasted twenty-one days.

_Shabbath_, fol. 147, col. 2.

A fowl hatches in twenty-one days, and the almond tree ripens its fruit in twenty-one days.

_Bechoroth_, fol. 8, col. 1.


## XXII.

Rabbi Levi says the realization of a good dream may be hopefully expected for twenty-two years; for it is written (Gen. xxxvii. 2), "These are the generations of Jacob,

<span id="p142">[<sup><small>p. 142</small></sup>]</span>

Joseph being seventeen years old when he had the dreams.“ And it is written also (Gen. xli. 46), ”And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh," etc. From seventeen to thirty are thirteen, to which add the seven years of plenty and the two years of famine, which make the sum total of twenty-two.

_Berachoth_, fol. 55, col. 2.

In the pages which precede and follow the above quotation there is much that is interesting on the subject of dreams and their interpretation, and one is strongly tempted to append selections, but we refrain in order to make room for a prayer which occurs in the morning service for the various festivals, and is given in the preceding context:—“Sovereign of the Universe! I am thine, and my dreams are thine. I have dreamed a dream, but know not what it portendeth. May it be acceptable in Thy presence, O Lord my God, and the God of my fathers, that all my dreams concerning myself and concerning all Israel may be for my good. Whether I have dreamt concerning myself, or whether I have dreamt concerning others, or whether others have dreamt concerning me, if they be good, strengthen and fortify them, that they may be accomplished in me, as were the dreams of the righteous Joseph; and if they require cure, heal them as Thou didst Hezekiah, king of Judah, from his sickness; as Miriam the prophetess from her leprosy, and Naaman from his leprosy; as the bitter waters of Marah by the hands of our legislator Moses, and those of Jericho by the hands of Elisha. And as Thou wast pleased to turn the curse of Balaam, the son of Beor, to a blessing, be pleased to convert all my dreams concerning me and all Israel to a good end. Oh, guard me; let me be acceptable to Thee, and grant me life. Amen.”\[\*\]

Rabbi Levi said, 'Come and see how unlike the character of the Holy One—blessed be He!—is to that of those who inherit the flesh and blood of humanity. God blessed Israel with twenty-two benedictions and cursed them with eight curses (Lev. xxvi. 3-13, xv. 43). But Moses, our Rabbi, blessed them with eight benedictions and cursed them with twenty-two imprecations" (see Deut. xxviii. 1-4, xv. 68).

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 59, col. 1.

Once as they were journeying to Chesib (in Palestine), some of Rabbi Akiva's disciples were overtaken by a band of robbers, who demanded to know where they were going to. “We are going to Acco,” was the reply; but on arriving at Chesib, they went no farther. The robbers

\[\*. The translation of this prayer is borrowed from the Jewish liturgy.\] <span id="p143">[<sup><small>p. 143</small></sup>]</span> then asked them who they were? “Disciples of Rabbi Akiva,” they replied. Upon hearing this the robbers exclaimed, “Blessed surely is Rabbi Akiva and his disciples too, for no man can ever do them any harm.” Once as Rabbi Menasi was traveling to Thurtha (in Babylonia), some thieves surprised him on the road and asked him where he was bound for. “For Pumbeditha,” was the reply; but upon reaching Thurtha, he stayed and went no farther. The highwaymen, thus balked, retorted, “Thou art the disciple of Yehuda the deceiver!” “Oh, you know my master, do you?' said the Rabbi. ”Then in the name of God be every one of you anathematized.“ For twenty-two years thereafter they carried on their nefarious trade, but all their attempts at violence ended only in disappointment. Then all save one of them came to the Rabbi and craved his pardon, which was immediately granted. The one who did not come to confess his guilt and obtain absolution was a weaver, and he was eventually devoured by a lion. Hence the proverbs, ”If a weaver does not humble himself, he shortens his life;“ and, ”Come and see the difference there is between the thieves of Babylon and the banditti of the land of Israel.”

_Avodah Zarah_, fol. 26, col. 1.

Rabbi Eliezer ben Hyrcanus was twenty-two years of age when, contrary to the wishes of his father, he went to Rabbon Yochanan ben Zaccai purposing to devote himself to the study of the law. By the time he arrived at Rabbon Yochanan's he had been without food four-and-twenty hours, and yet, though repeatedly asked whether he had had anything to eat, refused to confess he was hungry. His father having come to know where he was, went one day to the place on purpose to disinherit him before the assembled Rabbis. It so happened that Rabbon Yochanan was at that time lecturing before some of the great men of Jerusalem, and when he saw the father enter, he pressed Rabbi Eliezer to deliver an exposition. So racy and cogent were his observations that Rabbon Yochanan rose and styled him his own Rabbi, and thanked, him in the name of the rest for the instruction he had afforded them. Then the father of Rabbi Eliezer said, <span id="p144">[<sup><small>p. 144</small></sup>]</span> “Rabbis, I came here for the purpose of disinheriting my son, but now I declare him sole heir of all I have, to the exclusion of his brothers.”

_Avoth d'Rab. Nathan_, chap. 6.

The father of Eliezer acts more magnanimously by his son than does the father of St. Francis. Like the Rabbi, as Mr. Ruskin relates in his “Mornings in Florence,” St. Francis, one of whose three great virtues was obedience, “begins his spiritual life by quarreling with his father. He (commercially invests) some of his father's goods in charity. His father objects to that investment, on which St. Francis runs away, taking what he can find about the house along with him. His father follows to claim his property, but finds it is all gone already, and that St. Francis has made friends with the Bishop of Assisi. His father flies into an indecent passion, and declares he will disinherit him; on which St. Francis, then and there, takes all his clothes off, throws them frantically in his father's face, and says he has nothing more to do with clothes or father.”

Not the same strict scrutiny is required in money matters as in cases of capital punishment; for it is said (Lev. xxiv. 23), “Ye shall have one manner of law.” What distinction is there made between them? With regard to money matters three judges are deemed sufficient, while in cases of capital offense twenty-three are required, etc.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 32, col. 1.


## XXIV.

Rabbi, Yehoshua ben Levi said, “In twenty-four cases doth the tribunal excommunicate for the honor of a Rabbi, and all are explained in our Mishna.” Rabbi Elazer interposed and asked, “Where are they?” The reply was, “Go and seek, and thou shalt find.” He went accordingly and sought, but found only three—the case of the man who lightly esteems the washing of hands; of him who whispers evil behind the bier of a disciple of the wise; and of him who behaves haughtily toward the Most High.

_Berachoth_, fol. 19, col. 1.

There are three degrees of excommunication, _i. e._, separation, exclusion, and execration. That mentioned in the above extract is of the lowest degree, and lasts never less than thirty days. The second degree of excommunication is a prolongation of the first by thirty days more. The third or highest degree lasts for an indefinite time. See Moed Katon, fol. 17, col. 1; Shevuoth, fol. 36, col. 1; and consult Index II. appended.

A certain matron once said to Rabbi Yehuda ben Elaei, "Thy face is like that of one who breeds pigs and lends <span id="p145">[<sup><small>p. 145</small></sup>]</span> money on usury.“ He replied, ”These offices are forbidden me by the rules of my religion, but between my residence and the academy there are twenty-four latrinæ; these I regularly visit as I need.”

_Berachoth_, fol. 55, col. 1.

The Rabbi meant to say that paying attention to the regular action of his excretory organs was the secret of his healthy looks, and to imply that a disordered stomach is the root of most diseases,—a physiological opinion well worthy of regard by us moderns.

Rav Birim says that the venerable Rav Benaah once went to all the interpreters of dreams in Jerusalem, twenty-four in number. Every one of them gave a different interpretation, and each was fulfilled; which substantiates the saying that it is the interpretation and not the dream that comes true.

_Ibid._, fol. 55, col. 2.

Twenty-four fasts were observed by the men of the Great Synagogue, in order that the writers of the books, phylacteries, and Mezuzahs might not grow rich, lest in becoming rich they might be tempted not to write any more.

_P'sachim_, fol. 50, col. 2.

When Solomon was desirous of conveying the Ark into the Temple, the doors shut themselves of their own accord against him. Here cited twenty-four psalms, yet they opened not. In vain he cried, “Lift up your heads, O ye gates” (Ps. xxiv. 9). But when he prayed, “O Lord God, turn not Thy face away from Thine anointed; remember the mercies of David, Thy servant” (2 Chron. vi. 42), then the gates flew open at once. Then the enemies of David turned black in the face, for all knew by this that God had pardoned David's transgression with Bathseheba.

_Moed Katon_, fol. 9, col. 1.

In the Midrash Rabbah (Devarim, chap. 15) the same story is told, with this additional circumstance among others, that a sacred respect was paid to the gates when the Temple was sacked at the time of the Captivity. When the glorious vessels and furniture of the Temple were being carried away into Babylon, the gates, which were so zealous for the glory of God, were buried on the spot (see Lam. ii. 9), there to await the restoration of Israel. This romantic episode is alluded to in the closing service for the Day of Atonement.

There are twenty-four species of unclean birds, but the clean birds are innumerable.

_Chullin_, fol. 63, col. 2.

<span id="p146">[<sup><small>p. 146</small></sup>]</span>

In twenty-four places priests are called Levites, and this is one of them (Ezek. xliv. 15), “But the priests, the Levites, the sons of Zadok.”

_Tamid_, fol. 27, col. 1.

There are twenty-four extremities of members in the human body which do not suffer defilement in the case of diseased flesh (see Lev. xiii. 10, 24). The tip-ends of the fingers and toes, the edges of the ears, the tip of the nose, etc.

_Negaim_, chap. 6, mish. 7.


## XXV.

Twenty-five children is the highest number there should be in a class for elementary instruction. There should be an assistant appointed, if there be forty in number; and if fifty, there should be two competent teachers. Rava says, “If there be two teachers in a place, one teaching the children more than the other, the one that teaches less is not to be dismissed, because if so, the other is liable to lapse into negligence also.” Rav Deimi of Nehardaa, on the other hand, thinks the dismissal of the former will make the latter all the more eager to teach more, both out of fear lest he also be dismissed, and out of gratitude that he has been preferred to the other. Mar says, “The emulation of the scribes (or teachers) increaseth wisdom.” Rava also says, “When there are two teachers, one teaching much but superficially, and one teaching thoroughly but not so much, the former is to be preferred, for the children will, in the long run, improve most by learning much.” Rav Deimi of Nehardaa, however, thinks the latter is to be preferred, for a mistake or an error once learned is difficult to unlearn; as it is written in 1 Kings xi. 16, “For six months did Joab remain there with all Israel, until he cut off every male in Edom.” When David asked Joab why he killed only the males and not the females, he replied, “Because it is written in Deut. xxv. 19, ‘Thou shalt blot out the male portion of Amalek.’” “But,” said David, “we read ‘the remembrance of Amalek.’” To this Joab replied, “My teacher taught me to read zachar and not zeichar,” _i. e._, male, and not remembrance. The teacher of Joab was sent for; and being found guilty of having taught his pupil in a superficial manner, he was condemned to be beheaded. The poor teacher pleaded in vain for his life, <span id="p147">[<sup><small>p. 147</small></sup>]</span> for the king's judgment was based on Scripture (Jer. xlviii. 10), "Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord deceitfully, and cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood.

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 21, col. 1.


## XXVI.

The Romans faithfully observed their compact with Israel for twenty-six years. After that time they began to oppress them.

_Avoda Zarah_, fol. 8, col. 2.


## XXVII.

The Rabbis have taught that a small salt fish will cause death if partaken of after seven, seventeen, or twenty-seven days; some say after twenty-three days. This is said with reference to half-cooked fish, but when properly cooked there is no harm in it. Neither does any harm result from eating half-cooked fish, if strong drink be taken after it.

_Berachoth_, fol. 44, col. 2.


## XXVIII.

On the twenty-eighth day of Adar there came good news to the Jews. The Roman Government had passed a decree ordaining that they should neither study the law, nor circumcise their children, nor observe the Sabbath-days. Yehudah ben Shamua and his associates went to consult a certain matron, whom all the magnates of Rome were in the habit of visiting. She advised them to come at night and raise a loud outcry against the decree they complained of. They did so, and cried, “O heavens! are we not your brethren? are we not the children of one mother?” (Alluding to Rebekah, the mother of Jacob and Esau.) “Wherein are we worse than all other nations and tongues, that you should oppress us with such harsh decrees?” Thereupon the decrees were revoked; to commemorate which the Jews established a festival.

_Rosh Hashanah_, fol. 19, col. 1.


## XXIX.

The renewal of the moon comes round in not less than twenty-nine days and a half and forty minutes.

_Ibid._, fol. 25, col. 1.


## XXX.

Rav Mari reports that Rabbi Yochanan had said, “He who indulges in the practice of eating lentils once in thirty days keeps away quinsy, but they are not good to be eaten regularly because by them the breath is corrupted.” He used also to say that mustard eaten once in thirty days drives away sickness, but if taken every day the action of the heart is apt to be affected.

_Berachoth_, fol. 40, col. 1.

<span id="p148">[<sup><small>p. 148</small></sup>]</span>

He who eats unripe dates and does not wash his hands will for thirty day be in constant fear, without knowing why, of something untoward happening.

_P'sachim_, fol. 111, col. 2.

The Rabbis have taught that the lighter kind of excommunication is not to last less than thirty days, and censure not less than seven. The latter is inferred from what is said in Num. xii. 14, “If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days?”

_Moed Katon_, fol. 16, col. 1.

If we meet a friend during any of the thirty days of his mourning for a deceased relative, we must condole with him but not salute him; but after that time he may be saluted but not condoled with. If a man (because he has no family) re-marries within thirty days of the death of his wife, he should not be condoled with at home (lest it might hurt the feelings of his new partner); but if met with out of doors, he should be addressed in an undertone of voice, accompanied with a slight inclination of the head.

_Ibid._, fol. 21, col. 2.

During the thirty days of mourning for deceased friends or relatives, the bereaved should not trim their hair; but if they have lost their parents, they are not to attend to such matters until their friends force them to do so.

_Ibid._, fol. 22, col. 2.

And Haman told them of the glory of his riches and the multitude of his children“ (Esth. v. 11). And how many children were there? Ray said thirty; ten had died, ten were hanged, and ten went about begging from door to door. The Rabbis say, ”Those that went about begging from door to door were seventy; for it is written (1 Sam. ii. 5), ‘They that were full have hired themselves for bread.’”

_Meggillah_, fol. 15, col. 2.

When Rabbi Chauena bar Pappa was about to die, the Angel of Death was told to go and render him some friendly service. He accordingly went and made himself known to him. The Rabbi requested him to leave him for thirty days, until he had repeated what he had been learning; for it is said, "Blessed is he who comes here with his studies <span id="p149">[<sup><small>p. 149</small></sup>]</span> in his hand.“ He accordingly left, and at the expiration of thirty days returned to him. The Rabbi then asked to be shown his place in Paradise, and the Angel of Death consented to show him while life was still in him. Then said the Rabbi, ”Lend me thy sword, lest thou surprise me on the road and cheat me of my expectation.“ To this the Angel of Death said, ”Dost thou mean to serve me as thy friend Rabbi Yoshua did?" and he declined to intrust the sword to the Rabbi.

_Kethuboth_, fol. 77, col. 2.

If a man says to a woman, “Thou art betrothed to me after thirty days,” and in the interim another comes and betroths her, she is the second suitor's.

_Kiddushin_, fol. 58, col. 2.

If one finds a scroll, he may peruse it once in thirty days, but he must not teach out of it, nor may another join him in reading it; if he does not know how to read, he must unroll it. If a garment be found, it should be shaken and spread out once in thirty days, for its own sake (to preserve it), but not for display. Silver and copper articles should be used to take care of them, but not for the sake of ornament. Gold and glass vessels hie should not meddle with—till the coming of Elijah.

_Bava Metzia_, fol. 29, col. 2.

Rabbi Zira so inured his body (to endurance) that the fire of Gehenna had no power over it. Every thirty days he experimented on himself, ascending a fiery furnace, and finally sitting down in the midst of it without being affected by the fire. One day, however, as the Rabbis fixed their eyes upon him, his hips became singed, and from that day onward he was noted in Jewry as the little man with the singed hips.

_Ibid._, fol. 85, col. 1.

An Arab once said to Rabbah bar bar Channah, “Come and I will show thee the place where Korah and his accomplices were swallowed up.” “There,” says the Rabbi, "I observed smoke coming out from two cracks in the ground. Into one of these he inserted some wool tied on to the end of his spear, and when he drew it out again it was scorched. Then he bade me listen. I did so, and as I listened heard them groan out, 'Moses and his law are <span id="p150">[<sup><small>p. 150</small></sup>]</span> true, but we are liars.' The Arab then told me that they come round to this place once in every thirty days, being stirred about in the hell-surge like meat in the boiling caldron.”

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 74, col. 1.

Rabbi Yochanan, in expounding Isa. liv. 12, said, “The Holy One—blessed be He!—will bring precious stones and pearls, each measuring thirty cubits by thirty, and polishing them down to twenty cubits by ten, will place them in the gates of Jerusalem.” A certain disciple contemptuously observed, “No one has ever yet seen a precious stone as large as a small bird's egg, and is it likely that such immense ones as these have any existence?” He happened one day after this to go forth on a voyage, and there in the sea be saw the angels quarrying precious stones and pearls like those his Rabbi had told him of, and upon inquiry he learned that they were intended for the gates of Jerusalem. On his return he went straight to Rabbi Yochanan and told him what he had seen and heard.

“Raca!” said the latter, “hadst thou not seen them thou wouldst have kept on deriding the words of the wise!” Then fixing his gaze intently upon him, he with the glance of his eye reduced to a heap of bones the carcass of his body.

_Ibid._, fol. 75, col. 1.

He who lends unconditionally a sum of money to his neighbor is not entitled to demand it back within thirty days thereafter.

_Maccoth_, fol. 3, col. 2.

If a man has lost a relative, he is forbidden to engage in business until thirty days after the death. In the case of the decease of a father or a mother, he is not to resume work until his friends rebuke him and urge him to return.

_Semachoth_, chap. 9.

It is unlawful for one to enter a banqueting-house for thirty days after the death of a relative; but he must refrain from so doing for twelve months after the demise of either father or mother, unless on the behest of some higher requirement of piety.

_Ibid._

But I know not whether there are thirty righteous men here and fifteen in the land of Israel, or _vice versâ_.

_Chullin_, fol. 92, col. 1.

<span id="p151">[<sup><small>p. 151</small></sup>]</span>

Thirty days in a year are equivalent to a whole year.

_Niddah_, fol. 44, col. 2.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/20">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XIV. to XX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/40">
          <span class="pr-2">XXXI. to XL.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
