---
title: "Three Hundred (part 2)."
description: "Hebraic Literature"
published: true
date: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
tags: Judaism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/300_Witchcraft">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Witchcraft.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/400">
          <span class="pr-2">Four Hundred.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah proclaimed this anathema with the blast of three hundred trumpets:—“Whoever shall take drink from the hand of a bride, no matter whether she be the daughter of a disciple of the wise or the daughter of an Amhaaretz, it is all one as if he drunk it from the hand of a harlot.” Again, it is said, “He who receives a cup from the hands of a bride and drinks it therefrom, has no portion whatever in the world to come.”

_Tract Calah._

There was a place for collecting the ashes in the middle of the altar, and there were at times in it nearly as much as three hundred cors (equal to about 2830 bushels) of ashes. On Rava remarking that this must be an exaggeration, Rav Ammi said the law, the prophets, and the sages are wont to use hyperbolical language. Thus the law speaks of “Cities great and walled up to heaven” (Deut. i. 28); the prophets speak of “the earth rent with the sound of them” (1 Kings i. 40); the sages speak as above and also as follows. There was a golden vine at the entrance of the Temple, trailing on crystals, on which devotees who could used to suspend offerings of fruit and grape clusters. “It happened once,” said Rabbi Elazer ben Rabbi Zadoc, “that three hundred priests were counted off to clear the vine of the offerings.”

_Chullin_, fol. 90, col. 2.

Three hundred priests were told off to draw the veil (of the Temple) aside; for it is taught that Rabbi Shimon <span id="p196">[<sup><small>p. 196</small></sup>]</span> ben Gamliel declared in the name of Rabbi Shimon the Sagan (or high priest's substitute), that the thickness of the veil was a handbreadth. It was woven of seventy-two cords, and each cord consisted of twenty-four strands. It was forty cubits long and twenty wide. Eighty-two myriads of damsels worked at it, and two such veils were made every year. When it became soiled, it took three hundred priests to immerse and cleanse it.

_Chullin_.

When Moses was about to enter Paradise he turned to Joshua and said, “If any doubtful matters remain, ask me now and I will explain them.” To this Joshua replied, “Have I ever left thy side for an hour and gone away to any other? Hast than not thyself written concerning me (Exod. xxxiii. ii), ‘His servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the Tabernacle?’” As a punishment for this pert reply, which must have distressed and confounded his master, Joshua's power of brain was immediately weakened, so that he forgot three hundred Halachahs, and seven hundred doubts sprang up to perplex him. All Israel then rose up to murder him, but the Holy One—blessed be he!—said unto him, “To teach thee the Halachahs and their explanation is impossible, but go and trouble them with work; as it is said (Josh. i. 1), ‘Now after the death of Moses, the servant of the Lord, it came to pass that the Lord spake unto Joshua,’” etc.

_Temurah_, fol. 16, cal. i.

In the future God will assign to each righteous man three hundred and ten worlds as an inheritance; for it is said (Prov. viii. 21), “That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill their treasures.” By Gematria equals three hundred and ten.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 100, col. 1, and _Okitzin_, chap. 3, mish. 12.

An old woman once complained before Rav Nachman that the Head of the Captivity and certain Rabbis with him were enjoying themselves in her booth, which they had surreptitiously taken possession of and would not surrender, but Rav Nachman gave no heed to her remonstrance. Then she raised her voice and cried aloud, "A <span id="p197">[<sup><small>p. 197</small></sup>]</span> woman whose father had three hundred and eighteen slaves is now pleading before you, and you paying no heed to her!“ Upon which Rav Nachman turned to his associates and said, ”She is a bawling woman, but she has no right to claim the booth, only the value of its timber.”

_Succah_, fol. 31, col. 1.

Elijah the Tishbite once said to Rav Yehudah, the brother of Rav Salla the Holy, “You ask why the Messiah does not come, even though it is just now the Day of Atonement.” “And what,” asked the Rabbi, “does the Holy One—blessed be He!—say to that?” “He says, ”Sin lieth at the door“ ”(Gen. iv. 7). “And what has Satan to say?” “He has no permission to accuse any one on the Day of Atonement.” “How do we know this?” Ramma bar Chamma replied, “Satan by Gematria equals three hundred and sixty-four, therefore on that number of days only has he permission to accuse; but on the Day of Atonement (_i. e._, the 365th day) he cannot accuse.”

_Yoma_, fol. 20, col. 1.

Rav Yitzchak said, “What is the meaning of that which is written (Ps. cxl. 8), ‘Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked; further not his wicked device, lest they exalt themselves. Selah?’” It is the prayer of Jacob to the Lord of the universe that He would not grant to Esau, “the wicked, the desires of his heart.” “Further not his wicked device,” this refers to Germamia of Edam (_i. e._, Rome), for if they (the Romans) were suffered to go forward they would destroy the whole world! Rav Chama bar Chanena said, “There are three hundred crowned beads in Germamia of Edam, and there are three hundred and sixty-five dukes in Babylon. These encounter each other daily, and one of them commits murder, and they strive to set up a king.”

_Meggillah_, fol. 6, col. 2.

In the great city (of Rome) there were three hundred and sixty-five streets, and in each street there were three hundred and sixty-five palaces, and in every one of these there were three hundred and sixty-five steps, each of which palaces contained sufficient store to maintain the whole world.

_P'sachim_, fol. 118, cal. 2.

<span id="p198">[<sup><small>p. 198</small></sup>]</span>

There are three hundred and sixty-five negative precepts.

There were three hundred and ninety-four courts of law in Jerusalem, and as many synagogues; also the same number of high schools, colleges, and academies, and as many offices for public notaries.

_Kethuboth_, fol. 105, col. 1.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/300_Witchcraft">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Witchcraft.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/400">
          <span class="pr-2">Four Hundred.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
