---
title: "XXXI. to XL."
description: "Hebraic Literature"
published: true
date: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
tags: Judaism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/30">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XXI. to XXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/50">
          <span class="pr-2">XLI. to L.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## XXXI.

“Moses, thou didst say unto me, ‘What is Thy name?’ And now thou dost say, ‘Neither hast Thou delivered Thy people at all.’ Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh (Exod. v. 23, vi. 1), but not what I am about to do to the thirty-one kings.”

_Sanhedrin_, fol. iii, col. 1.


## XXXII.

When Rav Deimi arrived at Babylon, he reported that the Romans had fought thirty-two battles with the Greeks without once conquering them, until they allied themselves with Israel, on the stipulation that where Rome appointed the commanding officers the Jews should appoint the governors, and _vice versâ_.

_Avodah Zarah_, fol. 8, col. 2.


## XXXIII.

Manasseh did penance thirty-three years.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 103, col. 1.

Balaam was thirty-three years of age when Phineas, the robber, slew him.

_Ibid._, fol. 106, col. 2.


## XXXIV.

For thirty-four years the kingdom of Persia lasted contemporaneously with the Temple.

_Avodah Zarah_, fol. 9, col. 1.


## XXXVI.

Abaii has said, “There are never fewer than thirty-six righteous men in every generation who receive the presence of the Shechinah; for it is said (Isa. xxx. 18), ‘Blessed are all those who wait upon Him.’” The numerical value (by Gematria) of Him, is thirty-six.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 97, col. 2.


## XXXVI.

The sons of Esau, of Ishmael, and of Keturah went on purpose to dispute the burial (of Jacob); but when they saw that Joseph had placed his crown upon the coffin, they did the same with theirs. There were thirty-six crowns in all, tradition says. “And they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation.” Even the very horses and asses joined in it, we are told. On arriving at the Cave of Machpelah, Esau once more protested, and said, “Adam and Eve, Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah, are all buried here. Jacob disposed of his share when he buried Leah in it, and the remaining one belongs to me.” “But thou didst sell thy share with thy birthright,” remonstrated the sons of Jacob. “Nay,” rejoined Esau, "that did not include my <span id="p152">[<sup><small>p. 152</small></sup>]</span> share in the burial-place.“ ”Indeed it did,“ they argued, ”for our father, just before he died, said (Gen. 1. 5), ‘In my grave which I have bought for myself.’“ ”Where are the title-deeds?“ demanded Esau. ”In Egypt,“ was the answer. And immediately the swift-footed Naphthali started for the records. (”So light of foot was he,“ says the Book of Jasher, ”that he could go upon the ears of corn without crushing them.“) Hushim, the son of Dan, being deaf, asked what was the cause of the commotion. On being told what it was, he snatched up a club and smote Esau so hard that his eyes dropped out and fell upon the feet of Jacob; at which Jacob opened his eyes and grimly smiled. This is that which is written (Ps. lviii. 10), ”The righteous shall rejoice when he sees vengeance; he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.“ Then Rebekah's prophecy came to pass (Gen. xxvii. 45), ”Why shall I be deprived also of you both in one day?" For although they did not both die on the same day, they were both buried on the same day.

_Soteh_, fol. 13, col. 1.

This story slightly varied, is repeated in the Book of Jasher and in the Targum of Ben Uzziel.


## XL.

The principal works of the hand are forty save one:—To sow, to plow, to reap, to bind in sheaves, to. thrash, to winnow, to sift corn, to grind, to bolt meal, to knead, to bake, to shear, to wash wool, to comb wool, to, dye it, to spin, to warp, to shoot two threads, to weave two threads, to cut and tie two threads, to tie, to untie, to sew two stitches, to tear two threads with intent to sew, to hunt game, to slay, to skin, to salt a hide, to singe, to tan, to cut up a skin, to write two letters, to scratch out two letters with intent to write, to build, to pull down, to put out a fire, to light a fire, to smite with a hammer, to convey from one Reshuth\[\*\] to another.

_Shabbath_, fol. 73, col. 1.

King Yanai had a single tree on the royal mound, whence once a month they collected forty seahs (about fifteen bushels) of young pigeons of three different breeds.

_Berachoth_, fol. 44, col. 1.

\[\*. A private property in opposition to a public.\]

<span id="p153">[<sup><small>p. 153</small></sup>]</span>

Forty years before the destruction of the Temple the Sanhedrin were exiled, and they sat in the Halls of Commerce.

_Shabbath_, fol. 15, col. x.

Until one is forty eating is more advantageous than drinking. After that age the rule is reversed.

_Ibid._, fol. 152, col. 1.

The Rabbis have taught that during the forty years in which Simeon the just officiated in the Temple the lot always fell on the right (see Lev. xvi. 8-10). After that time it sometimes fell on the right and sometimes on the left. The crimson band also, which in his time had always turned white, after that period sometimes turned white, and at others it did not change color at all.

_Yoma_, fol. 39, col. 1.

The Rabbis have taught:—Forty years before the destruction of the Temple the lot did not fall on the right, and the crimson band did not turn white; the light in the west did not burn, and the gates of the Temple opened of themselves, so that Rabbi Yochanan ben Zacchai rebuked them, and said, “O Temple! Temple! why art thou dismayed? I know thy end will be that thou shalt be destroyed, for Zachariah the son of Iddo has already predicted respecting thee (Zech. xi. i), ‘Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars.’”

_Ibid._, fol. 39, col. 2.

During the forty years that Israel were in the wilderness there was not a midnight in which the north wind did not blow.

_Yevamoth_, fol. 71, col. 1.

Rabbi Zadok fasted forty years that Jerusalem might not be destroyed, and so emaciated was he, that when he ate anything it might be seen going down his throat.

_Gittin_, fol. 56, col. 1.

Forty days before the formation of a child a Bath Kol proclaims, “The daughter of so-and-so shall marry the son of so-and-so; the premises of so-and-so shall be the property of so-and-so.”

_Soteh_, fol. 2, col. 1.

Rav Hunna and Rav Chasda were so angry with one another that they did not meet for forty years. After that

<span id="p154">[<sup><small>p. 154</small></sup>]</span>

Rav Chasda fasted forty days for having annoyed Rav Hunna, and Rav Hunna forty days for having suspected Rav Chasda.

_Bava Metzia_, fol. 33, col. 1.

A female who marries at forty will never have any children.

He who eats black cummin the weight of a denarius will have his heart torn out; so also will he who eats forty eggs or forty nuts, or a quarter of honey.

_Tract Calah._

He that cooks in milk the nerve Nashe on a yearly festival, and then eats it, receives five times forty stripes save one, etc.

_Baitza_, fol. 12, col. 1.

He who passes forty consecutive days without suffering some affliction has received his good reward in his lifetime (_Cf._ Luke xvi. 25).

_Erachin_, fol. 16, col. 2.

If a bath contain forty measures of water and some mud, people may, according to Rabbi Elazar, immerse themselves in the water of it, but not in the mud; while Rabbi Yehoshua says they may do so in both.

_Mikvaoth_, chap. ii. 10.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/30">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XXI. to XXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/50">
          <span class="pr-2">XLI. to L.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
