---
title: "VI."
description: "Hebraic Literature"
published: true
date: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
tags: Judaism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">V.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/7">
          <span class="pr-2">VII.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Six things are a disgrace to a disciple of the wise:—To walk abroad perfumed, to walk alone by night, to wear old clouted shoes, to talk with a woman in the street, to sit at table with illiterate men, and to be late at the synagogue. Some add to these, walking with a proud step or a haughty gait.

_Berachoth_, fol. 43, col. 2.

A soft-boiled egg is better than six ounces of fine flour.

_Ibid._, fol. 44, col. 2.

Six things are a certain cure for sickness:—Cabbage, beetroot, water distilled from dry moss, honey, the maw and the matrix of an animal, and the edge of the liver.

_Ibid._

These six things are good symptoms in an invalid:—Sneezing, perspiration, evacuation, seminal emission, sleep, and dreaming.

_Ibid._, fol. 57, col. 2.

Six things bear interest in this world and the capital remaineth in the world to come:—Hospitality to strangers, visiting the sick, meditation in prayer, early attendance at the school of instruction, the training of sons to the study of the law, and judging charitably of one's neighbors.

_Shabbath_, fol. 127, col. 1.

There are six sorts of tears, three good and three bad:—Those caused by smoke, or grief, or constipation are bad; and those caused by fragrant spices, laughter, and aromatic herbs are good.

_Ibid._, fol. 151, col. 2; fol. 152, col. 1.

Six things are said respecting the illiterate:—No testimony is to be borne to them, none is to be accepted from them; no secret is to be disclosed to them; they are not to be appointed guardians over orphans, nor keepers of the charity-box, and there should be no fellowship with them when on a journey. Some say also no public notice is to be given of their lost property.

_P'sachim_, fol. 49, col. 2.

<span id="p74">[<sup><small>p. 74</small></sup>]</span>

The expression here rendered “illiterate” means literally “people of the land,” and was, there is reason to believe, originally applied to the primitive inhabitants of Canaan, traces of whom may still be found among the fellahin of Syria. They appear, like the aboriginal races in many countries of Christendom in relation to Christianity, to have remained generation after generation obdurately inaccessible to Jewish ideas, and so to have given name to the ignorant and untaught generally. This circumstance may account for the harshness of some of the quotations which are appended in reference to them.

He who aspires to be a fellow of the learned must not sell fruit, either green or dry, to an illiterate man, nor may he buy fresh fruit of him. He must not be the guest of an ignorant man, nor receive such an one as his guest.

_Demai_, chap. 2, mish. 2.

Our Rabbis teach, Let a man sell all that he has and marry the daughter of a learned man. If he cannot find the daughter of a learned man, let him marry the daughter of one of the great men of his day. If he does not find such a one, let him marry the daughter of one of the heads of the congregation, or, failing this, the daughter of a charity collector, or even the daughter of a schoolmaster; but let him not marry the daughter of an illiterate man, for the unlearned are an abomination, as also their wives and their daughters.

_P'sachim_, fol. 49, col. 2.

It is said that Rabbi (the Holy) teaches that it is illegal for an unlearned man to eat animal food, for it is said (Lev. xi. 46), “This is the law of the beast and the fowl;” therefore he who studies the law may eat animal food, but he who does not study the law may not. Rabbi Eliezar said, “It is lawful to split open the nostrils of an unlearned man, even on the Day of Atonement which happens to fall on a Sabbath.” To which his disciples responded, “Rabbi, say rather to slaughter him.” He replied, “Nay, that would require the repetition of the usual benediction; but in tearing open his nostrils no benedictory formula is needed.” Rabbi Eliezar has also said, "It is unlawful to travel with such a one, for it is said (Deut. <span id="p75">[<sup><small>p. 75</small></sup>]</span> xxx. 30), ‘For it is thy life and the length of thy days.’ The unlearned does not ensure his own life (since he has no desire to study the law, which would prolong life), how much less then will he regard the life of his neighbor?“ Rabbi Samuel, son of Nachman, says on behalf of Rabbi Yochanan, that it is lawful to split open an unlearned man like a fish. ”Aye,“ adds Rabbi Samuel, ”and that from his back.”

_P'sachim_, fol. 49, col. 2.

Rav Yehudah says it is good to eat the pulp of a pumpkin with beetroot as a remedy, also the essence of hemp seed in Babylonian broth; but it is not lawful to mention this in the presence of an illiterate man, because he might derive a benefit from the knowledge not meant for him.

_Nedarim_, fol. 49, col. 1.

No contribution or heave-offering should be given to an ignorant priest. Sanhedrin, fol. 90, col. 2.

No boor can be pious, nor an ignorant man a saint.

_Avoth_, chap. 2, mish. 6.

Sleep in the morning, wine at mid-day, the idle talk of inexperienced youth, and attending the conventicles of the ignorant drive a man out of the world.

_Ibid._, chap. 3, mish. 16.

Rabbi Jonathan says, 'Where do we learn that no present is to be made to an ignorant priest?" In 2 Chron. xxxi. 4, for there it is said Hezekiah ‘commanded that all the people that dwelt in Jerusalem should give a portion to the priests and to the! Levites, that they might be strong in the law of the Lord.’ He who firmly lays hold of the law has a claim to a portion, otherwise he has none.

_Chullin_, fol. 130, col. 2.

The aged, if ignorant, grow weaker in intellect the older they become in years, for it is written (Job xii. 20), “He removeth away the speech of the trusty, and taketh away the understanding of the aged.” But it is not so with them that are old in the study of the law, for the older they grow the more thoughtful thew become, and the wiser, as it is said (Job xii. 12), “With the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days understanding.”

_Kinnin_, chap. 3.

<span id="p76">[<sup><small>p. 76</small></sup>]</span>

The salutation of the ignorant should be responded to quietly, and with a reluctant nod of the head.

_Taanith_, fol. 14, col. 2.

No calamities ever befall the world except such as are brought on by the ignorant.

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 8, col. 1.

Rav Hunna's widow once appeared before Rav Nachman as plaintiff in a lawsuit. “What shall I do?” he said. “If I rise before her (to honor her as the widow of a Rabbi), the defendant, who is an _amhaaretz_, will feel uneasy; and if I don't rise I shall break the rule which ordains that the wife of an associate is to be treated as an associate.” So he said to his servant, “Loose a young goose over my head, then I'll get up.”

Rav bar Sheravyah had a lawsuit with an amhaaretz before Rav Pappa, who bade him be seated, and also asked the other to sit down. When the officer of the court raised the _amhaaretz_ with a kick, the magistrate did not request him to be seated again.

_Shevuoth_, fol. 30, col. 2.

Six things are said respecting demons. In three particulars they are like angels, and in three they resemble men.

They have wings like angels; like angels they fly from one end of the world to the other, and they know the future, as angels do, with this difference, that they learn by listening behind the veil what angels have revealed to them within. In three respects they resemble men. They eat and drink like men, they beget and increase like men, and like men they die. Chaggigah, fol. 16, col. 1.

The Talmud is particularly rich in demonology, and many are the forms which the evil principle assumes in its pages. We have no wish to drag these shapes to the light, and interrogate them as to the part they play in this intricate life. Enough now if we mention the circumstance of their existence, and introduce to the reader the story of Ashmedai, the king of the demons. The story is worth relating, both for its own sake and its historical significance.

In Ecclesiastes ii. 8, we read, “I gat me men singers and women singers, the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts.” These last seven words represent only two in the original Hebrew, _Shiddah-veshiddoth_. These two words in the original Hebrew translated by the last seven in this verse, have been a source of great perplexity to the critics, and their exact meaning is matter of debate to this hour. They in the West say they mean severally <span id="p77">[<sup><small>p. 77</small></sup>]</span> carriages for lords and carriages for ladies, while we, says the Babylonish Talmud, interpret them to signify male demons and female demons. Whereupon, if this last is the correct rendering, the question arises, for what purpose Solomon required them? The answer is to be found in 1 Kings vi. 7, where it is written, “And the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made ready before it was brought thither,” etc. For before the operation commenced Solomon asked the Rabbis, “How shall I accomplish this without using tools of iron?” and they remembering of an insect which had existed since the creation of the world, whose powers were such as the hardest substances could not resist, replied, “There is the Shameer, with which Moses cut the precious stones of the Ephod.” Solomon asked, “And where, pray, is the Shameer to be found?” To which they made answer, “Let a male demon and a female come, and do thou coerce them both; mayhap they know and will reveal it to thee.” He then conjured into his presence a male and a female demon, and proceeded to torture them, but in vain, for said they, “We know not its whereabouts and cannot tell; perhaps Ashmedai, the king of the demons, knows.” On being further interrogated as to where he in turn might be found, they made this answer: “In yonder mount is his residence; there he has dug a pit, and, after filling it with water, covered it over with a stone, and sealed with his own seal. Daily he ascends to heaven and studies in the school of wisdom there, then he comes down and studies in the school of wisdom here; upon which he goes and examines the seal, then opens the pit, and after quenching his thirst, covers it up again, re-seals it, and takes his departure.”

Solomon thereupon sent Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada, provided with a magic chain and ring, upon both of which the name of God was engraved. He also provided him with a fleece of wool and sundry skins with wine. Then Benaiah went and sank a pit below that of Ashmedai, into which he drained off the water and plugged the duct between with the fleece. Then he set to and dug another hole higher up with a channel leading into the emptied pit of Ashmedia, by means of which the pit was filled with the wine be had brought. After leveling the ground so as not to rouse suspicion, he withdrew to a tree close by, so as to watch the result and wait his opportunity. After a while Ashmedai came, and examined the seal, when, seeing it all right, he raised the stone, and to his surprise found wine in the pit. For a time he stood muttering and saying, it is written, “Wine is a mocker: strong drink is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise.” And again, “Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart.” Therefore at first he was unwilling to drink, but being thirsty, he could not long resist the temptation. He proceeded to drink therefore, when, becoming intoxicated, he lay down to sleep. Then Benaiah, came forth from his ambush, and stealthily approaching, fastened the chain round the sleeper's neck. Ashmedai, when he awoke, began to fret and fume, and would have torn off the chain that bound him, had not Benaiah warned him, saying, "The name of <span id="p78">[<sup><small>p. 78</small></sup>]</span> thy Lord is upon thee.“ Having thus secured him, Benaiah proceeded to lead him away to his sovereign master. As they journeyed along they came to a palm-tree, against which Ashmedai rubbed himself, until he uprooted it and threw it down. When they drew near to a hut, the poor widow who inhabited it came out and entreated him not to rub himself against it, upon which, as he suddenly bent himself back, he snapt a bone of his body, and said, ”This is that which is written (Prov. xxv. 15), ‘And a gentle answer breaketh the bone.’" Descrying a blind man straying out of his way, he hailed him and directed him aright. He even did the same service to a man overcome with wine, who was in a similar predicament. At sight of a wedding party that passed rejoicing along, he wept; but he burst into uncontrollable laughter when he heard a man order at a shoemaker's stall a pair of shoes that would last seven years; and when he saw a magician at his work he broke forth into shrieks of scorn.

On arriving at the royal city, three days were allowed to pass before he was introduced to Solomon. On the first day he said, “Why does the king not invite me into his presence?” “He has drunk too much,” was the answer, “and the wine has overpowered him.” Upon which he lifted a brick and placed it upon the top of another. When this was communicated to Solomon, he replied “He meant by this, go and make him drunk again.” On the day following he asked again, “Why does the king not invite me into his presence?” They replied, “He has eaten too much.” On this he removed the brick again from the top of the other. When this was reported to the king, he interpreted it to mean, “Stint him in his food.”

After the third day, he was introduced to the king; when measuring off four cubits upon the floor with the stick he held in his hand, he said to Solomon, “When thou diest, thou wilt not possess in this world (be referred to the grave) more than four cubits of earth. Meanwhile thou has conquered the world, yet thou wert not satisfied until thou hadst overcome me also.” To this the king quietly replied, “I want nothing of thee, but I wish to build the Temple and have need of the _Shameer_.” To which Ashmedai at once answered, “The Shameer is not committed in charge to me, but to the Prince of the Sea, and he intrusts it to no one except to the great wild cock, and that upon an oath that he return it to him again.” Whereupon Solomon asked, “And what does the wild cock do with the Shameer?” To which the demon replied, “He takes it to a barren rocky mountain, and by means of it he cleaves the mountain asunder, into the cleft of which, formed into a valley, he drops the seeds of various plants and trees, and thus the place becomes clothed with verdure and fit for habitation.” This is the _Shameer_ (Lev. xi. 19), Nagger Tura, which the Targum renders Mountain Splitter.

They therefore searched for the nest of the wild cock, which they found contained a young brood. This they covered with a glass, that the bird might see its young, but not be able to get at them. When accordingly the bird came and found his nest impenetrably glazed over, he <span id="p79">[<sup><small>p. 79</small></sup>]</span> went and fetched the Shameer. Just as he was about to apply it to the glass in order to cut it, Solomon's messenger gave a startling shout, and this so agitated the bird that he dropped the Shameer, and Solomon's messenger caught it up and made off with it. The cock thereupon went and strangled himself, because he was unable to keep the oath by which he had bound himself to return the Shameer.

Benaiah asked Ashmedai why, when he saw the blind man straying, he so promptly interfered to guide him? “Because,” he replied, “it was proclaimed in heaven that that man was perfectly righteous, and that whosoever did him a good turn would earn a title to a place in the world of the future.” “And when thou sawest the man overcome with wine wandering out of his way, why didst thou put him right again?” Ashmedai said, “Because it was made known in heaven that that man was thoroughly bad, and I have done him a good service that he might not lose all, but receive some good in the world that now is.” “Well, and why didst thou weep when thou sawest the merry wedding-party pass?” “Because,” said he, “the bridegroom was fated to die within thirty days and the bride must needs wait thirteen years for her husband's brother, who is now but an infant” (see Deut. xxv. 5-10). “Why didst thou laugh so when the man ordered a pair of shoes that would last him seven years?” Ashmedai replied, “Because the man himself was not sure of living seven days.” “And why,” asked Benaiah, “didst thou jeer when thou sawest the conjuror at his tricks?” “Because,” said Ashmedai, “the man was at that very time sitting on a princely treasure, and he did not, with all his pretension, know that it was under him.”

Having once acquired a power over Ashmedai, Solomon detained him till the building of the Temple was completed. One day after this, when they were alone, it is related that Solomon, addressing him, asked him, “What, pray, is your superiority over us, if it be true, as it is written (Num. xxiii. 22), ‘He has the strength of a unicorn,’ and the word ‘strength,’ as tradition alleges, means ‘ministering angels,’ and the word ‘unicorn’ means ‘devils’?” Ashmedai replied, “Just take this chain from my neck, and give me thy signet-ring, and I'll soon show thee my superiority.” No sooner did Solomon comply with this request, than Ashmedai, snatching him up, swallowed him; then stretching forth his wings—one touching the heaven and the other the earth—he vomited him out again to a distance of four hundred miles. It is with reference to this time that Solomon says (Eccl. i. 3; ii. 10), “What profit hath a man of all his labor which he taketh under the sun? This is my portion of all my labor.” What does the word this mean? Upon this point Rav and Samuel are at variance, for the one says it means his staff, the other holds that it means his garment or water-jug; and that with one or other Solomon went about from door to door begging; and wherever he came he said (Eccl. i. 12), “I, the preacher, was king over Israel in Jerusalem.” When in his wanderings he came to the house of the Sanhedrin, the Rabbis reasoned and said, if he were mad he would <span id="p80">[<sup><small>p. 80</small></sup>]</span> not keep repeating the same thing over and over again; therefore what does he mean? They therefore inquired of Benaiah, “Does the king ask thee into his presence?” He replied, “No!” They then sent to see whether the king visited the hareem. And the answer to this was, “Yes, he comes.” Then the Rabbis sent word back that they should look at his feet, for the devil's feet are like those of a cock. The reply was, “He comes to us in stockings.” Upon this information the Rabbis escorted Solomon back to the palace, and restored to him the chain and the ring, on both of which the name of God was engraven. Arrayed with these, Solomon advanced straightway into the presence-chamber. Ashmedai sat at that moment on the throne, but as soon as he saw Solomon enter, he took fright and raising his wings, flew away, shrieking back into invisibility. In spite of this, Solomon continued in great fear of him; and this explains that which is written (Song of Songs, iii. 7, 8), “Behold the bed which is Solomon's; threescore valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel; they all hold swords, being expert in war; every man has his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night.” (See Gittin, fol. 68, cols. 1, 2.)

Ashmedai is the Asmodeus of the Book of Tobit, iii. 8, vi. 14, etc. The Shameer is mentioned in Jer. xvii. 1, Ezek. iii. 9; Zech. vii. 12. The Seventy in the former passage and the Vulgate passim take it for the diamond.

Six things are said respecting the children of men, in three of which they are like angels, and in three they are like animals. They have intelligence like angels, they walk erect like angels, and they converse in the holy tongue like angels. They eat and drink like animals, they generate and multiply like animals, and they relieve nature like animals.

_Chaggigah_, fol. 16, col. 1.

Six months did the Shechinah hesitate to depart from the midst of Israel in the wilderness, in hopes that they would repent. At last, when they persisted in impenitence, the Shechinah said, “May their bones be blown;” as it is written (Job xi. 20), “The eyes of the wicked shall fail, they shall not escape, and their hopes shall be as the blowing out of the spirit.” Rosh Hashanah, fol. 31, col. 1.

Six names were given to Solomon:—Solomon, Jedidiah, Koheleth, Son of Jakeh, Agur, and Lemuel.

_Avoth d'Rab. Nathan_, chap. 39.

Six years old was Dinah when she gave birth to Asenath, whom she bore unto Shechem.

_Sophrim_, chap. 21.

<span id="p81">[<sup><small>p. 81</small></sup>]</span>

“And the Lord blessed Obed-edom and all his household” (2 Sam. vi. 11). In what did the blessing consist? Rav Yehudah bar Zavidah says it consisted in this, that Hamoth, his wife, and her eight daughters-in-law gave birth each to six children at a time. (This is proved from 1 Chron. xxvi. 5, 8.)

_Berachoth_, fol. 63, col. 2.

Six things were done by Hezekiah the king, but the sages praised him for three only:—(1.) He dragged the bones of his father Ahaz on a hurdle of ropes, for this they commended him; (2.) he broke to pieces the brazen serpent, for this they commended him; (3.) he hid the Book of Remedies, and for this too they praised him. For three they blamed him:—(1.) He stripped the doors of the Temple and sent the gold thereof to the King of Assyria; (2.) he stopped up the upper aqueduct of Gihon; (3.) he intercalated the month Nisan.

_P'sachim_, fol. 56, col. 1.

The hiding of the Book of Remedies, harsh and inhuman as it might seem, was dictated by high moral considerations. It seemed right that the transgressor should feel the weight of his sin in the suffering that followed, and that the edge of judgment should not be dulled by a too easy access to anodyne applications. The reason for stopping the aqueduct of Gihon is given in 2 Chron. xxxii. 3, 4. The inhabitants of Jerusalem did the very same thing when the Crusaders besieged the City, A. D. 1099. Rashi tries to explain why this stratagem was not commended; the reason he gives is that Hezekiah ought to have trusted God, who had said (2 Kings xix. 34), “I will defend the city.”

Six things are said of the horse:—It is wanton, it delights in the strife of war, it is high-spirited, it despises sleep, it eats much and it voids little. There are some that say it would fain kill its own master.

_Ibid._, fol. 113, col. 2,

The Rabbis have taught that there are six sorts of fire:—(1.) Fire that eats but drinks not, _i. e._, common fire; (2.) fire that drinks but does not eat, _i. e._, a fever; (3.) fire that eats and drinks, _i. e._, Elijah, as it is written (1 Kings xviii. 38), "And licked up the water that was in the trench; (4) fire that burns up moist things as soon as dry, _i. e._, the fire on the altar; (5.) fire that counteracts other fire, _i. e._, like that of Gabriel; (6.) fire that consumes fire, for the Master has said (Sanhed., fol. 38, col. 2), <span id="p82">[<sup><small>p. 82</small></sup>]</span> “God stretched out His finger among the angels and consumed them,' _i. e._, by His own essential fire.

_Yoma_, fol. 21, col. 2.

For six months David was afflicted with leprosy; for it is said (Ps. li. 7), “Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.” At that time the Shechinah departed from him; for it is said (Ps. li. 12), “Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation;” and the Sanhedrin kept aloof from him, for it is said (Ps. cxix. 79), “Let those that fear thee turn unto me.” That this ailment lasted six months is proved from 1 Kings ii. 11, where it is said, 'And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years; seven years he reigned in Hebron, and thirty-three years he reigned in Jerusalem;“ whereas in 2 Sam. V. 5, it is said, ”In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months." The reason why these six months are omitted in Kings is because during that period he was afflicted with leprosy.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 107, col. 1.

The tables of stone were six ells long, six broad, and three thick.

_Nedarim_, fol. 38, col. 8.

It may help the reader to some idea of the strength of Moses if we work out arithmetically the size and probable weight of these stone slabs according to the Talmud. Taking the cubit or ell at its lowest estimate, that is eighteen inches, each slab, being nine feet long, nine feet wide, and four and a half feet thick, would weigh upward of twenty-eight tons, reckoning thirteen cubic feet to the ton,—the right estimate for such stone as is quarried from the Sinaitic cliff. The figures are 9 x 9 x 9/2 = 729/2 = 364.5 x 173.5 = 63240.75=28 tons, 4 cwt., 2 qrs., 16 lbs. avoirdupois.

The Rabbis have taught that these six things possess medicinal virtue:—Cabbage, lungwort, beetroot, water, and certain parts of the offal of animals, and some also say little fishes.

_Avodah Zarah_, fol. 29, col. 1.

Over six the Angel of Death had no dominion, and these were:—Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. Respecting the first three it is written, “in all” (Gen. xxiv. 1), “of all” (Gen. xxvii. 33) “all” (A. V. “enough,” Gen. xxxiii. ii). Respecting the last three it <span id="p83">[<sup><small>p. 83</small></sup>]</span> is written, “by the mouth of Jehovah” (see Num. xxxiii. 38, and Deut. xxxiv. 5).

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 17, col. 1.

According to Jewish tradition, there are 903 kinds of death, as is elicited by a Kabbalistic rule called gematria, from the word outlets (Ps. lxviii. 20); the numeric value of the letters of which word is 903. Of these 903 kinds of death, the divine kiss is the easiest. God puts His favorite children to sleep, the sleep of death, by kissing their souls away. It was thus Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob fell asleep, as may be inferred from the word all; that is to say, they had all the honor God could confer upon them. Moses and Aaron fell asleep by the divine kiss, for it is plainly stated to have been “by the mouth of Jehovah.” So also Miriam passed away, only the Scripture does not say lest the scoffer should find fault. We are also informed that quinsy is the hardest death of all. (See _Berachoth_, fol. 8, col. 1.)

“These six of barley gave he me.” What does this mean? It cannot surely be understood of six barleycorns, for it could not be the custom of Boaz to give a present of six grains of barley. It must, therefore, have been six measures. But was it usual for a woman to carry such a load as six measures would come to? What he intended by the number six was to give her a hint that in process of time six sons would proceed from her, each of which would be blessed with six blessings; and these were David, the Messiah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. David, as it is written (1 Sam. xvi. 8), (1.) “Cunning in playing,” (2.) “and a mighty and valiant man,” (3.) “a man of war,” (4.) “prudent in matters,” (5.) “a comely person,” (6.) and “the Lord is with him.” The Messiah, for it is written (Isa. xi. 2), “And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him,” viz, (1.) “The spirit of wisdom and (2.) understanding, (3.) the spirit of counsel and (4.) might, (5.) the spirit of knowledge, and (6.) the fear of the Lord.” Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, for regarding them it is written (Dan. i. 4), (1.) “Young men in whom was no blemish” (2.) “handsome in looks” (3.) “intelligent in wisdom” (4.) “acquainted with knowledge,” (5.) “and understanding science, and such as (6.) had ability to stand in the palace of the king,” etc. But what is the meaning of unblemished? Rav Chama ben Chanania says it means that not even the scar of a lancet was upon them.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 93, cols. 1, 2.

<span id="p84">[<sup><small>p. 84</small></sup>]</span>

The words “not even the scar of a lancet was upon them,” bespeak the prevalence of blood-letting in the East, and the absence of the scar of the lancet on the persons of Daniel and his companions is a testimony to their health of body and moral temperance and purity.

In Taanith (fol. 21, col. 2) mention is made of a certain phlebotomist—a noteworthy exception to the well-known rule (see Kiddushin, fol. 82, col. 2) that phlebotomists are to be regarded as morally depraved, and ~n the same class with goldsmiths, perfumers, hairdressers, etc.,—Abba Umna by name, who had a special mantle with slits in the sleeves for females, so that he could surgically operate upon them without seeing their naked arms, while he himself was covered over head and shoulders in a peculiar cloak, so that his own face could not by any chance be seen by them.

From Shabbath, fol. 156, col. 1, we learn that a person born under the influence of Maadim, _i. e._, Mars, will in one way or another be a shedder of blood, such as a plebotomist, a butcher, a highwayman, etc., etc.

Six blasts of the horn were blown on Sabbath-eve. The first was to set free the laborers in the fields from their work; those that worked near the city waited for those that worked at a distance and all entered the place together. The second blast was to warn the citizens to suspend their employments and shut up their shops. At the third blast the women were to have ready the various dishes they had prepared for the Sabbath and to light the lamps in honor of the day. Then three more blasts were blown in succession, and the Sabbath commenced.

_Shabbath_, fol. 35, col. 2.


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">V.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/7">
          <span class="pr-2">VII.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
