---
title: "LII. to LXXI."
description: "Hebraic Literature"
published: true
date: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
tags: Judaism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-7T10:36:56Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/50">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XLI. to L.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/71_Judges">
          <span class="pr-2">Judges., Witnesses., Criminals And Criminal Punishments.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## LII.

For fifty-two years no man traveled through the land of Judea.

_Yoma_. fol. 54, col. 1.


## LX.

Black cummin is one of the sixty deadly drugs.

_Berachoth_, fol. 40, col. 1.

Ulla and Rav Chasda were once traveling together, when they came up to the gate of the house of Rav Chena bar Chenelai. At sight of it Rav Chasda stooped and sighed. “Why sighest thou?” asked Ulla, “seeing, as Rav says, sighing breaks the body in halves; for it is said (Ezek. xxi. 6), ‘sigh, therefore, O son of man, with the breaking of thy loins;’ and Rabbi Yochanan says a sigh breaks up the whole constitution; for it is said (Ezek. xxi. 7), ‘And it shall be when they say unto thee, Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt answer, For the tidings because it cometh, and the whole heart shall melt,’” etc. To this Rav Chasda replied, “How can I help sighing over this house, where sixty bakers used to be employed during the day, and sixty during the night, to make bread for the poor and needy; and Rav Chena had his hand always at his purse, for he thought the slightest hesitation might cause a poor but respectable man to blush; and besides he kept four doors open, one to each quarter of the heavens, so that all might enter and be satisfied? Over and above this, in time of famine he scattered wheat and barley abroad, so that they who were ashamed to gather by day might do so by night; but now this house has fallen into ruin, and ought I not to sigh?”

_Ibid._, fol. 58, col. 2.

Egypt is a sixtieth of Ethiopia, Ethiopia a sixtieth of the world, the world is a sixtieth part of the garden of Eden, the garden itself is but a sixtieth of Eden, and Eden a sixtieth of Gehenna. Hence the world in proportion to Gehenna is but as the lid to a caldron.

_P'sachim_, fol. 94, col. 1.

They led forth Metatron and struck him sixty bastinadoes with a cudgel of fire.

_Chaggigah_, fol. 15, col. 1.

<span id="p157"><sup><small>[ p. 157 ]</small></sup></span>

In the context of the foregoing quotation occurs an anecdote of Rabbi Elisha ben Abuyah which is too racy to let pass, and too characteristic to need note or comment. One day Elisha ben Abuyah was privileged to pry into Paradise, where he saw the recording angel Metatron on a seat registering the merits of the holy of Israel. Struck with astonishment at the sight, he exclaimed, “Is it not laid down that there is no sitting in heaven, no shortsightedness or fatigue?” Then Metatron, thus discovered, was ordered out and flogged with sixty lashes from a fiery scourge. Smarting with pain, the angel asked and obtained leave to cancel the merits of the prying Rabbi. One day—it chanced to be on Yom Kippur and Sabbath—as Elisha was riding along by the wall where the Holy of Holies once stood, he heard a Bath Kol proclaiming, “Return, ye backsliding children, but Acher abide thou in thy sin” (Acher was the Rabbi's nickname). A faithful disciple of his hearing this, and bent on reclaiming and reforming him, invited him to go and hear the lads of a school close by repeat their lessons. The Rabbi went, and from that to another and another, until he had gone the round of a dozen seminaries, in the last of which he called up a lad to repeat a verse who had an impediment in his speech. The verse happened to be Ps. 1. 16, “But unto the wicked, God saith, Why dost thou declare my law?” Acher fancied the boy said, and to Elisha (his own name), instead of and to Rasha, that is, the wicked. This roused the Rabbi into such fury of passion, that he sprang to his feet, exclaiming: “If I only had a knife at hand I would cut this boy into a dozen pieces, and send a piece to each school I have visited!”

A woman of sixty runs after music like a girl of six.

_Moed Katon_, fol. 9, col. 2.

Rabba, who only studied the law, lived forty years; Abaii, who both studied the law and exercised benevolence, lived sixty.

_Rosh Hashanah_, fol. 18, col. 1.

The manna which came down upon Israel was sixty ells deep.

_Yoma_, fol. 76, col. 1.

It is not right for a man to sleep in the daytime any longer than a horse sleeps. And how long is the sleep of a horse? Sixty respirations.

_Succah_, fol. 26, col. 2.

Abaii says, “When I left Rabbah, I was not at all hungry; but when I arrived at Meree, they served up before me sixty dishes, with as many sorts of viands, and I ate half of each, but as for hotch-potch, which the last dish contained, I ate up all of it, and would fain have eaten up the dish too.” Abaii said, "This illustrates the proverb, current <span id="p158"><sup><small>[ p. 158 ]</small></sup></span> among the people, ‘The poor man is hungry, and does not know when he has eaten enough; or, there is always room for a tit-bit.’”

_Meggillah_, fol. 7, col. 2.

There are sixty kinds of wine; the best of all is the red aromatic wine, and bad white wine is the worst.

_Gittin_, fol. 70, col. 1.

Samson's shoulders were sixty ells broad.

_Soteh_, fol. 10, col. 1.

Ebal and Gerizim were sixty miles from Jordan.

_Ibid._, fol. 36, col. 1.

One who makes a good breakfast can outstrip sixty runners in a race (who have not).

_Bava Kama_, fol. 92, col. 2.

A (hungry) person who looks on while another eats, experiences sixty unpleasant sensations in his teeth.

_Ibid._

His wife made him daily sixty sorts of dainties, and these restored him again.

_Bava Metzia_, fol. 84, col. 2.

Rabbi Elazar, the son of Rabbi Shimon, once vindictively caused a man too be put to death, merely because he had spoken of him as Vinegar the son of Wine, a round-about way of reproaching him that he was the bad son of a good father, though it turned out afterward that the condemned man deserved death for a crime that he was not known to be guilty of at the time of his execution; yet the mind of the Rabbi was ill at ease, and he voluntarily did penance by subjecting himself in a peculiar fashion to great bodily suffering. Sixty woolen cloths were regularly spread under him every night, and these were found soaked in the morning with his profuse perspiration. The result of this was greater and greater bodily prostration, which his wife strove, as related above, day after day to repair, detaining him from college, lest the debates there should prove too much for his weakened frame. When his wife found that he persisted in courting these sufferings, and that her tender care, as well as her own patrimony, were being lavished on him in vain, she tired of her assiduity, and left him to his fate. And now, waited on by some sailors, who believed they owed to him deliverance from a watery grave, he was free to do as he liked. One day, being ministered to by them after a night's perspiration of the kind referred to, he went straight to college, and there decided sixty doubtful cases against the unanimous dissent of the assembly. Providential circumstances, which happened afterward, both proved that he was right in his judgment and that his wife was wrong in suffering her fondness for him to stand in the way of the performance of his public duties.

<span id="p159"><sup><small>[ p. 159 ]</small></sup></span>

Elijah frequently attended the Rabbi's seat of instruction, and once, on the first of a month, he came in later than usual. Rabbi asked what had kept him so late. Elijah answered, “I have to wake up Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob one after the other, to wash the hands of each, and to wait until each has said his prayers and retired to rest again.” “But,” said Rabbi, “why do they not all get up at the same time?” “The answer was, ”Because if they prayed all at once, their united prayers would hurry on the coming of the Messiah before the time appointed.“ Then said Rabbi, ”Are there any such praying people among us?“ Elijah mentioned Rabbi Cheyah and his sons. Then Rabbi announced a fast, and the Rabbi Cheyah and his sons came to celebrate it. In the course of repeating the Shemoneh Esreh\[\*\] they were about to say, ”Thou restoreth life to the dead“ when the world was convulsed, and the question was asked in heaven, ”Who told them the secret?" So Elijah was bastinadoed sixty strokes with a cudgel of fire. Then he came down like a fiery bear, and dashing in among the people, scattered the congregation.

_Bava Metzia_, fol. 85, col. 2.

When love was strong, we could lie, as it were, on the edge of a sword; but now, when love is diminished, a bed sixty ells wide is not broad enough for us.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 7, col. 1.

The pig bears in sixty days.

_Bechoroth_, fol. 8, col. 1.

Sixty iron mines are suspended in the sting of a gnat.

_Chullin_, fol. 58, col. 2.

An egg once dropped out of the nest of a bird called Bar-Yuchnei, which deluged sixty cities and swept away three hundred cedars. The question therefore arose, “Does the bird generally throw out its eggs?” Rav Ashi replied, “No; that was a rotten one.”

_Bechoroth_, fol. 57, col. 2.


## LXX.

Everybody knows why a bride enters the nuptial chamber, but against him who sullies his lips by talking about it, the decree for good, though of seventy years' standing,

\[\*. A prayer consisting of eighteen Collects, which is repeated three times each day.\] <span id="p160"><sup><small>[ p. 160 ]</small></sup></span> shall be reversed into a decree for evil. Rav Chasda says, “Whosoever disgraces his mouth (by evil communication), Gehenna shall be deepened for him; for it is said in Prov. xxii. 14, ‘A deep pit for the mouth of strange words (immoral talk).’” Rav Nachman bar Yitzchak says, “The same punishment will be inflicted on him who listens to it and is silent; for it is said (Prov. xxii. 14), ‘And he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein.’”

_Shabbath_, fol. 33, col. 1.

(Jer. xxiii. 29), “Like a hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces,” so is every utterance which proceedeth from the mouth of God, divided though it be into seventy languages.

_Ibid._, fol. 88, col. 2.

Rabbi Eliezer asked, “For whose benefit were those seventy bullocks intended?” See Num. xxix. 12-36. For the seventy nations into which the Gentile world is divided; and Rashi plainly asserts that the seventy bullocks were intended to atone for them, that rain might descend all over the world, for on the Feast of Tabernacles judgment is given respecting rain, etc. Woe to the Gentile nations for their loss, and they know not what they have lost! for as long as the Temple existed, the altar made atonement for them; but now, who is to atone for them?

_Succah_, fol. 55, col. 2.

Choni, the Maagol, once saw in his travels an old man planting a carob-tree, and he asked him when he thought the tree would bear fruit. “After seventy years,” was the reply. “What!” said Choni, “dost thou expect to live seventy years and eat the fruit of thy labor?” “I did not find the world desolate when I entered it,” said the old man; “and as my fathers planted for me before I was born, so I plant for those that will come after me.”

_Taanith_, fol. 23, col.

Mordecai was one of those who sat in the hall of the Temple, and he knew seventy languages.

_Meggillah_, fol. 13, col. 2.

The Rabbis have taught during a prosperous year in Israel, a place that is sown with a single measure of seed produces five myriad cors of grain. In the tilled districts <span id="p161"><sup><small>[ p. 161 ]</small></sup></span> of Zoan, one measure of seed produces seventy cors; for we are told that Rabbi Meir said he himself had witnessed in the vale of Bethshean an instance of one measure of seed producing seventy cors. And there is no better land any where than the land of Egypt; for it is said, “As the garden of the Lord, like the land of Egypt.” And there is no better land in all Egypt than Zoan, where several kings have resided; for it is written (Isa. xxx. 4), “His princes were in Zoan.” In all Israel there was no more unsuitable soil than Hebron, for it was a burying-place, and yet Hebron was seven times more prolific than Zoan; for it is written (Num. xiii. 22), “Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.” For it is said (Gen. x. 6), “And the sons of Ham, Cush, Mizraim (that is, Egypt), Phut, and Canaan” (that is, Israel). It must, therefore, mean that it was seven times more prolific (the verb meaning both to build and to produce) than Zoan. This is only in the unsuitable soil of the land of Israel, Hebron, but in the suitable soil (the increase) is five hundred times. All this applies to a year of average return, but in one of special prosperity, it is written (Gen. xxvi. 12), “Then Isaac sowed in that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold, and the Lord blessed him.” (The word years, is conveniently overlooked in working out the argument.)

_Kethuboth_, fol. 112, col. 1.

The astrologers in Egypt said to Pharaoh, “What! shall a slave whose master bought him for twenty pieces of silver rule over us?” Pharaoh replied, “But I find him endowed with kingly qualities.” “If that is the case,” they answered, “he must know seventy languages.” Then came the angel Gabriel, and taught him seventy languages.

_Soteh_, fol. 36, col. 2.

When the leviathan makes the deep boil, the sea does not recover its calm for seventy years; for it is said (Job xli. 32), “One would think the deep is to be hoary,” and we cannot take the word “hoary” to imply a term of less than seventy years.

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 75, col. 1.

Abba Chalepha Keruya once remarked to Rav Cheyah bar Abba, "The sum total of Jacob's family thou findest <span id="p162"><sup><small>[ p. 162 ]</small></sup></span> reckoned at seventy, whereas the numbers added up make only sixty-nine. How is that?“ Rav Cheyah made answer that the particle in verse 15, implies that Dinah must have been one of twin-sisters. ”But,“ objected the other, ”the same particle occurs also in connection with Benjamin, to say nothing of other instances.“ ”Alas!“ said Rav Cheyah, ”I am possessed of a secret worth knowing, and thou art trying to worm it out of me.“ Then interposed Rav Chama bar Chanena, ”The number may be made up by reckoning Jochebed in, for of her it is said (Num. xxvi. 59) ‘that her mother bare her to Levi in Egypt;’ her birth took place in Egypt, though she was conceived on the journey.”

_Bava Bathra_, fol. 123, cols. 1, 2.

Rav Yehudah says in the name of Shemuel:—There is yet another festival in Rome, which is observed only once in seventy years, and this is the manner of its celebration. They take an able-bodied man, without physical defect, and cause him to ride upon the back of a lame one. They dress up the former in the garments of Adam (such as God made for him in Paradise), and cover his face with the skin of the face of Rabbi Ishmael, the high priest, and adorn his neck with a precious stone. They illuminate the streets, and then lead the two men through the city, a herald proclaiming before them, “The account of our Lord was false; it is the brother of our Lord that is the deceiver! He that sees this festival sees it, and he that does not see it now will never see it. What advantage to the deceiver is his deception, and to the crafty his craftiness?” The proclamation finishes up thus—“Woe to this one when the other shall rise again!”

_Avodah Zarah_, fol. 11, col. 2.

The Targum Varushalmi informs us that the Lord God wrought for Adam and his wife robes of honor from the cast-off skin of the serpent. We learn elsewhere that Nimrod came into possession of Adam's coat through Ham, who stole it from Noah while in the Ark. The glib tongue of tradition also tells how Esau slew Nimrod and appropriated the garment, and wore it for luck when hunting; but that on the day when he went to seek venison at the request of his dying parent, in his hurry he forgot the embroidered robe of Adam, and had bad luck in consequence. Then Jacob borrowed the left-off garment, and kept it for himself. The mask alluded to is accounted for <span id="p163"><sup><small>[ p. 163 ]</small></sup></span> thus:—The daughter of a Roman emperor took a fancy to have the skin of Rabbi Ishmael's face, and it accordingly, when he was dead, was taken off, and so embalmed as to retain its features, expression, and complexion, and the Jews say that it is still preserved among the relics at Rome. The able-bodied man in this prophetic mystery-play represents Esau, and the limping man is intended for Jacob. Rome (or Esau) is uppermost in that ceremonial, but the time is coming when Jacob will rise and invest himself in the blessings he so craftily obtained the reversion of.

Rabbi Yochanan said:—None were elected to sit in the High Council of the Sanhedrin except men of stature, of wisdom, of imposing appearance, and of mature age; men who knew witchcraft and seventy languages, in order that the High Council of the Sanhedrin should have no need of an interpreter.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 17, col. 1.

Yehudah and Chiskiyah, the sons of Rabbi Cheyah, once sat down to a meal before Rabbi (the Holy) without speaking a word. “Give the boys some wine,” said Rabbi, “that they may have boldness to speak.” When they had partaken of the wine, they said, “The son of David will not come until the two patriarchal houses of Israel are no more,” that is, the head of the Captivity in Babylon and the Prince in the land of Israel; for it is written (Isa. viii. 14), “And he shall be for a sanctuary, and for a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel.” “Why, children,” said Rabbi (who was patriarch of Tiberias), “you are thrusting thorns into my eyes.” Rabbi Cheyah said, “Do not be offended at them. Wine is given with seventy, and so is a secret (the numerical value of each of these words is seventy); when wine enters the secret oozes out.”

_Ibid._, fol. 38, col. 1.

A certain star appears once in seventy years and deceives the sailors (who guide their vessels by the position of the heavenly bodies; and this star appears sometimes in the north and sometimes in the south.—_Rashi_.)

_Horayoth_, fol. 10, col. 1.

As eating olive berries causes one to forget things that he has known for seventy years, so olive oil brings back to the memory things which happened seventy years before.

_Ibid._, fol. 13, col. 2

<span id="p164"><sup><small>[ p. 164 ]</small></sup></span>

The outside of the shell of the purple mollusk resembles the sea in color; its bodily conformation is like that of a fish; it rises once in seventy years; its blood is used to dye wool purple, and therefore this color is dear.

_Menachoth_, fol. 44, col. 1.

The bearing-time of the flat-headed otter lasts seventy years; a parallel may be found in the carob-tree, from the planting to the ripening of the pods of which is seventy years.

_Berachoth_, fol. 8, col. 1.


## LXXI.

The Sanhedrin consisted of seventy-one members. It is recorded that Rabbi Yossi said, “Seldom was there contention in Israel, but the judicial court of seventy-one sat in the Lishkath-hagazith, _i. e._, Paved Hall, and two (ordinary) courts of justice consisting of twenty-three, one of which sat at the entrance of the Temple-Mount, and the other at the entrance of the ante-court; and also (provincial) courts of justice, also comprising twenty-three members, which held their sessions in all the cities of Israel. When an Israelite had a question to propose, he asked it first of the court in his own city. If they understood the case, they settled the matter; but if not, they applied to the court of the next city. If the neighboring justices could not decide, they went together and laid the case in debate before the court which held its session at the entrance of the Temple-Mount. If these courts, in turn, failed to solve the problem, they appealed to the court that sat in the entrance of the ante-court, where a discussion was entered into upon the moot points of the case; if no decision could be arrived at, they all referred to the (supreme) court of seventy-one, where the matter was finally decided by the majority of votes.”

As the disciples of Shammai and Hillel multiplied who had not studied the law thoroughly, contentions increased in Israel to such an extent that the law lost its unity and became as two.

_Sanhedrin_, fol. 88, col. 2.

The Sanhedrin sat in a semicircle, in order that they might see one another; and two notaries stood before them, the one on the right and the other on the left, to record the pros and cons in the various processes. Rabbi Yehudah says there were three such notaries, <span id="p165"><sup><small>[ p. 165 ]</small></sup></span> one for the pros, one for the cons, and one to record both the pros and the cons. (_Sanhedrin_, fol. 36, col. 2.)

The witnesses (in capital cases) were questioned on seven points, as follows:—In what Shemitah (or septennial cycle) did it occur? In which year (of the cycle)? In what month? Upon what day? At what hour? In what place? . . . The more one questioned the more he was commended. (See Deut. xiii. 15; A. V., ver. 14.) (_Ibid._, fol. 40, col. 1.)

In connection with the foregoing subject, let its string together some of the gems of forensic wisdom to be met with in the Talmud. A score or so of bona fide quotations, respecting judges, criminals and criminal punishment, and witnesses, will serve to illustrate this part of our subject.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/50">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XLI. to L.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Hebraic_Literature/71_Judges">
          <span class="pr-2">Judges., Witnesses., Criminals And Criminal Punishments.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
