---
title: "Chapter XXVIII: Foods and Drinks"
description: "A Manual of Hadith"
published: true
date: 2024-11-8T10:39:35Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-8T10:39:35Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/A_Manual_of_Hadith/27">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter XXVI: Wills and Inheritance</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/A_Manual_of_Hadith">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/A_Manual_of_Hadith/29">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter XXIX: Toilet</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p343">[<sup><small>p. 343</small></sup>]</span>

1. “O men! Eat the lawful and good things out of what is in the earth” (2:168).

2. “And eat and drink and be not immoderate, for He does not love the immoderate” (7:31).

3. “O you who believe! Do not forbid yourselves the good things which Allāh has made lawful for you, and do not exceed the limits” (5:87).

4. “And do not eat of that on which Allāh's name has not been mentioned.” (6: 122).

5. “Forbidden to you is that which dies of itself, and blood, and flesh of swine, and that on which any other name than that of Allāh has been invoked, and the strangled animal, and that beaten to death, and that killed by a fall, and that killed by being smitten with the horn, and that which wild beasts have eaten—except what you slaughter—and what is sacrificed on stones set up for idols” (5:3).

6. “Lawful to you is the game of the sea and its food ... and the game of the land is forbidden to you so long as you are on pilgrimage” (5:96).

7. “And the food of those who have been given the Book is lawful for you and your food is lawful for them” (5:5).

8. “It is no sin in you that you eat together or separately” (24:61).

9. “O you who believe! Intoxicants and games of chance are only an uncleanness, the devil's work; shun them, therefore, that you may be successful” (5:90).

There are some general principles laid down by the Holy Qur'ān regarding food. The first condition is that it should be lawful (_halāl_) (v. 1), which carries the double significance of being earned lawfully and not being prohibited by Law. The second is that it should be good (_tayyih_) (v. 1) or fit for eating, not unclean or such as offends the taste. It is further stated that the golden rule regarding what one eats and drinks is moderation (v. 2). As underfeeding affects the build-up of man, so does also the overloading of the stomach. Moderation also requires that no food should be used to excess. Self-denying practices by which a man deprives himself of certain kinds of food are <span id="p344">[<sup><small>p. 344</small></sup>]</span> expressly denounced (v. 3). Flesh is allowed if the animal is slaughtered in the name of Allāh (v. 4). Prohibited foods are detailed in v. 5. Game of land and sea is allowed with one exception (v. 6), Inter-dining with non-Muslims is allowed (v. 7). One may eat in the company of others or separately (v. 8), Intoxicants are prohibited (v. 9).

Further details are laid down in Hadīth. The name of Allāh must be mentioned when an animal is slaughtered (h. 1). It may be slaughtered with any sharp instrument which makes the blood flow (h. 2), Slaughtering consists in cutting the jugular vein of the throat, but the spinal cord must not be cut (hh. 3, 4). An afflicted animal may be slaughtered (h. 5). An animal properly slaughtered by a non-Muslim is allowed (h. 6). In a doubtful case the utterance of Allāh's name is sufficient (h. 7). Game is allowed subject to certain conditions (hh. 8, 9). Beasts of prey with teeth are prohibited (h. 10). Intoxicants are prohibited (hh. 11, 12), and they cannot be taken even in small quantities which may not intoxicate (h. 13). The hands must be washed before taking meals and again after it, when the mouth must also be rinsed (h. 14, 15). The utterance of _Bismillāh_ when taking food and a short prayer after it was the Holy Prophet's practice (hh. 16, 17). Drink and food must not be blown into and must be kept covered (hh. 18-20). In eating, one may help oneself with a knife (h. 21), or a spoon. Vessels of gold and silver are a luxury which Islām does not allow (h. 22). When a person is invited to a meal he should not refuse; nor should one go to a feast to which one has not been invited (h. 23). A servant may eat at the same table with his master (h. 24). Eating together is recommended (h. 25); but when doing so, one should have regard for others (hh. 26, 27). The guest must be accompanied to the door of the house (h. 28).

**1** Anas said,

The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, sacrificed two rams of a white colour mixed with black; I saw him with his foot placed on one side of their face, uttering _Bismillāh_, _Allāh-u-Akbar_, and he slaughtered them with his own hand.[^1]

(B. 73:9.)

<span id="p345">[<sup><small>p. 345</small></sup>]</span>

**2** Rāfi' said,

We were with the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, in Dhu-l-Hulaifah. . . . . .

So Rāfi said, We expect or we fear the enemy tomorrow and we have no knives; may we slaughter with (the thin edge of) cane? He (the Prophet) said: “What makes the blood flow, not the teeth and the nail, and the name of Allāh is mentioned on it, eat it.”[^2]

(B. 47:1)

**3** Nāfi' said,

Ibn 'Umar forbade (the cutting of) the spinal cord, saying, Cut what is above the bone, then leave (it) until it dies.

(B. 72:24)

<span id="p346">[<sup><small>p. 346</small></sup>]</span>

**4** Ibn Abbās said, Slaughtering is in the throat and in the pit above the breast between the collar bones.[^3]

(B. 72:24.)

**5** Mu'ādh ibn Sa'd reported,

A slave girl of Ka'b ibn Mālik was pasturing sheep in Sal', and one of the goats was afflicted, so she caught hold of it and slaughtered it with a stone. The Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, was asked about it, and he said, “Eat it.”

(B. 72:19.)

**6** Zuhrī said, There is no harm in (eating) an animal slaughtered by a Christian of Arabia; if thou hearest <span id="p347">[<sup><small>p. 347</small></sup>]</span> him invoking another name than that of Allāh, do not eat it, and if thou dost not hear him, Allāh has made it lawful, and He knew their unbelief.[^6]

(B. 72:22.)

**7** 'Ā'ishah said, Some people said to the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, People[^5] bring to us meat about which we do not know whether the name of Allāh was mentioned over it or not. He said, “Mention the name of Allāh over it and eat it.” She said, and they had just emerged from unbelief.

(B. 72:21)

<span id="p348">[<sup><small>p. 348</small></sup>]</span>

**8** Abū Th'labah said,

I said, O Prophet of Allāh! We live in the land of the followers of the Book; may we eat in their vessels? And (we live) in a land where there is game,—I hunt with my bow and with my dog which is untaught and with my dog that has been taught, so what is right for me? He said: “As to what thou askest about the followers of the Book, if you can find (vessels) other than these, do not eat in them; and if you do not find (other vessels), wash them and eat in them.” And what thou huntest with thy bow, and thou hast mentioned the name of Allāh, eat (it)[^7]; <span id="p349">[<sup><small>p. 349</small></sup>]</span> and what thou huntest with the dog that thou hast taught, and thou hast mentioned the name of Allāh, eat (it); and what thou huntest with thy untaught dog and thou art able to slaughter it, eat it."

(B. 72:4.)

**9** 'Umar said,

'The game of the sea is that which has been hunted, and its food (_ta'ām_) is that which it casts forth . . . . . . . . And Ibn 'Abbās said, Eat of the game of the sea whether it is (killed) by a Christian or a Jew or a Magian.[^8]

(B. 72:12.)

**10** Abū Tha'labah said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, forbade all beasts of prey with canine teeth.[^9]

(B. 72:29.)

<span id="p350">[<sup><small>p. 350</small></sup>]</span>

**11** Anas said,

I was giving drink to people in the abode of Abu Talhah, and their wine at that time was made of dates. Then the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, ordered a crier to make it known that wine was forbidden. He said. So Abu Talhah said to me, Get out and pour it out. I poured it out, and it flowed in the streets of Madīnah.[^10]

(B. 46:21.)

**12** 'Ā'ishah said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, was asked about _bit'_\—it is a <span id="p351">[<sup><small>p. 351</small></sup>]</span> drink made of honey and the people of Yaman used to drink it. So the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

“Every drink that intoxicates is prohibited.”[^11]

(B. 74:1)

**13** Jābir said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

“Of whatever thing a large quantity intoxicates, even a small quantity is prohibited.”[^12]

(AD. 25:5.)

**14** Salmān reported,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said “The blessing of food is the washing of hands before it, and the washing of hands after it.”[^13]

(Tr-Msh. 20.)

<span id="p352">[<sup><small>p. 352</small></sup>]</span>

**15** Suwaid Ibn al-Nu'mān said:

We went forth with the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, to Khaibar. When we reached Sahbā', he ordered the food to be served; and there was brought to him nothing but meal of parched barley, and we ate (of it); then he got up for the prayer and he rinsed his mouth and we rinsed our mouths.[^14]

(B. 70:51.)

**16** 'Umar ibn Abū Salamah said,

I was a boy being brought up in the care of the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, and my hand was active in the bowl, taking from every side. So the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said to me, “Boy! Say Bismillāh and eat with thy <span id="p353">[<sup><small>p. 353</small></sup>]</span> right hand and cat from the side nearest to thee.” So this was my manner of eating afterwards.

(B. 70:2.)

**17** Abū Sa'īd al-Khudrī said,

When the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, finished his meal, he used to say: “All praise is due to Allāh Who has given us to eat and to drink, and male us Muslims.”[^15]

(Tr-2 Msh. 20.)

**18** Abū Qatādah said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

“When one of you drinks, he should not blow into the vessel.”[^16]

(B. 4:18.)

<span id="p354">[<sup><small>p. 354</small></sup>]</span>

**19** Jābir said,

Abū Humaid brought a cup of milk from Naqī', and the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said to him:

“Why didst thou not cover it? Thou shouldst have placed a piece of wood on it.”

(B. 74:11.)

**20** Jābir reported,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

“When you go to sleep, put out the lamp and shut the doors and cover the mouths of water-skins and cover food and drink.”

(B. 74:21.)

**21** Ja'far ibn Amr reported,

His father informed him that he saw the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, <span id="p355">[<sup><small>p. 355</small></sup>]</span> cutting (meat) from the shoulder of a goat. Then he was invited to prayer, so he threw away the knife and said prayers and did not perform ablutions."[^17]

(B. 4:51.)

**22** Hudhaifah said, I heard the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, say: “Do not wear silk or silk brocade, and do not drink in vessels of gold and silver, and do not eat in bowls made of them; for they are for them in this life and for us in the next.”[^18]

(B. 70:29)

**23** 'Abd Allāh ibn 'Umar said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said: “When a person is invited (to a <span id="p356">[<sup><small>p. 356</small></sup>]</span> meal) and he does not accept (or reply), he disobeys Allāh and His Messenger; and he who goes (to a feast) without being invited enters as a thief and goes forth as a raider.”

(AD. 26:l.)

**24** Abū Hurairah reported on the authority of the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him:

“When the servant brings to one of you his food, then if he does not make him sit with him (to eat at the same table), let him give him a morsel or two morsels, for he has laboured to prepare it.”[^19]

(B. 49:18.)

**25** 'Umar said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

“Eat together and do not eat separately, for the blessing is with the company”[^20]

(IM-Msh. 20:l.)

<span id="p357">[<sup><small>p. 357</small></sup>]</span>

**26** Ja'far ibn Muhammad reported on the authority of his father,

When the Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, ate in the company of (other) people, he was the last of them (to finish) eating.[^21]

(Msh. 20:1.)

**27** Ibn 'Umar said,

The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

“When food is placed (before a company), no one should get up until the food is removed; nor should any one raise up his hand (from the food), though he may have satisfied his hunger, until the people have finished—and he should offer an excuse—for this causes his companion to become ashamed, so he withholds his hand though he may still need food.”

(IM-Msh. 20:1.)

<span id="p358">[<sup><small>p. 358</small></sup>]</span>

Abū Hurairah said,

**28** The Messenger of Allāh, peace and blessings of Allāh be on him, said:

“It is the sunnah that a man should accompany his guest to the door of the house.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/A_Manual_of_Hadith/27">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter XXVI: Wills and Inheritance</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/A_Manual_of_Hadith">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/A_Manual_of_Hadith/29">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter XXIX: Toilet</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Notes

[^1]: The concluding portion of this hadīth relates the exact words that must be uttered when an animal is slaughtered. The condition that Allāh's name must p. 345 be mentioned over the slaughtered animal is laid down to make man realize that the taking of a life, even though it be an animal, is a serious matter, and that it is by Divine permission that man does it, not by his superior might. If a man forgets to mention the name of Allāh, the meat is still allowed (B. 72:15).
[^2]: This hadīth shows that an animal may be slaughtered with any sharp instrument that makes the blood flow out. The object is that blood which contains poisons should not form part of human food.
[^3]: There are two ways of slaughtering; _dhabh_ in which the throat is cut from beneath at the part next to the head. while the animal is made to lie down under one's foot, and _nahr_, in which the animal is stabbed, while in a standing posture, in the _nahr_ (the place where the wind-pipe commences in the uppermost part of the breast). The latter practice is resorted to in the case of bigger animals. such as camels and cows, on account of the difficulty of making them lie down. But an animal that may be stabbed may also be slaughtered. In both cases, it is a necessary condition that the spinal cord is not cut. If, however. the head is cut off by mistake, it does not make the meat unlawful (B. 72:24).
[^4]: The view expressed here by Zuhrī is supported by Ibn 'Abbās (Ah, I, 302), who explains the word food in 5:5—The food of those who have been given the Book is lawful for you—"as meaning the animal slaughtered by them. Only if it is known for certain that a name other than that of Allāh has been invoked, would it be unlawful.
[^5]: These people, as 'Ā'ishah explains, were recent converts to Islām, and therefore it was doubtful whether they observed the details of the Law.
[^6]: Washing was required because they were also used for prohibited foods.
[^7]: The same rule would apply to game shot with a gun. The Bismillāh should be uttered at the time of loading the gun or when firing it. If a Muslim p. 348 forgets to mention the name of Allāh, the same rule would apply as in slaughtering. _i.e._, the game is allowed as food.
[^8]: The reference here is to v. 6 quoted above. The _ta'ām_ (lit. _food_ ) of the sea is distinguished from its game, and means _what is found_, the sea having thrown it on dry land, or _what is left by the water having receded from it, for the catching of which no struggle is needed_. Fish, even it caught alive, is not required to be slaughtered. Eel, frog or tortoise may be eaten, according to some.
[^9]: Muslim adds, birds of prey with claw 19:2).
[^10]: The Arabic word for wine is _khamr_, from _khamara_ meaning _he covered_ or _veiled_ a thing; and wine is so called because it veils (obscures) the intellect (LL). It is not only _the expressed juice of grapes_ when it has fermented but the _intoxicating expressed juice of anything_ (LL). In Arabia, at that time, wine was generally made of grapes, dates, wheat, barley and honey (B. 74: 4). Fresh juice of grapes or dates is not prohibited (B. 67:72).
[^11]: Everything which intoxicates is prohibited, whether it is a drink or any other drug cannot, therefore, be used even in small quantities
[^12]: An intoxicant unless, of course, it is used as a medicine to save life, for which purpose the Holy Qur'ān expressly allows the use of prohibited foods: "Whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring nor exceeding the limit, no sin shall be upon him" (2:173, 6:146).
[^13]: The word used here is _wudzū'_, but it means only the washing of hands.
[^14]: Rinsing of the mouth after taking food is necessary, so that particles of food may not be left in the mouth to rot.
[^15]: A Muslim is taught to start food with the mention of the name of Allāh, and to give thanks to God after having finished it. He thus feels the Divine presence when satisfying his physical desires.
[^16]: The words of another hadīth (Ah, I. 309) are that the Holy Prophet forbade blowing on food and drink.
[^17]: It is not forbidden to help oneself in eating with a spoon or a fork, as the Holy Prophet helped himself with a knife in this case.
[^18]: These are luxuries which can be enjoyed by the rich at the expense of the poor; hence they are forbidden to a Muslim.
[^19]: To make the servant sit at the same table with his master shows the extent to which the Islamic brotherhood minimizes differences of rank and wealth.
[^20]: Islām thus requires even the people of a household to take their food together.
[^21]: This hadīth and the one that follows relate to good manners in eating. p. 358The man who eats less than his companion should eat slowly, so that he finishes along with his companions.