---
title: "Infancy Gospel of Thomas — Latin writing"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

**Here Begins the Treatise of the Boyhood of Jesus According to Thomas.**

## I. How Mary and Joseph Fled with Him into Egypt.

<span id="v1_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  When a commotion took place in consequence of the search made by Herod for our Lord Jesus Christ to kill Him, then an angel said to Joseph: <span id="v1_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Take Mary and her boy, and flee into Egypt from the face of those who seek to kill Him. <span id="v1_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And Jesus was two years old when He went into Egypt. <span id="v1_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And as He was walking through a field of grain, He stretched forth His hand, and took of the ears, and put them over the fire, and rubbed them, and began to eat. <span id="v1_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And when they had come into Egypt, they received hospitality in the house of a certain widow, <span id="v1_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  and they remained in the same place one year. <span id="v1_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And Jesus was in His third year. And seeing boys playing, He began to play with them. <span id="v1_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And He took a dried fish, and put it into a basin, and ordered it to move about. <span id="v1_9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And it began to move about. <span id="v1_10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And He said again to the fish: Throw out your salt which you have, and walk into the water. <span id="v1_11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And it so came to pass. And the neighbours, seeing what had been done, told it to the widow woman in whose house Mary His mother lived. <span id="v1_12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  And as soon as she heard it, she thrust them out of her house with great haste.

## II. How a Schoolmaster Thrust Him Out of the City.

<span id="v2_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And as Jesus was walking with Mary His mother through the middle of the city market-place, He looked and saw a schoolmaster teaching his scholars. <span id="v2_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And behold twelve sparrows that were quarrelling fell over the wall into the bosom of that schoolmaster, who was teaching the boys. <span id="v2_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And seeing this, Jesus was very much amused, and stood still. <span id="v2_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And when that teacher saw Him making merry, he said to his scholars with great fury: <span id="v2_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Go and bring him to me. <span id="v2_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And when they had carried Him to the master, he seized Him by the ear, <span id="v2_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  and said: What did you see, to amuse you so much? <span id="v2_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And He said to him: Master, see my hand full of wheat. <span id="v2_9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  I showed it to them, and scattered the wheat among them, and they carry it out of the middle of the street where they are in danger; <span id="v2_10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  and on this account they fought among themselves to divide the wheat. And Jesus did not pass from the place until it was accomplished. <span id="v2_11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And this being done, the master began to thrust Him out of the city, along with His mother.

## III. How Jesus Went Out of Egypt.

<span id="v3_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And, lo, the angel of the Lord met Mary, <span id="v3_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  and said to her: Take up the boy, and return into the land of the Jews, <span id="v3_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  for they who sought His life are dead. <span id="v3_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And Mary rose up with Jesus; <span id="v3_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  and they proceeded into the city of Nazareth, which is among the possessions of her father. <span id="v3_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And when Joseph went out of Egypt after the death of Herod, he kept Him in the desert until there should be quietness in Jerusalem on the part of those who were seeking the boy's life. <span id="v3_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And he gave thanks to God because He had given him understanding, <span id="v3_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  and because he had found favour in the presence of the Lord God. Amen.

## IV. What the Lord Jesus Did in the City of Nazareth.

<span id="v4_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  It is glorious that Thomas the Israelite and apostle of the Lord gives an account also of the works of Jesus after He came out of Egypt into Nazareth. <span id="v4_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Understand all of you, my dearest brethren, what the Lord Jesus did when He was in the city of Nazareth; the first chapter of which is as follows:— <span id="v4_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And when Jesus was five years old, there fell a great rain upon the earth, <span id="v4_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  and the boy Jesus walked up and down through it. <span id="v4_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And there was a terrible rain, and He collected it into a fish-pond, and ordered it by His word to become clear. And immediately it became so. <span id="v4_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  Again He took of the clay which was of that fish-pond, and made of it to the number of twelve sparrows. <span id="v4_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And it was the Sabbath when Jesus did this among the boys of the Jews. <span id="v4_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And the boys of the Jews went away, and said to Joseph His father: <span id="v4_9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  Behold, your son was playing along with us, <span id="v4_10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  and he took clay and made sparrows, which it was not lawful to do on the Sabbath; and he has broken it. <span id="v4_11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And Joseph went away to the boy Jesus, and said to Him: Why have you done this, which it was not lawful to do on the Sabbath? <span id="v4_12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  And Jesus opened His hands, and ordered the sparrows, saying: Go up into the air, and fly; <span id="v4_13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  nobody shall kill you. <span id="v4_14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  And they flew, and began to cry out, and praise God Almighty. <span id="v4_15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  And the Jews seeing what had happened, wondered, and went away and told the miracles which Jesus had done. <span id="v4_16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  But a Pharisee who was with Jesus took an olive branch, and began to let the water out of the fountain which Jesus had made. <span id="v4_17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  And when Jesus saw this, He said to him in a rage: Thou impious and ignorant Sodomite, what harm have my works the fountains of water done you? <span id="v4_18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  Behold, you shall become like a dry tree, having neither roots, nor leaves, nor fruit. <span id="v4_19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  And immediately he dried up, and fell to the ground, and died. <span id="v4_20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  And his parents took him away dead, and reproached Joseph, <span id="v4_21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  saying: See what your son has done; teach him to pray, and not to blaspheme.

## V. How the Citizens Were Enraged Against Joseph on Account of the Doings of Jesus.

<span id="v5_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And a few days after, as Jesus was walking through the town with Joseph, one of the children ran up and struck Jesus on the arm. <span id="v5_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And Jesus said to him: So shall you not finish your journey. <span id="v5_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And immediately he fell to the ground, and died. <span id="v5_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And those who saw these wonderful things cried out, saying: Whence is that boy? <span id="v5_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And they said to Joseph: It is not right for such a boy to be among us. And Joseph went and brought Him. And they said to him: Go away from this place; <span id="v5_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  but if you must live with us, teach him to pray, and not to blaspheme: but our children have been killed. <span id="v5_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  Joseph called Jesus, and reproved Him, saying: Why do you blaspheme? <span id="v5_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  For these people who live here hate us. <span id="v5_9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And Jesus said: I know that these words are not mine, but yours; <span id="v5_10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  but I will hold my tongue for your sake: and let them see to it in their wisdom. <span id="v5_11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And immediately those who were speaking against Jesus became blind. <span id="v5_12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  And they walked up and down, and said: All the words which proceed from his mouth are accomplished. <span id="v5_13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  And Joseph seeing what Jesus had done, in a fury seized Him by the ear; and Jesus said to Joseph in anger: <span id="v5_14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  It is enough for you to see me, not to touch me. <span id="v5_15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  For you know not who I am; but if you knew, you would not make me angry. And although just now I am with you, I was made before you.

## VI. How Jesus Was Treated by the Schoolmaster.

<span id="v6_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Therefore a certain man named Zacheus listened to all that Jesus was saying to Joseph, <span id="v6_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  and in great astonishment said to himself: Such a boy speaking in this way I have never seen. <span id="v6_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And he went up to Joseph, and said: That is an intelligent boy of yours; hand him over to me to learn his letters; <span id="v6_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  and when he has thoroughly learned his letters, I shall teach him honourably, so that he may be no fool. <span id="v6_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  But Joseph answered and said to him: No one can teach him but God alone. You do not believe that that little boy will be of little consequence? <span id="v6_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And when Jesus heard Joseph speaking in this way, He said to Zacheus: Indeed, master, whatever proceeds from my mouth is true. <span id="v6_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And before all I was Lord, but you are foreigners. To me has been given the glory of the ages, to you has been given nothing; because I am before the ages. <span id="v6_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And I know how many years of life you will have, and that you will be carried into exile: <span id="v6_9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  and my Father has appointed this, that you may understand that whatever proceeds from my mouth is true. <span id="v6_10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And the Jews who were standing by, and hearing the words which Jesus spoke, were astonished, <span id="v6_11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  and said: We have seen such wonderful things, and heard such words from that boy, as we have never heard, nor are likely to hear from any other human being <span id="v6_12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  — either from the high priests, or the masters, or the Pharisees. <span id="v6_13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  Jesus answered and said to them: Why do you wonder? <span id="v6_14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  Do you consider it incredible that I have spoken the truth? <span id="v6_15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  I know when both you and your fathers were born, and to tell you more, when the world was made: I know also who sent me to you. <span id="v6_16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  And when the Jews heard the words which the child had spoken, they wondered, because that they were not able to answer. <span id="v6_17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  And, communing with Himself, the child exulted and said: I have told you a proverb; and I know that you are weak and ignorant. <span id="v6_18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  And that schoolmaster said to Joseph: Bring him to me, and I shall teach him letters. <span id="v6_19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  And Joseph took hold of the boy Jesus, and led Him to the house of a certain schoolmaster, where other boys were being taught. <span id="v6_20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  Now the master in soothing words began to teach Him His letters, <span id="v6_21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  and wrote for Him the first line, which is from A to T, and began to stroke Him and teach Him. <span id="v6_22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  And that teacher struck the child on the head: and when He had received the blow, the child said to him: I should teach you, and not you me; <span id="v6_23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  I know the letters which you wish to teach me, and I know that you are to me like vessels from which there come forth only sounds, and no wisdom. <span id="v6_24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  And, beginning the line, He said the letters from A to T in full, and very fast. And He looked at the master, and said to him: You cannot even tell us what A and B are; how do you wish to teach others? <span id="v6_25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  O hypocrite, if you know and will tell me about the A, then will I tell you about the B. And when that teacher began to tell about the first letter, he was unable to give any answer. <span id="v6_26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  And Jesus said to Zacheus: Listen to me, master; understand the first letter. <span id="v6_27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  See how it has two lines; advancing in the middle, standing still, giving, scattering, varying, threatening; triple intermingled with double; at the same time homogeneous, having all common. <span id="v6_28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  And Zacheus, seeing that He so divided the first letter, was stupefied about the first letter, and about such a human being and such learning; <span id="v6_29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  and he cried out, and said: Woe's me, for I am quite stupefied; <span id="v6_30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  I have brought disgrace upon myself through that child. And he said to Joseph: I earnestly entreat you, brother, take him away from me, because I cannot look upon his face, nor hear his mighty words. <span id="v6_31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span>  Because that child can tame fire and bridle the sea: for he was born before the ages. <span id="v6_32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span>  What womb brought him forth, or what mother nursed him, I know not. <span id="v6_33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span>  Oh, my friends, I am driven out of my senses; I have become a wretched laughing-stock. And I said that I had got a scholar; but he has been found to be my master. <span id="v6_34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span>  And my disgrace I cannot get over, because I am an old man; and what to say to him I cannot find. <span id="v6_35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span>  All I have to do is to fall into some grievous illness, and depart from this world; or to leave this town, because all have seen my disgrace. An infant has deceived me. <span id="v6_36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span>  What answer can I give to others, or what words can I say, because he has got the better of me in the first letter? <span id="v6_37"><sup><small>37</small></sup></span>  I am struck dumb, O my friends and acquaintances; neither beginning nor end can I find of an answer to him. <span id="v6_38"><sup><small>38</small></sup></span>  And now I beseech you, brother Joseph, take him away from me, and lead him home, because he is a master, or the Lord, or an angel. <span id="v6_39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span>  What to say I do not know. And Jesus turned to the Jews who were with Zacheus, and said to them: Let all not seeing see, and not understanding understand; let the deaf hear, and let those who are dead through me rise again; <span id="v6_40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span>  and those who are exalted, let me call to still higher things, as He who sent me to you has commanded me. And when Jesus ceased speaking, all who had been affected with any infirmity through His words were made whole. And they did not dare to speak to Him.

## VII. How Jesus Raised a Boy to Life.

<span id="v7_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  One day, when Jesus was climbing on a certain house, along with the children, He began to play with them. <span id="v7_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And one of the boys fell down through a back-door, and died immediately. And when the children saw this, they all ran away; but Jesus remained in the house. <span id="v7_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And when the parents of the boy who had died had come, they spoke against Jesus: Surely it was you who made him fall down; and they reviled Him. <span id="v7_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And Jesus, coming down from the house, stood over the dead child, and with a loud voice called out the name of the child: Sinoo, Sinoo, rise and say whether it was I that made you fall down. <span id="v7_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And suddenly he rose up, and said: No, my lord. And his parents, seeing such a great miracle done by Jesus, glorified God, and adored Jesus.

## VIII. How Jesus Healed a Boy's Foot.

<span id="v8_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And a few days thereafter, a boy in that town was splitting wood, and struck his foot. <span id="v8_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And a great crowd went to him, and Jesus too went with them. And He touched the foot which had been hurt, and immediately it was made whole. <span id="v8_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And Jesus said to him: Rise, and split the wood, and remember me. <span id="v8_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And when the crowd saw the miracles that were done by Him, they adored Jesus, and said: Indeed we most surely believe that You are God.

## IX. How Jesus Carried Water in a Cloak.

<span id="v9_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And when Jesus was six years old, His mother sent Him to draw water. <span id="v9_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And when Jesus had come to the fountain, or to the well, there were great crowds there, and they broke His pitcher. <span id="v9_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And He took the cloak which He had on, and filled it with water, and carried it to His mother Mary. <span id="v9_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And His mother, seeing the miracles which Jesus had done, kissed Him, and said: O Lord, hear me, and save my son.

## X. How Jesus Sowed Wheat.

<span id="v10_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  In the time of sowing, Joseph went out to sow wheat, and Jesus followed him. <span id="v10_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And when Joseph began to sow, Jesus stretched out His hand, and took as much wheat as He could hold in His fist, and scattered it. <span id="v10_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Joseph therefore came at reaping-time to reap his harvest. <span id="v10_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Jesus came also, and collected the ears which He had scattered, and they made a hundred pecks of the best grain; and he called the poor, and the widows, and the orphans, and distributed to them the wheat which He had made. Joseph also took a little of the same wheat, for the blessing of Jesus to his house.

## XI. How Jesus Made a Short Piece of Wood of the Same Length as a Longer One.

<span id="v11_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And Jesus reached the age of eight years. <span id="v11_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Joseph was a master builder, and used to make ploughs and ox-yokes. <span id="v11_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And one day a rich man said to Joseph: Master, make me a couch, both useful and beautiful. <span id="v11_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And Joseph was in distress, because the wood which he had brought for the work was too short. <span id="v11_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And Jesus said to him: Do not be annoyed. Take hold of this piece of wood by one end, and I by the other; I and let us draw it out. <span id="v11_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And they did so; and immediately he found it useful for that which he wished. <span id="v11_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And He said to Joseph: Behold, do the work which you wish. And Joseph, seeing what He had done, embraced Him, and said: Blessed am I, because God has given me such a son.

## XII. How Jesus Was Handed Over to Learn His Letters.

<span id="v12_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And Joseph, seeing that He had such favour, and that He was increasing in stature, thought it right to take Him to learn His letters. And he handed Him over to another teacher to be taught. <span id="v12_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And that teacher said to Joseph: What letters do you wish me to teach that boy? <span id="v12_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Joseph answered and said: First teach him the Gentile letters, and then the Hebrew. For the teacher knew that He was very intelligent, and willingly took Him in hand. <span id="v12_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And writing for Him the first line, which is A and B, he taught Him for some hours. <span id="v12_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  But Jesus was silent, and made him no answer. <span id="v12_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  Jesus said to the master: If you are indeed a master, and if you indeed know the letters, tell me the power of the A, and I shall tell you the power of the B. <span id="v12_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  Then His master was filled with fury, and struck Him on the head. And Jesus was angry, and cursed him; and he suddenly fell down, and died. <span id="v12_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And Jesus returned home. And Joseph gave orders to Mary His mother, not to let Him go out of the court of his house.

## XIII. How He Was Handed Over to Another Master.

<span id="v13_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Many days after came another teacher, a friend of Joseph, <span id="v13_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  and said to him: Hand him over to me, and I with much sweetness will teach him his letters. <span id="v13_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And Joseph said to him: If you are able, take him and teach him. <span id="v13_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  May it be attended with joy. When the teacher had taken Him, he went along in fear and in great firmness, and held Him with exultation. <span id="v13_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And when He had come to the teacher's house, He found a book lying there, and took it and opened it, <span id="v13_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  and did not read what was written in the book; but opened His mouth, and spoke from the Holy Spirit, and taught the law. <span id="v13_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And, indeed, all who were standing there listened to Him attentively; and the master sat down beside Him, and listened to Him with pleasure, and entreated Him to teach them more. <span id="v13_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And a great crowd being gathered together, they heard all the holy teaching which He taught, and the choice words which came forth from the mouth of Him who, child as He was, spoke such things. <span id="v13_9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And Joseph, hearing of this, was afraid, and running. ..the master, where Jesus was, said to Joseph: Know, brother, that I have received your child to teach him or train him; <span id="v13_10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  but he is filled with much gravity and wisdom. Lo, now, take him home with joy, my brother; because the gravity which he has, has been given him by the Lord. <span id="v13_11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And Jesus, hearing the master thus speaking, became cheerful, and said: Lo, now, master, you have truly said. <span id="v13_12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  For your sake, he who is dead shall rise again. And Joseph took Him home.

## XIV. How Jesus Delivered James from the Bite of a Serpent.

<span id="v14_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And Joseph sent James to gather straw, and Jesus followed him. <span id="v14_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And while James was gathering the straw, a viper bit him; and he fell to the ground, as if dead from the poison. <span id="v14_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And Jesus seeing this, blew upon his wound; and immediately James was made whole, and the viper died.

## XV. How Jesus Raised a Boy to Life.

<span id="v15_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  A few days after, a child, His neighbour, died, and his mother mourned for him sore. <span id="v15_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Jesus, hearing this, went and stood over the boy, and knocked upon his breast, <span id="v15_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  and said: I say to you, child, do not die, but live. <span id="v15_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And immediately the child rose up. And Jesus said to the boy's mother: Take your son, and give him the breast, and remember me. <span id="v15_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And the crowd, seeing this miracle, said: In truth, this child is from heaven; <span id="v15_6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  for already has he freed many souls from death, and he has made whole all that hope in him.  <span id="v15_7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  The scribes and Pharisees said to Mary: Are you the mother of this child? And Mary said: Indeed I am. <span id="v15_8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And they said to her: Blessed are you among women, [Luke 1:28](/en/Bible/Luke/1#v28) <span id="v15_9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  since God has blessed the fruit of your womb, seeing that He has given you such a glorious child, and such a gift of wisdom, as we have never seen nor heard of. <span id="v15_10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  Jesus rose up and followed His mother. And Mary kept in her heart all the great miracles that Jesus had done among the people, in healing many that were diseased. <span id="v15_11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And Jesus grew in stature and wisdom; and all who saw Him glorified God the Father Almighty, who is blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

And all these things I Thomas the Israelite have written what I have seen, and have recounted them to the Gentiles and to our brethren, and many other things done by Jesus, who was born in the land of Judah. Behold, the house of Israel has seen all, from the first even to the last; how great signs and wonders Jesus did among them, which were exceedingly good, and invisible to their father, as holy Scripture relates, and the prophets have borne witness to His works in all the peoples of Israel. And He it is who is to judge the world according to the will of immortality, since He is the Son of God throughout all the world. To Him is due all glory and honour for ever, who lives and reigns God through all ages of ages. Amen.

