---
title: "Chapter 1"
description: "A Day in the Life of a Mansion Worlds Student – The Pearl of Wisdom"
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Life after death, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1994 Tom Maringer</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/2">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 2</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

The light grew brighter as I emerged from my rest period at the dawn of a new day on Mansonia III. I had arrived exactly sixty days earlier and was just beginning to acclimate to the local routines. My class schedule listed only “personal instruction” as the day's events. I was beginning to wonder who was ringing the soft chime announcing the arrival of visitors. I peered through the shimmering translucency of the entrance door and was pleased to see a pair of familiar figures. I greeted my personal guardians of destiny, the seraphic pair Henri and Henta, accompanied by another angelic pair and a companion from the morontia. They all entered my apartment and arranged themselves around me in a semicircle.

“Hey Bill, how's everything going?” Henri spoke to me in American English (just to practice).

“The Father has granted me enthusiasm for life,” I replied in the language of Nebadon, and while looking at the guests, I added the intonation that indicated a politely inquisitive attitude.

Returning to the language of the local universe, Henri made the introductions.

—Bill, I would like you to meet my companions Lamar and Lamont —he indicated the seraphic pair— and Samotad —he referred to the companion of the morontia.

They all greeted me; I greeted them back and then added:

“I am very pleased to share space with you for a while, Lamar, Lamont, and Samotad,” and I used my newly learned way of paying my respects in the language of Nebadon.

—Lamar and Lamont are transition ministers assigned to this world, and Samotad is a liaison director. I've asked them to assist us with a special project we're embarking on today.

When Henri finished speaking, he looked at Henta, and their faces went through a rapid series of changes. Angels have extremely expressive faces, and although I tried to follow their rapid-fire dialogue, it was too fast for me; all I caught was a certain expectant humor and perhaps joy. They turned to Lamont, and I deduced I should do the same.

Lamont began to speak:

—Your guardian of destiny approached me the second day after your arrival and asked for help with this project. I, for my part, asked Samotad for additional support, and it's primarily thanks to his efforts that today's presentation was possible.

I looked at Samotad with new respect and she graciously acknowledged the gratitude I expressed with a nod and a smile.

“Please examine the object Samotad is holding,” Lamont continued, and I then noticed that in the transitional minister’s right hand was what appeared to be a large, white pearl, just over a centimeter in diameter.

He handed it to me, and I examined it carefully, noting that it was round and smooth, with a pearly luster, but slightly heavier than a real pearl of that size. When held up to the light, it also seemed too translucent to be a common pearl.

“What's this?” I asked, and they all just smiled, but I knew that this kind of smile meant they would refuse to answer me until I had solved at least part of the riddle.

—Well, it's obviously common matter and not morontia material—I said, noting the absence of that particular sheen that marks the materialization phase of morontia—and while it looks very much like a pearl, I think it must be something else.

They smiled wider and Lamont asked:

—Have you ever heard of the Pearl of Wisdom?

“Yes, why?” I replied. “And what does this have to do with anything?”

A certain expression on their faces made me think they were trying to make me understand something.

“Do you mean this one...?” I pointed at the pearl.

“Yes, it is one of them,” Lamont replied. “It is, in fact, a recording device that Samotad has prepared for us. He has traveled to Edentia to gain access to the communication channels necessary to prepare this pearl, and it was essential to arrange communication between no fewer than twelve people, from a Perfector of Wisdom and a Solitary Messenger to some of your fellow members of your morontia form, to accomplish this.”

I was a little surprised by this, given that the Perfectors of Wisdom are quite “elevated” beings. I had met several in passing but had never yet received personal attention from a being of that order. Not knowing what else to say, I adopted the learning posture that Henri and Henta had taught me.

—May the will of the Father in heaven be done—a wink from Henta told me that so far I was doing well.

I looked back at the pearl with renewed interest and Samotad, noticing my great curiosity, said:

—It's actually a specialized silicon dioxide crystal that has a hexagonal helical structure in which each unit cell of the crystal is either right-handed or left-handed. Atoms of several different elements can be trapped in the structure, allowing for extremely high data density for a purely materials-based technique.

“Very impressive,” I commented, having never seen anything similar before, although I had heard of such things existing. “What storage capacity are we talking about here?”

—In one of this size, for example, about two thousand hours of audiovisual material or, if applicable, about three hours of ideographic representation.

I looked at my seraphic guardians who were smiling broadly and seemed to be enjoying themselves immensely.

—This is something totally new to me, isn't it? I don't think I've ever seen anything remotely like this before.

Henri simply replied that the pearl had just been prepared. I turned to Samotad and asked:

—Ideographic representation?

“You are familiar,” he began, “with audiovisual representations, two-dimensional representations of three- or four-dimensional realities. Ideographic representation is an analogous technique involving a three-dimensional representation in the mind of four- or five-dimensional actualities. Your new morontia intellect, interconnected as it is with the cosmic mind of the local universe, has new capabilities and functions that you have barely begun to utilize. The technique of absorbing TRUTH from the pearl is very similar to the technique you have learned to activate your new powers of remembering, the morontia memory.”

—Extracting TRUTH from a mass of facts requires the exercise of WISDOM. Wisdom is the ability to simultaneously access all memories for facts relevant to the matter at hand and then process that information in such a way that the decision-making powers of the personality, the WILL, can act upon it. In material life, you enjoyed the wisdom ministry of the seven spirit-mind adjutants. With the morontia endowment, your mind encompasses new and greater powers of wisdom. Today you will learn to expand the use of these new capabilities.

—Before we activate the pearl, we will begin this day's instruction with a review of your career in morontia thus far. Use your powers to formulate generalizations that reflect the meaning and significance of your experience on the mansion worlds to the present, and conclude with a concise statement of the purpose of existence as you understand it.

The five of them crowded around me and assumed an expression I had learned meant I was about to undergo a formal teaching session. Each of the two seraphic pairs merged with their being complement, and I began the process of shifting my mind into the receptive mode, letting the present scene pass from my awareness as I mentally communed with the “three” beings. As soon as I was able to recognize the group within my mind, Lamont/Lamar began to say:

—We'll begin as usual, reviewing your career in morontia; as we progress, try to maintain control of the sequence of images, concentrating on the TOTALITY of the experiences you've undergone.

Under his guidance, I traveled back to the moment I woke up in the customization chamber. The memories came back to me clearly and in order.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/2">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 2</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>