---
title: "Chapter 10"
description: "A Day in the Life of a Mansion Worlds Student – The Pearl of Wisdom"
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Life after death, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1994 Tom Maringer</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/9">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 9</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/11">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 11</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

As we traveled from the Sea of Glass, I remembered a Bible verse I had read long ago; it was about a vision that John the Revelator had seen and recorded:

“I saw, as it were, a sea of glass mingled with fire, and those who had overcome the beast that was originally in them, and his image that persisted in the mansion worlds, and finally their final mark and trace, standing upon the sea of glass, with the harps of God and singing the song of the deliverance of mortals from fear and death.”

Henri and Henta looked at me.

—Yes, Bill, John did indeed have a vision of the Sea of Glass on Jerusem and the arrival of a class of ascending mortals. He was shown many things in his visions, most of which he couldn't understand; the records of these experiences are confusing, but they were nevertheless a perception of reality and not some symbolic prophecy as some have interpreted it.

—But I don't understand how this could be, how John truly saw the mansion worlds while he was still a mortal on Urantia.

—In certain situations, it is possible for the thought adjuster to disengage from his subject during sleep and go to the mansion worlds so that the latter may receive some specific lessons that he may need. The mortal subject will actually see the activities of these worlds, even though this may present problems of comprehension, for the mortal's experience may not have prepared him for some of the scenes he may witness. These visitors will be frequently perceived on Jerusem and the other advanced worlds of the system training regimen.

—What is the reason for such purely personal revelations?

—Sometimes the angels of progress determine that a particular individual has the potential to have a great impact on the well-being of the planet. In certain cases, it may be decided that the world will benefit from the fact that such an individual has a broader understanding of the universe's situation than is currently available.

—I don't recall ever experiencing anything of that kind during my mortal life.

—Not everyone is positioned in life to be a key figure in the evolution of their planet, Bill. No offense, but you're really just a very small part of a very large universe, you know?

—That's great to hear! Sometimes things make me feel like my every move is somehow cosmically important, and that feeling really saps my energy.

—Absolutely! It's said that while work is important, self isn't. We're all actually part of a wonderful evolving being, the evolving SUPREME, which grows with every decision we make.

—Do you mean that we are, in fact, part of the Supreme Court?

—That's right. If you look at the Supreme Being as a living organism, we are the cells of that organism. He grows and changes as we grow and change.

—And where does this leave the Universal Father? I thought he was the existential I AM. How can he be existential and experiential at the same time?

—Good question, Bill! That's one of the big issues you'll soon begin to address in your classes. It seems to us that the Universal Father created the space-time universes of things and beings with the express intention of bringing the Supreme into existence as a means of obtaining the attributes of experience. There seems to be an inherent limitation in the Father's experience. Being infinite and absolute, He can be nothing less. The only way His absoluteness is limited is that He cannot arbitrarily set limits even on His own power. Being omniscient, omnipotent, and omnipresent may have its own rewards, but He lacks the experience of discovery, understanding, and striving. To obtain these things, He has dedicated a part of Himself to the task of evolving the space-time creations.

—Wow, every time we talk about it, the universe seems bigger to me.

—That's what it looks like, Bill. The universe of universes is very large indeed, and it seems to get larger as your understanding of its vastness increases.

—Hey, look! We're starting to go down.

The small transport car rolled to the edge of the residential area where my apartment was located. We disembarked and walked along the winding paths through the orchards and trees. The light was dim at that time, about the intensity of the Urantia full moon, and there were very few people about at this hour. It was the quiet time on the mansion worlds, when most people retire to their apartments to rest, meditate, and worship.

We arrived at my apartment right away and Henri said to me:

—It's been a great day, Bill. I can't remember a period since your arrival on the mansion worlds when so much happened in a single day. It's time, after the exertions of today, for you to relax and, figuratively, “recharge your batteries.” We can worry about tomorrow's plans when we get around to them; past trials and struggles have become part of us. What we can do is live in the present, become the NOW, accept the love and mercy the Father showers upon us all with the grace and acceptance with which a small child delights in its Father's love.

I approached them and gave them a big hug, which they accepted affectionately.

-See you tomorrow!

—Of course, Bill!

—Well, in that case, I suppose we shall meet again in the eternity of your Father's grace.

They smiled as they waved goodbye and left me alone again. I went to the couch and settled in. It had been a long day, but although I was tired, I wasn't exhausted. I closed my eyes, lay back, and contemplated the day's events. I didn't sleep, though my mind relaxed and my thoughts flowed more freely and randomly. I heard a still, small voice in the back of my mind speaking to me in images of Love, Beauty, and Truth.

—IT'S ME/WE/YOU/MINE

Without a doubt, my journey had truly begun. I was going home.

END

(Or is this just the beginning?)


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/9">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 9</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/11">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 11</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>