---
title: "Chapter 2"
description: "A Day in the Life of a Mansion Worlds Student – The Pearl of Wisdom"
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Life after death, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1994 Tom Maringer</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 1</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/3">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 3</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Waking up was like emerging from a deep sleep, except I had no trace of drowsiness left. In an instant, I was awake, though confused, and before me were the two most exquisite beings I had ever seen. As I gazed into their eyes, they radiated LOVE so strongly toward me that the strangeness of the surroundings ceased to matter. They gently let me know that they were my guardian angels and that their names were Henri and Henta; that I had died on an evolutionary world in space and had been repersonalized in prime Mansonia.

I spent about two hours alone with Henri and Henta, and they answered most of my frantic questions and helped me calm down. My first concern was for my wife and boyfriend. I was assured that they were fine and that although they missed me, they would manage reasonably well with the help of my parents. I was 27 years old in the year 1983 AD on the planet Urantia, number 606 in the Satania system. I had died in a car accident while driving alone, although I couldn't recall the details and they weren't given to me. The last thing I remembered was kissing my wife goodbye as I left for work. Henri mentioned to me that most people don't remember the moment of their physical death and that it's just as well that way. After a while, it began to dawn on me where I was and I started to wonder about it.

—So after all, there really is life after death, right?

—Yes, it seems so —and they gave me a warm smile.

—Okay, so what's next? Are we going to see God now or what?

They looked at each other in a very strange way, and their faces went through an impressive series of rapid changes. Henri turned to me and said:

—It's not as simple as that; you will certainly get to see the Universal Father, but it will take some time.
That puzzled me.

—Hey, listen! I was just joking; seriously, I've never believed in God.
They looked at each other again in that peculiar way in which they seemed to be rapidly exchanging some kind of silent communication.

“Are you sure about that?” Henri asked gently.
I thought about it for a moment and remembered my few encounters with religion.


—Well, I don't know. I've only been to church a few times. The truth is, I've never prayed, and quite frankly, I've never been able to believe there really is a God. I mean, if so many bad things happen in the world, why does God allow them?

Their faces showed a mixture of pity and love.

—You have much to learn about the answer to that, one of the great questions of the universe of universes. It would have been easier if you had already read The Urantia Book in depth, but the fundamental point is that God does exist and that you share a sonship relationship with Him. God simply IS. He is infinitely greater than any concept with which He can be described. What matters far more than whether you believe in Him is that He already believes in you!

They approached me and enveloped me in what, to use a material analogy, I must call a “hug.” After their embrace, I felt a profound sense of being one with the universe. I finally felt that I truly knew that God existed, that He cared for me like a loving father cares for his children as if they were his only children.

After a long time, we broke the embrace and silently formed a circle. I was a little embarrassed and tried to think of something to break the silence.

—Hey, that book you mentioned, I think I've heard its name before. Doesn't my friend Dave have it?

—Yes, Bill, he does; if I'd had more time I'd probably have gotten someone to point it out to you eventually.

—So, what's so great about a book? I mean, there are tons of books in the world, and it seems to me that all religious groups claim that their book is the only truth.

“Yes, that's true,” Henri chuckled, “and some books are more helpful than others in the work of mental and spiritual growth. The Urantia Book is the revelation of truth concerning the organization of the universe and the part your little planet, Urantia, has played in the unfolding of an age of the cosmos. It would have saved us some trouble if you had read it thoroughly, but never mind... let us have all eternity!”

They looked at each other again and laughed loudly.

—If you had read it, you would know better what awaits you here!

—You mean the book is about this place.

—Yes, of course! We'll give you a copy soon. All ascendants in your world are required to read it. But for now, you're going on the grand tour with a personal guide.

We left the room through a door at the back and came out into a large vestibule with hundreds of other doors like the one we had used to leave. A small group of beings similar to me, also accompanied by seraphim, were passing toward one end of the room, and I deduced that we were about to do the same. As we walked, I noticed that the seraphim didn't seem to move their feet when they walked, but simply glided about 3 centimeters off the floor; it seemed strange, but entirely appropriate. I had time to look around and notice several odd things: first, the furniture in the room seemed extremely luxurious; the floor tiles seemed to be made from enormous chunks of the highest-quality opal, gilded. I drew Henri's attention to the sumptuousness of the materials.

“Yes,” he replied, “it is considered better to teach newcomers from the worlds of space that material things are not valued here as they were in the evolutionary spheres. A beautiful thought is valued more than a thousand precious stones.”

I had to think about that for a while.

The vestibule had no ceiling whatsoever. The entire place was filled with a soft glow that seemed to filter down from the crystalline blue sky above. I looked around at some of the others pacing the room. While all the seraphim looked more or less the same, the others, presumably mortals from the worlds of Space, displayed several differences in their anatomical structures. Some were quite tall and lanky, while others were short and heavyset; they had hands of different shapes and a wide variety of face types, but all displayed the same friendly, curious eyes, and all wore the same type of white garment. I began to notice that there were subtle differences within my own body. At first, it seemed the same—at least I walked upright and had two arms and two legs—but I noticed that my skin was very smooth, with no trace of hair on the backs of my arms and a strange sheen and texture that was completely unfamiliar to me. I was wearing a loose white robe that prevented me from examining my body in more detail. I looked toward my seraphim, who noticed my discomposure.

“This is your first morontia garment, Bill; structurally, it is very similar to the mortal body you once had, but biochemically, it is very different. It is constructed of morontia materials, a type of substance completely unknown on your home world. For example, it has no circulatory system to move bodily fluids, the digestive tract is radically different, and the process of harnessing energy is completely altered. You will also notice that you have no reproductive organs. While mortal ascendants always retain some trace of the sex they had on evolutionary worlds, they no longer marry or mate after leaving their home worlds. Nevertheless, I trust that you will find your new body comfortable and useful during your stay here, and that when, in the long run, it becomes a limitation to your further development, you will be transferred to a new one.”

We were nearing the end of the colossal vestibule, and I could see six others like it converging on an immense open-air promenade. In its center was an enormous sculpture. I continued walking, gazing rapt at the extraordinary beauty of the figure. I began to realize that the others were doing the same—the other mortals from the newly repersonalized worlds of space were also watching the scene with their guardians of destiny. There was a sort of procession of people strolling clockwise around the sculpture, and we followed. I saw that around the base were a series of plaques apparently bearing inscriptions, but with letters and forms of writing completely unknown to me. Finally, we came to one in English, and I read:

“Dedicated to the heroic bestowal of our beloved Michael as Son of Man on Urantia, planet 606 of Satania, system 24 of Norlatiadec, constellation number 70 of the local universe of Nebadon.”

I stared at the sculpture for some time, completely overwhelmed by the implications of what I was seeing and what I had just read in the inscription.

—Does this mean that the creator of the universe and the man we know as Jesus of Nazareth are in fact the same person?

They nodded solemnly.

—But it's incredible.

They nodded again.

—I didn't know... I always thought that Jesus, the few times I thought about him, was some kind of wise man, maybe a prophet, but just a man.

They nodded again.

I then noticed that through the crowd, a person was coming directly toward us, clearly not a mortal, but not a seraph either. Henri leaned toward me and told me that “she” was a morontia companion, a specialized type of being created to minister to those who visited these worlds. She came directly toward us and gestured in greeting.

—Hello! My name is Tinko, and I'll be joining you for a while today to interpret for Bill. Allow me to welcome you to Mansonia Primera, to the Temple of New Life, and to the initial steps of your eternal career.

“Thank you very much. I think I'm glad to be here,” was all I could think of to say as they smiled.

We then entered the crowd, stopping to introduce ourselves to people more or less at random and very spontaneously. Tinko proved to be a wonderfully fluent translator, and it was a surprising sight to spend an hour or so mingling with the other newly arrived mortals and their companions. There were few parents and loved ones who came to welcome the newcomers. No one came for me, although Tinko brought a message from my maternal grandfather, who was then in Mansonia Quinta, promising to meet me when it could be arranged.

Then a loud but friendly voice was heard calling for our attention from one side of the room. An exquisite, glowing being about eight feet tall addressed us:

—Resurrected mortals from the worlds of space, you have chosen to be here through an unforced decision of your personal free will, and in this way, you are part of the “individual” order of ascension. I call this group of a thousand present here a “company,” and while you will each pursue your individual careers, you will never be far from these, your brothers. Learn to love each and every one of them, and you will thus know of the love that the Universal Father above bestows upon each of his children through the others. I, Silam, am the archangel of this resurrection. Advance toward a fuller brotherhood in sonship with God.

Since the archangel had said this in a strange language, Tinko had been translating it for me. Now he turned to me and said directly:

—Well, Bill, I've enjoyed this time of service with you; now it's time for you to go ahead and get your bearings, while I prepare to meet the next group of ascendants. The next group arriving is a large one, for I understand there has been a serious earthquake on planet 219. We will meet again, Bill, in the eternity of our Father's grace.

“Thank you, Tinko, I hope to see you again.” He waved a warm goodbye and left through the crowd as the rest of the mortals and their companions began to head toward the exit doors, enormous columns of luminescent pearly crystal that flanked the openings.

—Wow! The gates of Paradise! —I exclaimed— Where is Saint Peter?

“Oh! He must be around here somewhere,” Henri replied. “He deals mainly with the ‘hard cases,’ people who expect unrealistic or grandiose things. He doesn’t show up often in these special groups, but he’s almost always here for millennial or epochal resurrections. He spends most of his time meeting as one of the Twenty-Four Councilors who oversee some aspect of the affairs of the quarantined worlds.”

We went out through one of the gates into a wide plaza dotted with statues of various kinds and small driverless cars parked on a curb. Groups of people were getting into the cars three and four abreast and heading off in different directions. I looked into the distance and was astonished by the beauty of the scenery. As far as the eye could see, there were gentle, rolling hills covered with all kinds of plants, grass, trees, and flowers, the colors and fragrance of which were astonishing. Further away, the broad shapes of other structures like the one we had just left could be seen. I could see no sun in any direction, although the clear blue sky provided as much light as a bright, sunny day; nevertheless, I had a vague idea that I was looking west.

Finally, our turn came, and we entered one of the small four-seater cars that were parked at the curb. It looked very much like the type of cars on the roller coasters back home, and I commented on it. Henri explained that they were mind-controlled, and that one day I would learn how to operate them. For the time being, we floated soundlessly at a good speed at treetop level. It was truly a beautiful landscape, and the whole area seemed to be a botanical garden, carefully tended to look natural. At one point, we passed over one of the gardeners, who looked like a cross between a horse and a dog but stood upright and had dexterous hands with long, brown fingers. Henri explained that they were spornagia, a type of material beings who live on these worlds and truly enjoy the work of tending the “lord's fields.” I looked toward the horizon again and noticed a particularly large structure looming over it. It looked like we were heading for a landing area off to one side, flanked by a massive gateway with iridescent blue stone columns.

—Wow! What is this place?

—This is the Melchizedek sector, Bill; we'll stop here for you to be registered and assigned a room.

—Melchizedek? Sounds like an Old Testament word or something.

—Indeed. It was in fact Melchizedek Machiventa two thousand years before Christ, in the time of Abraham, who gave himself to the world on an emergency mission to keep the light of truth alive until the time when Michael himself could arrive. There are many of his kind, wise and wonderful counselors and teachers. Ah! We have arrived now.

We flew to a platform similar to the one we had boarded, but somewhat smaller. Passing through portals of majestic grandeur, we approached one of several counters in view, behind which sat a person of extraordinary dignity. It occurred to me that he resembled a wrinkled old man... old not in the sense of frailty, but rather of profound wisdom and long experience. My perception immediately clarified when he looked at me from his workstation on a screen and met my eyes with a smile that seemed to say, “Welcome, friend!”

He stood up and extended his hand to me in greeting.

—Bill, nice to finally meet you! I've heard and seen so much about you, all good, of course.

He smiled, gave me a curious look from under his bushy white eyebrows, and gestured for me to sit next to him.

“I'm Melchizedek Laminefta, and I'm in charge of registering new arrivals from the quarantined worlds. I'll arrange your accommodations and help you acclimate to life in morontia. You'll have ten days of free time to look around, and then Henri and Henta will help you decide which elective courses you'd like, aside from the required ones.”

He looked at a clear globe of light floating in the air above his desk and ran his hands over certain markings on its surface; within the glowing sphere, flickering symbols and images could be seen.

—Yes, I think I can give you a nice apartment near the Musicians' Circle, if that's okay with you. I understand you like playing music.

“Yes, that'll be great, thank you,” I replied, a little stunned. Laminefta looked at me with knowing eyes.

—Bill, do you have any questions you'd like to ask that might help me understand this experience?

After a long and awkward pause, I replied:

—Well, yes, since you've given me the opportunity. I don't quite get it. This all sounds too good to be true; I'm afraid I'm not the type you think I am. I mean... well... what have I done to deserve this personal service? I haven't been a particularly bad person back on Earth, but I certainly wasn't a saint!

Laminefta smiled warmly and seemed to look relieved. Henri and Henta exchanged one of their strange expressions and laughed as well.

“That has an answer, of course,” Laminefta almost shouted.

Getting serious, he looked me in the eyes and said:

—I must now ask you to try to recall a particular moment in your life on Earth. You will see that your memory patterns are quite different now from what they were in the old days. You have retained only the memories that had a spiritual component. All the memories stored in the material mind that had no spiritual relevance have not found their way into the memory system with which your mind is now wired. Although I believe you will remember this particular instance. It concerns a certain point in your relationship with a fellow officer named Mike Landro, and it concerns some dealings you both had agreed to. Do you recall the incident?

—I certainly did. Mike traded me two ten-speed bikes for a small go-kart I'd built. What does this have to do with anything?

—Bill, try to remember how you felt about the transaction.

—Well, let me see... I know the two bikes I got turned out to be such worthless wrecks that I couldn't even make them into working machines. I remember being really upset that a friend would trick me like that; I was angry about it for a while and then I forgot about it.

“That’s it!” Laminefta exclaimed, rising from her chair and leaning forward with her hands resting on the desk as she looked at me searchingly. “You ‘forgot’ him. Bill, I must tell you that I have seen and examined the transcripts of your thoughts since the day you ‘forgot’ your resentment toward Mike. The records show that you briefly entertained the thought that perhaps it was your attitude toward the matter that caused your displeasure. At once, your soul grasped that the idea was good and valid and absorbed it and stayed with it. A few minutes later, you made the decision to forgive Mike completely for your own peace of mind. Our records show that shortly afterward, you expanded that decision and resolved to extend that forgiveness to anyone who irritates you. Bill, that is what we mean by a ‘supreme decision,’ and it entitles you to the attention of a personal guardian of destiny from that moment forward.”

Laminefta looked at me, assuming I had explained everything very clearly.

—Well, I still don't get it. What do my thoughts have to do with this? I always thought it was what you do that matters, not what you think.

—Look, Bill, there are three basic levels of experiential reality: the material, the mental, and the spiritual. Actions are relevant primarily at the material level, what you understand at the mental level, and decisions at the spiritual level. The highest and therefore most fundamental of the three is the spiritual; consequently, when you made this decision that determined not only how you felt, but also what you thought and what you did, the event had relevance at all three levels. When you made the supreme decision in your innermost heart, Bill, it was clearly discernible here, a couple of dozen light-years away. I can tell you, we also had a little celebration about it; it's not often we see a supreme decision, and it's even rarer in someone as young as you.

—Well, I barely remember any of that. It seemed like the most natural thing in the world to me. It doesn't seem like a great achievement.

“Of course not!” he replied, smiling.

Then I looked at the seraphim again and thought about what Laminefta had said about them being with me through everything I'd experienced since that day. I began to feel waves of emotion wash over me. I noticed a sense of belonging and connection with these beings, which strangely seemed to bring back scents from my childhood memories, very strong and clear... pine needles on Christmas morning... freshly cut grass on a summer day... flowers opening in spring... the smell of Mom's cookies baking in the kitchen.

Henri and Henta approached each other and seemed to actually merge their visible forms until they spoke again as one being:

—I/we believe that Bill's other questions can be answered satisfactorily from now on.

Laminefta handed me a folder containing a few sheets of white, paper-like material and a copy of _The Urantia Book_, which I accepted with gratitude. As we retreated toward the landing platform, Laminefta spoke softly:

—We will meet again, Bill, in the eternity of our Father's grace.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 1</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/3">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 3</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>