---
title: "Chapter 4"
description: "A Day in the Life of a Mansion Worlds Student – The Pearl of Wisdom"
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Life after death, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1994 Tom Maringer</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 3</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/5">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 5</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

The succession of memories had continued up to the present moment and then stopped; my mind seemed to balance on the very edge of a new, first-order knowledge. I heard Lamont's voice with a hint of Henri's, and it was as if they were speaking in unison somewhere deep within my mind.

—Just as the stream of memories has passed through your mind without interruption thanks to your searching intellect, so will this story from the eternal past of the thought adjuster, that divine spirit fragment of the Universal Father who seeks eternal union with your soul.

The three beings gathered around me, the seraphim on either side and the liaison director in front, facing me, holding in her outstretched hand the pearl of wisdom, which began to emit a faint yellowish glow. Slowly, I began to realize that a clear three-dimensional image was forming in my mind, and as I concentrated on it, my awareness of the scene we were in faded. I could easily examine the image but could not identify it. It seemed to be a whirlpool of energy, some type of cosmic vortex in a formless void. A second image now flowed into my consciousness, superimposing itself upon the first but in a different form, not visual but informational. I knew now that the whirlwind of energy I was seeing was an artist's rendering of Divinington, the home of the thought adjusters. As the scene revolved, I saw the gigantic form of Paradise rise in the firmament and could see the rings of the billion worlds of Havona spread out through space like diamonds. It was breathtakingly beautiful! As I recognized and understood the images in my mind, they seemed to gain solidity until finally, it was as if I were floating in space above the surface of Divinington and gazing out at the grandeur of the entire central universe. I was so entranced that I cannot say for sure how long I stood gazing at the scene. Then the vision seemed to spin, and I plummeted toward the surface of the planet where I witnessed the initial training of a virgin Thought Adjuster. The images flickered and shifted at dizzying speeds, yet my mind seemed to absorb the details of the scene—details I would recall and study later, for at the moment all I could do was watch.

The plot now began to focus on a particular adjuster who was being trained by others of his kind who had experience with the minds of mortals on the Spacer worlds. From time to time, calls went out seeking volunteers for missions to the inhabited worlds. All unattached adjusters always volunteered for these missions, but it was not clear to me how the selection was made; and finally, the adjuster we were observing was summoned before the Chief of the Personalized Adjusters and given his commission. As the adjuster departed for the world on which he was to be assigned, it was as if I were looking at the scene with two eyes, each seeing different things. On the one hand, I saw the adjuster as a point of light rocketing across millions of light-years of space in a few seconds. On the other hand, I saw the scene that the adjuster presumably saw, a scene in which the material universe was practically nonexistent, and only a flashing beacon shining brightly before him indicated the mortal intellect to which he had been assigned.

With this same double vision, I observed the entire life of a mortal on a primitive world. I witnessed the material problems and tribulations of life on a planetary pre-prince world, and I also witnessed the experience of the thought adjuster in spiritual terms, seeing how he attempted to contact the mortal in whom he had his abode. Finally, upon the mortal's death, the adjuster returned to Divinington to await further missions.

Again and again I saw the adjuster go forth to the worlds of space, sometimes to this superuniverse, sometimes to another; the physical appearance of the various creatures was manifold and varied: eight-legged, spider-like beings, flying creatures, swimmers, subbreathers, superbreathers, and nonbreathers, all of the borrowed order in the adjuster's abode.

Finally, after twenty-one cosmos sorties to beings of non-adjuster fusion potential, the adjuster was sent on a mission to a being of adjuster fusion status on an advanced world. The speed of history seemed to slow, and additional details became apparent. The adjuster had been assigned to one of the inner realms of the sixth superuniverse, a planet of midbreathers in the pre-bestowal Son era of development. It was a life-experiment world fraught with both material and spiritual difficulties. The mortal subject was a male from one of the secondary race groups living in a poor social environment. The universe truth teachers had repeatedly attempted to open the subject to the transforming power of the indwelling thought adjuster, but despite all efforts, the subject descended into evil and sin and ultimately chose to reject eternal survival.

The adjuster returned to Divinington and although it cannot be said that the adjusters feel shame or remorse, a certain feeling of regret is fully representative of the adjuster's attitude.

The call of the Chief of Personalized Adjusters is issued, saying: “A MORTAL CHILD FROM A WORLD OF TIME AND SPACE APPROACHES THE THRESHOLD OF MORAL DECISION.”

—SEND ME! —the volunteers chorus with the force of ten billion voices— SEND ME!

—¡ADJUSTER, SEE!

The adjuster responds and is sent back into space. The story slows down again, and more details become clear. This time it goes to a spirit-merged world, a non-breather world in the seventh superuniverse, Orvonton. It's in the local universe of Nebadon, in the constellation Norlatiadec, specifically in the Satania system; the chosen star family is Monmatia, and the target is the innermost planet in the system, Panoptia, number 612 in Satania, and it's the mind of the child Tar-Lee that's ready for her first moral decision. $\qquad$

“It's my fault. I'm sorry, Father, I beg your forgiveness. I was stupid enough to venture outside the protected area, and young people shouldn't be allowed there.”

“You're forgiven, daughter. There are others older than you who are the instigators and who will be punished. In any case, I'm proud that you came to me this way and trusted me enough to tell me the truth. Thank you.”

As the story of Tar-Lee continues, a series of graphic representations of facts about the planet, its history, and its environment begin to flash through my mind. Although each packet of information flashes through my mind for only a moment, I can absorb all the main points and store the rest for later, more detailed contemplation. Excerpts from the Panoptian story follow.

<p style="text-align:center;">
(For simplicity, Urantian units of measurement are used.)<br>
<ins>PANOPTIA, planet 612</ins><br>
<ins>Planetary environment</ins><br>
</p>

Panoptia is an airless world, the innermost of the twelve planets in the family of the G-type star Monmatia. It orbits its sun every 88 days at an average distance of 3.2 light-seconds, in an eccentric elliptical orbit whose distance varies between 46 and 69 million kilometers. The planet rotates on its axis once every 58.97 days, resulting in a phase-tracking orbital system in which the planet rotates only three times every two years. Thus, a “day” (defined as the time from sunrise to sunrise) lasts exactly 176 days, or two planetary years. This gives rise to the creation of two supertropical zones, corresponding in alternate years to those opposite the Sun at perihelion (point of closest approach).

Daytime surface temperatures can range from 50°C to over 400°C, with nighttime temperatures dropping to as low as -100°C. There is a small magnetic field about 1% as strong as Urantia's, whose polarity is 12 degrees from the planet's axis, which is perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic, so there are no seasonal variations, only daily ones.

The planet's mass is approximately 3.3 x 1023 kilograms or about ⅛ that of Urantia. With a diameter of 4,879 km, the gravity at the planet's surface is about ⅓ that of Urantia. The surface is characterized by an abundance of meteoric impact craters of all sizes from microscopic to the gigantic Caloris Basin, and by a series of long, shallow cliffs or “escarpments” that may extend hundreds of kilometers across the landscape.

Panoptia has a metallic core about ⅓ its diameter and a silicate crust about 600 km wide. The surface materials are mainly black, heavy magnesium-iron silicates, occasionally mixed with lighter, oxygen-rich granites and andesites. Heavy metals are relatively abundant, and salts, mainly chlorides of sodium, calcium, and magnesium, occasionally form pools at the bottoms of the deeper craters, especially in the two supertropics. Panoptia has an extremely thin atmosphere composed mainly of nitrogen, oxygen, argon, xenon, carbon, water vapor, and helium.

## Planetary History

Six hundred million years ago, a commission of Life Carriers examined this rocky, airless world as a candidate for life implantation and registered it for future implantation, pending the abatement of the excessive deposition of meteoric debris. 342 million years ago, the Life Carriers returned with life plasma from the laboratories of one of the satellites of Jerusem, the system capital. The Life Carriers had designed a modified standard Nebadon design for the Satania type, based on sodium chloride, the standard design for such worlds. This life plasma was implanted in selected chloride pools at two locations, one in each of the supertropical zones that lay on the equator at two antipodal positions on the planet.

The basic design involved fluorosilicon fabric structures with a sodium chloride circulatory system, and the direct use of energy from sunlight.

The earliest plant and animal forms basked in the sunlight during daylight hours and then grew fruit (the plants) or hibernated during the long night. The first animals that could crawl out of the chloride pools were able to move to spend more time in the setting sun, and eventually, animal forms grew long legs and could quickly traverse the planet's surface. Following the sun around the globe in an endless migration, any animal that could travel an average of 87 km per day could remain perpetually in the sunlight.

The human form of Panoptia evolved from a long-legged, quadrupedal animal life form in a series of sudden evolutionary leaps culminating in a being with upright bipedal locomotion and specialized forelegs as hands.

The basic energy consumption of all panoptian animal forms involved the direct use of light energy collected by tiny silicon plates in the skin cells, which triggers an iron-nickel alkaline reaction that stores the electrical potential in a special organ of the double-layered epidermis. Higher animals have developed this capacity to the point where they can effectively continue functioning in total darkness for long periods. The charging reaction is:

$$
\mathrm{Fe}_{2} \mathrm{O}_{3}+\mathrm{Ni}_{2} \mathrm{O}_{3}+\text { light energy }=2 \mathrm{Fe}+\mathrm{Ni}_{2} \mathrm{O}_{5}+\mathrm{O}
$$

This involves the reduction of iron oxide to metallic iron, with most of the excess oxygen being absorbed by nickel oxide. This brings us to the second basic problem of panoptian animal forms: acquiring the necessary supply of oxygen and maintaining it according to supply requirements. Oxygen is produced in the previous charging reaction and must be reabsorbed during the discharge to ensure adequate energy flow.

The various panoptian forms carry out oxygen harvesting in different ways, from the direct reduction of silicate rocks by plants, to the utilization of water from dissolving chloride pools and the absorption of small amounts from the extremely thin atmosphere by higher animals.

The main environmental risk for the inhabitants of Panoptia is the constant danger of meteor bombardment. Without an atmosphere to absorb these pieces of cosmic debris, even a tiny fragment can be deadly. This danger can be minimized by staying as close as possible to the dividing line between evening and night, and taking shelter in caves during the worst storms. Likewise, the effects of sunspot activity can be extremely severe, making shelter necessary. Only an asteroid of any size crosses Panoptia's orbit and ventures as close as 20 million kilometers from the Sun before retreating back toward the colder outer planets.

The willed creatures of this world possess vehicles for personality manifestation composed primarily of fluorine and silicon, which replace the more familiar water and carbon chemistry of atmospheric worlds. The circulatory fluid is over ninety percent sodium chloride, which is the modification group for the higher temperatures of the local system. The temperature regulation system involves modifying the chemistry of the circulatory fluid to adapt it to changing conditions so that while the creatures are technically “cold-blooded,” they can function effectively at temperatures from about 0 degrees Celsius to over 400 degrees Celsius.

Panoptia mortals are of the three-brain nervous system order, having a lower brain for routine physical functions and two upper brains, one for intellectual operations and the other devoted to activities related to the spiritual ministry of the thought adjusters. They are also of the three-gland chemical control order, having a special pituitary-like body that enhances the potential for spiritual response.

These beings are about three meters tall, weigh about 50 kg as adults, and have an average lifespan of about 120 years. They walk upright, are bipedal, and quite slender by Urantia standards. They have two arms ending in large hands, each with seven fingers. Their skin is very tough and thick, serving a dual function of protection from the environment and as a light-harvesting organ. Except for a small band covering their sexual organs, they almost never wear clothing. Their head is quite large, with two large eyes in its upper third and a roughly circular, light-emitting prehensile organ in its lower third. This “mouth” is their means of communication; these beings speak by manipulating the shape, color, and pattern of the light emanating from this organ, their eyes being able to detect light of three and a half octaves of the color scale, compared to the single octave of Urantians. The sense of hearing is limited to detecting vibrations propagating through the ground surface, achieved through a set of specialized gas chambers located at the tips of the seven widely spaced toes on each foot. This sense is exceptionally sensitive to nearby movement.

These mortals are of the non-adjuster fusion series and are candidates for fusion with a spirit fragment of the local universe Mother Spirit; therefore, they experience the indwelling of adjusters only transiently.

## Social history

The implantation of life took place about two hundred million years after that same step was taken on Urantia, but because of the simplicity of the patterns, evolution proceeded at a much greater rate and resulted in a more limited diversity of life forms. Panoptia was recorded as an inhabited world almost three hundred thousand years before the advent of Andon and Fonta to Urantia.

The first humans descended from a group of migratory animals that followed the sun around the world, escaping the bitter cold of the night and the need for hibernation. Implacable conflicts erupted between human and prehuman groups for control of migration routes, especially the escarpment passes, so that within ten thousand years the prehuman forms were completely extinct. Fighting continued between various tribes for control of these lifelines, especially those along the equatorial routes.

When the Planetary Prince and his team were dispatched during this time of clan strife, they established their headquarters and built their permanent dwelling near the edge of the great Caloris Basin, in one of the two supertropic zones. The construction of dwellings and energy reservoirs was subterranean to withstand the long night until the coming of the new day, thus allowing for the first time the continuous occupation of a single location without hibernation. Over a few hundred thousand years, under the guidance of the Planetary Prince, the clans evolved into seven territorial tribes that soon federated into a global government that remains almost unchanged to this day. The Planetary Prince's High Advisory Council is composed of forty-nine members, seven representatives from each of the seven tribes, all chosen through representative elections at divisional tribal councils.

The arrival of the material Son and Daughter was well prepared; the Garden of Eden was constructed in the supertropical zone antipodal to that occupied by the seat of the Planetary Prince. This Adamic dispensation was enormously successful and brought the material evolution of Panoptian mortals to a level high in fifty thousand years.

The Lucifer rebellion took place soon after the dispersion among the seven tribes of pure-line Adamic descent, and although the Planetary Prince himself fell under the influence of the rebel System Sovereign and forcibly neutralized the material Son and Daughter, Elanora, the youthful matriarch of the Sun tribe, seized upon the governments of the realms and so eloquently stood for Michael in the planetary council that not a single mortal was led astray. Panoptia had the honor of being the only planet in all Nebadon on which such a demonstration of profound loyalty on the part of evolving mortals took place.

The subsequent dispensations of the Magisterial Son, the Bestowal Son (of the Avonal order), and the Trinity Teaching Sons were highly successful and culminated in the inauguration of the first stage of light and life and the descent of the Temple of Light in conjunction with Michael's elevation to Master Son status following his triumphant return from his seventh bestowal on Urantia. The planetary Adam and Eve were at this time elevated to the status of planetary sovereigns.

Panoptia now sends representatives to the system conclaves, and the translated and spirit-fused ascendants have the honor of being in charge, while en route to the training spheres of Edentia, of the maintenance and beautification of the Father's world, the seventh transitional culture world from those orbiting Jerusem, the system capital. Collectively, they are commonly known throughout the system as “the children of the Sun,” an expression that has a double meaning.

---

The progression of the most salient spiritual events in Tar-Lee's life continues to flow through my mind, simultaneously with the presentation of the physical aspects of the planet. His story tells me of Tar-Lee's life struggles, his childhood following the arrival of the adjuster, puberty, his marriage, his children, his search for God, his attainment of the third circle and the assignment of a personal seraphic guardian, his doing the will of God, and his election to the highest office of the third tribe as representative to the Panoptian planetary council.

From the adjuster's point of view, Tar-Lee was progressing in his ability to communicate with the indwelling spirit in a completely satisfactory manner. Up to this point, the succession of thoughts, the adjuster's story of Tar-Lee's life, like that of his indwelling in the preceding beings, was in the form of a spirit transcript. While I could gain a sense of the patterns of his life development and while I knew the general physical status of the planet and its inhabitants, I had no physical “picture” of Tar-Lee, only of his mind and spirit. Now, the ideographic progression of story images was once again halted to permit a real-time material projection superimposed on the spirit scene. The council chamber of the Planetary Council of Panoptia was visible.

There is applause as Tar-Lee approaches the podium.

—Friends, clansmen, and symbiotes, I wish to thank you from the bottom of my heart for granting me the honor of serving a term on this high council, an honor I now pass on to my invaluable successor as I move on to the highest office of member of the advisory council of the super cabinet. May you all grow to be ever more, in every circuit around Your sun, the light of the Universal Father.

There was thunderous applause again as Tar-Lee stepped down from the podium and Jangor-Wat stepped up and stood silently looking out over the crowd, waiting for the clamor to die down. (Note: Since these beings communicate by light signals, the room lit up brightly during the applause. Slowly, the room dimmed until it was back to its usual dull orange glow.)

Slowly, Jangor-Wat began to speak; her voice radiated with such intensity of color and such precision of pattern that she had been hailed as the greatest orator of millennia.

—I wish all of you to hear what I have to say about my friend and symbiote Tar-Lee. It is you, Tar-Lee, whom we owe thanks for your tireless service in the best interests of your world and its people. We can never repay the good you have done for all of us, and I wish to tell you that if such decisions were my own, you would be in the personal presence of the Creator Son himself the very day you left this world, for he must love you very much, since you are so much like him. Please join me in wishing:

“Our Father, in whom all the kingdoms of the universe consist, may your name be lifted up and your character glorified. May your presence surround us and your glory be manifested, imperfectly in us as it is perfectly displayed on high. Give us this day the life-giving power of light and do not let us be lost in the evil wanderings of our imaginations, for yours is the glorious dwelling, the everlasting power, and ours is the eternal gift of your Son’s infinite love. May it be so forever.”

In the spiritual version of this part of the ideographic presentation, Tar-Lee was virtually overcome by waves of emotion. Her seraphim approached her, and through a link with the thought adjuster and with the aid of the mobilization of will that had been produced by the emotion of the event, Tar-Lee broke into the first circle of cosmic progression right then and there on the council bench. The seraphim guarding her danced and sang for joy. Tar-Lee had lived a long and full life and had now passed the last obstacle to the possible final unification of creature will with the will of God.

Tar-Lee left the council chamber after chatting a bit with friends and colleagues and boarded a train tube headed to the other side of the planet, settling in for the journey. The train moved quickly and smoothly, utilizing the unlimited electrical capacity that its close proximity to the Sun provided. She decided to eat along the way and dialed in the specific frequency combination she preferred. She was immediately enveloped in a blue-green glow.

“Oh! That's great, they always have such good food on the trains!” he thought as he rested and absorbed the flow of energy.

Arriving at his underground home, a few kilometers from the Garden of Eden Museum and the sub-administrative council chamber, he unloaded his luggage and decided to head upstairs. As he climbed the ladder to the surface, he saw the yellow glow of the warning light indicating that the meteorite shield was not working. He climbed to the chamber just below the surface door in the wall of the ancient crater. A familiar figure leaned distractedly against the door.

—Why? Delás, my old “light box”; I noticed you weren't at the ceremony.

“Come on, Tar, you know I can't stand that kind of thing. Besides, I wanted to see you alone, and I knew you'd come up here,” said Tar-Lee's longtime partner. “Let's go look at the stars, shall we?”

—I suppose you've noticed the shields are down again.

From there river.

—Has that ever stopped us?

They put on their thermal insulation suits and left the underground living space to emerge at the bottom of the ancient meteor impact crater, about 1,500 meters wide and 100 meters deep. When the sun reaches its zenith in about four months, this place will be teeming with people and have the atmosphere of a carnival. Now, it is inhospitable and arid, with a few gray, lifeless plants clinging to the rocks while the thrilling spectacle of the star display and the brilliant Milky Way swirls overhead. They lay down in one of the many sunbathing alcoves and gazed at the sky together. Delás noticed the intensely bright disc of The Blue Globetrotter.

“Can you imagine,” he said, “that Michael himself was incarnated in that cold, gas-filled place? It seems quite unlikely, but that's what we were told.”

—I know what you mean, Delás, it's hard to believe that life could be possible so far from the Sun, but there are apparently many forms of life very different from ours.

—Scientists have supposedly detected radio signals originating there and have suggested we send a strong beam as a signal to communicate with them, but the Planetary Sovereigns always oppose it; they're apparently in a stage of primitive social barbarism and in quarantine with respect to us. It's quite pitiful, don't you think?

—Well, maybe things will change one day and we'll have the chance to communicate with them; I think that would be very interesting. After all, there's a whole chapter in The Book of Panoptia that tells the story of life on atmospheric worlds. That must have been one of the reasons for including the chapter.

—Hey Tar-Lee, remember the day we came here at the solar zenith when we were both in government art school?

—Of course, darling, how could I forget! It was the first time we shared light. —They held hands tightly.

—I was taking a children's swimming class at the pool and noticed you going down into the salt water. You lay down on the beach among the moss and flowers.

—I saw you diving between the rocks, were you showing off?

“You were the most beautiful creature I'd ever seen, and you still are.” They looked at each other like two lovers, an old married couple reunited after many years of abundant obligations and busy careers. “Do you want to go up to the edge? We'll have a view of the solar corona with the sun rising.”

—I don't know, Delás. It would be quite risky since the shields are down in this sector. The late morning is always the most dangerous part of the planet, as you know. Shouldn't we stay near the gate in case it rains?

“Oh, let's not miss this opportunity! If Father wants us today, I'm ready to go. There's nothing I really want to do with my life except be with you. Besides, I understand there's a major solar storm at the zenith; the corona should be exceptionally clear now.”

—Okay, let's take the old western route since we've been encouraged despite everything.

—That's how I like it! Let's go.

Tar-Lee and Delás climbed the west face of the crater, passing through a steep crevasse and a nearly vertical wall with handholds and footholds, and finally emerged over the crater rim. The climb had actually been more difficult than either of them could remember; it had been a few years since they had last made this trek. The view was truly spectacular. The sun was just above the horizon, and the flickering halo of the solar corona could be seen vividly shining in the sky at about one-third its size. They heard a thud under their feet and perceived dust rising a few hundred meters above; it was obviously the impact of a micrometeorite. They looked at each other and continued unafraid, taking in the natural beauty of the landscape and the sky.


—It's been a good life, Tar-Lee. We've had our difficulties and our share of problems, but I don't regret a single thing; if I had the chance, I'd do exactly the same thing again.

—We've had wonderful children, haven't we, Delás? It was quite hard having Lin-Tao when we were newly married and neither of us had graduated. Do you remember when we lived in that little cave near the shield park?

Delás responded laughing:

—It was difficult, yes. But do you remember how much fun we had back then? We would put Lin-Tao on our backs in a backpack and walk for hours along the old migration trails, exploring those ancient refuge caves and dipping our toes in the salt pools. The little one liked to throw stones into the pools just to see them splash. Oh Tar! How long had it been since we surfaced together? Years!

—Well, we graduated from statecraft school, got jobs at Eden Warren, had Dumas and Cormas, and our lives got pretty busy from then on. We haven't had much time for these things, at least until now.

—Perhaps we'll have time for our grandchildren now. The twins are absolutely adorable. Their Uncle Dumas dotes on them too, and I'd say he spoils them a bit too much. I wish young Cormas would decide soon what he wants to do with his life. He has a good heart, but he seems impractical at times, and he always goes out alone in unprotected areas.

—Oh! With how overprotective you were, aren't we being that way now, Delás? How can you find fault with him when we're out here doing the same thing? Who knows? Maybe he'll become a professor one day.

—You're right, I know. I just want the best for our boys, that's all. I just want him to do better than we did.

Tar-Lee smiled:

—I love you, you know that, right?

—Well, I thought maybe you loved me.

“You're kidding me!” They embraced, filled with a feeling of mutual love and satisfaction with their world and their lives, sharing the natural beauty of their planet as they had done many years before.

In the sky, several thousand kilometers away but approaching rapidly, was a cloud of meteoroids, part of a small, broken-up comet. The cluster, a mere handful of sand and pea-sized chunks of rock, was hurtling through space toward Panoptia at a speed of 85 kilometers per second. The cloud was detected by the planetary meteoroid defense system's monitors and would have been destroyed by an electron beam focused on it if the system had been operating in that sector.

A seraphim attached to the monitoring station operator sent word of this approach to other seraphim. The guardian seraphim attached to Tar-Lee and Delás were informed of the situation ten seconds in advance. They quickly made calculations to determine the outcome of the impact, but there were too many variables, and they couldn't be certain what would happen, although in practice it was certain that both individuals would suffer serious injuries.

The planetary sovereigns were contacted, their approval was sought and received, the planetary midshipmen were consulted, and the mission was given the go-ahead.

Delás and Tar-Lee, caught up in the excitement of the moment, fearlessly felt the particle pounding behind them and drew closer. Suddenly, they were lifted up by unseen forces with the light of bliss on their faces and the ultimate mobilization of their willingness to do God's will in their hearts. In a flash of cosmic energy, the souls of Delás and Tar-Lee merged with spirit fragments of the Local Universe Mother Spirit, were instantly transported into the presence of the Creator Son, and, on the mansion worlds, resumed their cosmic journey. Their thought adjusters were released, and they returned to Divinington.

The Adjuster that had resided on Tar-Lee quickly traverses space to Divinington, the Adjuster home, but something has changed; by piloting a mortal to the threshold of fusion, the Adjuster has gained a kind of volition, it has become self-actuating!

Upon arriving at Divinington, the adjuster's first action is a request: to receive his next mission on another planet in the same solar system as his previous mission.

The Chief of Custom Fitters approves the request. And the call comes in: “A MORTAL CHILD FROM A WORLD OF TIME AND SPACE APPROACHES THE THRESHOLD OF MORAL DECISION.”

A chorus of volunteers responds:

—SEND ME!

The choice is made:

—¡ADJUSTER, SEE!

The adjuster streaks through space, back to Orvonton, back to Nebadon, Norlatiadec, and Satania, and on to the small solar system of Monmatia, this time to the third planet, Urantia, number 606, to North America, to a school lunch line, to an elementary school classroom, in the year 1961 A.D. A child speaks:

—Listen, Billy, if you don't stop hanging around Jeff, that useless friend of yours, we won't like you anymore and we won't play with you at recess.

“Well, I don't care,” Billy says, “Jeff is a good friend of mine and I won't turn my back on him for you or anyone else.”

<p style="text-align:center;">
IT REALIZED!<br>
</p>

“But it's me!” I shouted, trying to make myself heard over the din of my own racing thoughts.

“Yes!” echoed the voices of the others.

—The same adjuster, me, Tar-Lee, all those others...

-Yeah!

—Oh my God!

-YEAH!!!!!!!!!!!!!

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 3</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/5">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 5</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>