---
title: "Chapter 5"
description: "A Day in the Life of a Mansion Worlds Student – The Pearl of Wisdom"
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Life after death, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1994 Tom Maringer</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/4">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 4</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/6">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 6</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

My mind reeled with the transcendence of what I had just experienced. I felt a new and far-reaching connection between the various creatures of the universe; it was community in the abode of the spirit.

I'd known about the various other orders of creature existence since my early days on the mansion worlds, especially the spirit-fusion candidates, but I'd always felt somewhat different from them and, in a way, pitied them. Now, I realized that their destiny is as grand as my own, though different, and that we have wonderful, intimate bonds in common.

I began to think about the thought adjuster, imagining what its experience would be like, moving from mind to mind, always seeking to bring the creature toward God and hoping one day to find a being I could pilot to the Paradise lands. I probed ever more deeply into the significance of the Father fragment's indwelling, the way the spirit of the Original Creator lives within me.

I began to hear a small, quiet voice in my mind that spoke not in words but in images and thought symbols similar to those I had experienced with the pearl of wisdom.

—IT'S ME/MINE/OURS/US.
I AM YOU AND YOU ARE ME.
WE GO TOGETHER TO ETERNITY.
MUCH TO DO AND MUCH TO SEE.

—Henri, what's that? I hear a “voice” in my mind speaking to me in images. I don't understand anything. We've turned off the pearl, haven't we?

Henri/Henta turned to look at Samotad and Lamont/Lamar. They were all smiling and looking at me. Samotad spoke:

—It's your thought adjuster, Bill. You've just crossed the barrier of the third psychic circle of progression and now have the ability to consciously communicate with your adjuster sporadically. You've heard the very voice of God speaking to you, Bill! You'll learn to listen to it, to trust its counsel and guidance, for the spirit knows the way to God, since it comes from the Father of all. It's your cosmic pilot who will always guide your soul toward the first source and center of all things and all beings.

The seraphim defused from their being complements, and the group, now consisting of five beings, enveloped me in a glorious “embrace.” Henri spoke:

—Bill, there's someone waiting outside who'd like to meet you.

“What? Here? Who is it?” I was caught off guard and couldn't imagine who they were talking about. We all turned toward the door, and Lamont rang a small bell. Then, a person entered the room; she was obviously a female moronic progressor, and she was wearing the crystal that denoted she had achieved fusion status.

—Bill, I'd like you to meet Tar-Lee.

Although we had never met, we had known each other for a long time. Tar-Lee smiled and nodded to me. I nodded back, and then he came to the group and joined in the embrace; now there were seven of us. We spontaneously formed a circle and said a few prayers together. Each spoke from his or her heart, and each was inspired by the one who had spoken before; we ended with a harmonious humming, a kind of wordless song of praise. It was glorious!

When we undid the circle, Samotad said:

—Well, Bill, I've really enjoyed this service session with you. Your journey to the Father has truly begun. I bid you farewell. We shall meet again in the eternity of our Father's grace.

I waved back and thanked him for his help. Then, Lamont and Lamar said their goodbyes as well. Finally, Henri and Henta turned to leave.

“Are you leaving too?” I said, feeling a little uncomfortable with the idea of being alone with Tar-Lee.

—Yes, Bill, we'll take care of registering your new status. You and Tar-Lee can spend the rest of the day getting to know each other; I think you'll have a lot to say to each other. —They left the room, leaving Tar-Lee and me alone.

—Well, Tar-Lee, I just experienced a presentation that included a portion of your life. It seems we share the same thought adjuster.

—Yes Bill, and by the way, call me Tar, it's the family name.

—Okay, Tar, you'll have to give me some time to get used to the situation. I guess it was too much of a shock for me.

Tar smiled and sat down.

—Don't worry about that, Bill, and look, you don't have to address me formally. We've just met, but we share a relationship more intimate than any married couple or even identical twins. We already know more about each other than you can imagine. I've had time to prepare for this meeting, reviewed your mortal transcripts, and noticed many similarities in the way you react to life's problems. I've followed your career in morontia since you arrived and have been looking forward to the time when this meeting could be arranged.

—Well, I see that your form of morontia is very different from your material body in appearance and structure, while mine is very similar to the former.

—As you know, Bill, I come from a world of non-breathers, and the life-modification processes on these worlds represent a radical departure from the universe norm. At each stage of my progression in morontia, my body was modified to more closely conform to the standard type. You will notice that I now breathe air and speak to you with the vocal vibrations that are standard in Nebadon. These changes were uncomfortable at first, but I soon grew accustomed to the new bodies, and I still retain my ability to perceive light-wave speech, something you will have to learn someday through long, hard work.

—So Tar, if I understand correctly, you come from a planet in my own solar system that we call Mercury.

—That's right, Bill. These types of worlds are ideal for the non-breathing type of life since they receive such a large flow of energy that it can be used for the life processes of material beings.

—Well, why didn't I know this before? I mean, although I already knew the history of Panoptia, especially due to its unique status since Lucifer's rebellion, I never knew it was in my own solar system.

—Have you ever asked?

—Well, no, I don't think so.

Tar shrugged.

—You know they don't tell you much here if you don't ask.

I laughed.

—You know, in all the space books I've read, it seemed like scientists didn't give much thought to Mercury. They assumed that because it was so close to the Sun and our way of life would be impossible in that environment, there was no way life of any kind could exist.


—Well Bill, in your world as in mine, scientists are often the last to know —we both laughed together.

I looked at the crystal hanging around his neck. He noticed my interest, took it from it, and offered it to me. It was the first one I'd seen so close. The cube, a little over a centimeter on a side, contained two fine threads, one silver and the gray color of platinum, the other gold. The silver thread ran in a straight line from one corner of the cube to the opposite corner, and I realized it was what they called “the straight and narrow path.” The gold thread began and ended at the same points, but curved in a complex line inside the cube and spiraled around the silver thread in increasingly narrow arcs as it approached the top corner.

“It's beautiful,” I said and handed the bucket back to him.

“Thank you,” she replied, putting it back on him. “You'll have one very similar to this one sooner than you can imagine.”

-What do you mean?

—You know you'll be merging with your adjuster before long and you'll have a crystal very similar to this one, and the shape of the line will probably be similar.

—Do you really believe it?

—Of course! As I told you, I know you quite well.

—Tell me, Tar, what's it like to merge with the spirit like you did? You know that ever since I came to the mansion worlds, I've always felt a bit sorry for those who merge with the spirit, because I thought they were less fortunate than me, that they had a less exalted destiny. But that's not the way to look at it, is it?

Tar-Lee river.

—Funny you should mention that, Bill, because I've always felt the same way about adjuster-mergers. When Delás and I were lifted up through the midwayers and merged, it was as if we were suddenly free. The adjuster transported us at incredible speed across the sky, the stars streaking before us, to the personal presence of Michael of Nebadon on Salvington. It was astonishing. We had merged with a spirit fragment of the Creative Daughter, Michael's consort. Michael welcomed us and accepted us as a permanent part of his family, forever citizens of Nebadon, to live and work in eternal association with the Mother Spirit and Michael. For me, the moment of fusion was literally a mind-expanding moment; in fact, my consciousness expanded to include a direct perception of the entire local universe. I became part of Michael's immediate family, never to leave his side again. On the contrary, the destiny of those who merge with the adjuster is to leave Michael's domain, perhaps never to return. I'm sure it's a glorious destiny, but for me, it would be sad to have to leave this wonderful place, to have to say goodbye to all of this.

—Well, I guess I've never seen it that way. I do feel a kind of regret about having to move forward in the universe someday, but I think the new places we'll see will be just as interesting.

—Oh, don't be mistaken, Bill, I'm sure the things you'll do and see will be fantastic, going through the superuniverse training schools and continuing on to Havona and Paradise. Well, it's like that story from your home world:

“Once upon a time, there lived a blacksmith and his wife who had a small but comfortable house filled with love and happiness. They had two sons, and they loved them both very much. One of the sons chose to stay home and help his father in the forge and his mother take care of the animals, while the other son went out into the wide world to make his fortune.”

“You see, Bill, I'm like the first son, while you're like the second. I choose to stay by my parents' side and help them tend the gardens they've already established, while you'll eventually go out into the outer layers of space to sow new fields for the harvest.”

—Wow! Wow, how beautiful it is! I had no idea it could be like this.

—Have they told you about the others?

—The others? What do you mean?

—There are five other spirit-fused or son-fused beings who have also shared our thought adjuster.

—What? Where?

—They are scattered throughout the grand universe. There is one in a remote area of Orvonton, another in superuniverse 5, two in superuniverse 4, and one in superuniverse 3. Since you have seen the presentation of the Pearl of Wisdom, you are vaguely familiar with their careers.

—Wow, will we ever get to meet them?

—You might, Bill, I probably won't. Well, maybe someday I'll get a pass to Uversa to meet the Orvontonian, but basically, there won't be any direct contact in the superuniverses until they're fully settled in light and life. On the other hand, you'll almost certainly meet the others in the distant future when you reach the Finality Corps and are sent back to the time-space realms.

—Listen, Tar, this has all been a bit much for me today. I've absorbed a lot of information, and this meeting with you has been incredible, but I'm exhausted. Would you mind if we go out for something to eat?


—Good idea. I've been feeling a little tired for a while now too. Where do you want to go? You know this area better than I do.

—I know where; there's an orchard of moroncia fruit trees nearby, and the spornagia there know me. Let's go!

—Okay, let's go.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/4">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 4</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/6">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 6</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>