---
title: "Chapter 6"
description: "A Day in the Life of a Mansion Worlds Student – The Pearl of Wisdom"
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Life after death, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1994 Tom Maringer</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 5</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/7">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 7</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Tar-Lee and I left the apartment and went down a winding path that ran between low, vine-covered walls. There were many other ascenders everywhere, and many greeted us as we passed. Very soon, we found ourselves near a wide esplanade filled with many beings of all kinds coming and going. We jumped onto a moving sidewalk and began to descend the esplanade; we changed lanes several times until finally, we began to leave the populated areas and arrived at a cultivated suburb with fields, gardens, and well-tended orchards. We jumped off the moving sidewalk at a certain point and took a winding path through the trees.

“I'm glad you came with me, Tar; I like showing people around here. It's a bit off the beaten path, but the trees and flowers here are similar to those I knew when I was on Urantia, and the way they're cared for mimics the wildness of nature I enjoyed so much.”

—It's really beautiful, Bill, of course, very different from where I come from, but I like these smells. You know, it's a sense we didn't have on Panoptia except for the limited ability to detect traces of gases; there was nothing like the grandeur and texture of these scents of living things.

—So tell me what things were like there. Were there many plants and animals, or was the surface barren?

—Oh! Yes, during the daytime the surface was practically covered with living things. The plants were mainly low things close to the ground; you would probably think they were lichens and mosses. Their colors were mainly gray and black to favor maximum absorption of solar energy. There were many kinds of animals, though not as many as on an atmospheric world. They were basically divided into nomads and hibernators. There were all kinds of small swimming creatures that lived in the chloride pools and hibernated when these accumulations froze at night. The nomads followed the sun around the planet; there were various kinds of runners and jumpers, from those the size of a mouse to great beasts the size of a giraffe. The main thing to remember about all life on Panoptia is that its basic function is to absorb solar energy. It is never necessary for any life form to kill another for food. My description will probably seem somewhat stark to you. It is difficult to describe the sense of beauty I get when looking at that landscape. There wasn't much color, but the play of light and shadow, the herds of running animals, the way the light from the sun's corona sparkled across the sky—it's the kind of beauty a Urantian might find in a high mountain range or a scorching desert. Such is my world, such is home to me, and sometimes... well, often, I miss it.

We continued down the narrow path for a kilometer or more, delighting in the natural beauty of the trees and bushes. Birds and animals of various kinds could be seen fluttering or scampering through the undergrowth. Although it may seem strange, they weren't afraid of us at all and continued on their way.

A few hundred yards farther, we came to a small babbling brook spanned by a log bridge. Beyond the bridge, the landscape took on a more orderly appearance, with clumps of apple, peach, and orange trees, and other trees impossible to name because they had no similar ones on Urantia. We continued through the groves and observed one of the gardeners working with a shovel, hunched over the base of one of the trees. Beside him was a low wagon filled with some kind of mulch. He was intent on his task, but he heard us approaching and turned around. It was a spornagia.

—Hi Bill! It’s you.

He stood up and came toward us, brushing the dirt off his arms, until he stopped in front of us. He was about two meters tall, a male, with a long, narrow face very similar to a dog's, but much more expressive. His broad shoulders and broad chest showed that he was well built for hard work, but in proportions and grace, he was perhaps the most beautiful of all animal forms.

—Hi Mala, I'd like you to meet my friend Tar-Lee. I'm showing her some of my favorite places.

“Nice to meet you, Tar-Lee,” he said.

“Same here, Mala,” Tar-Lee replied.

—Mala, we're thinking about maybe having a little snack. Is there anything special today?

Mala almost jumped for joy, and her long, narrow face lit up with delight.

—Oh, yes! You should try the pilka fruit that just ripened today, and you know it rarely ripens. I was so hoping someone would stop by today! Come on, follow me.

Mala began to trot across the orchard at a pace slow enough that Tar-Lee and I had no trouble keeping up. We passed other spornagia who were working in the orchards and orchards, greeting them as we went, and entered the forest again; we ran for almost two kilometers, moving from one trail to another. Birds and animals followed us in a kind of formal parade. They chirped at Mala, and he made sounds back that seemed to understand. The forest itself seemed alive; as we ran, branches crossing the path moved out of our way as we passed, as if we were in one of those enchanted forests from a fairy tale. Finally, we came out into a small clearing with a single small tree at its center. Its trunk was thick and twisted like a rope, with knots and folds as if it were very old.

Mala stood proudly in front of the tree; her reddish skin shone and her large brown eyes laughed.

—Look, isn't it beautiful? It's the only one for miles around; it's terribly difficult to grow, as it's very finicky about soil chemistry. That's why it's out here in the thicket, far from the other fruit trees.

Dozens of fruits could be seen hanging, a soft purple in color and with the luster that denoted the materialization phase of morontia. A pair of small, hopping squirrels emerged from the branches, scolded us for disturbing their solitude, and mingled with the birds that had followed us and had now perched on the branches of the pilka tree, singing and chirping happily.

—Look! Here's a Bill. Notice the little yellow spots and the size is just right, it's perfect. And here's another Tar-Lee. Have you eaten them before?

“No,” Tar-Lee said. “I've been on this world for a couple of dozen years, but I don't think I've ever had the chance to taste your fruits, Mala.”

—Go ahead then, one for each of you, no more are needed. And please, tell me what you think. Are they good?

Tar and I looked at each other and took a bite at the same time. It was indescribable! I could remember the summer days back on Earth when the peaches were ripe and we would go out to the orchards to pick them. This was a hundred times better! The flavor and texture were fabulous, but even more so, the moroncia fruit was “soul food”; it seemed to lift sagging spirits, to sweep away the weariness from my soul that had fallen from the day’s exertions. I felt giggly when we finished eating, and we began to dance around the clearing singing nonsense songs with great joy and jubilation in our hearts. Mala sang and danced with us as if she had shared the fruit. She seemed genuinely joyful just to be there.

After a while, we fell to the ground and stood there looking up at the sky through the branches of the trees; the sky was a more vivid blue than any color I could remember ever seeing, not even on the mansion worlds. The branches of the tree seemed to sway in the breeze and take on shapes of light and color that suggested the figures of people and things we had previously known. Occasionally, some of the small flying cars could be seen passing quickly overhead.

“This is really wonderful, Bill,” Tar-Lee said. “I'm delighted you brought me here. But I had another idea; there's a place I know of that I'd like to show you. What do you say?”

—Come on, Tar, I feel great. What's on your mind?

—Recovery for the mind and body.

—Come on, Tar, what are you talking about?

Serious.

—You'll know when we get there.

—But where?

—Follow me!

We got up and let Mala know how grateful we were for the wonderful fruit from the tree she had so lovingly cared for, and we started walking back along the path we had come. Mala seemed elated that we had liked the fruit so much.

As we passed through the orchards again, we noticed a group of spornagia gathered around another pair of ascendants. Mala immediately joined them, and we followed. It seemed that a pair of artists from the celestial artisans had come to help design a new section of the orchards. Plans were being discussed for another natural-looking woodland environment that would mimic the ecosystem of another world in the local system. One of the spornagia hurried off and returned driving a large, noiseless, tractor-like vehicle that seemed specially designed for transplanting large trees. By the time Tar-Lee and I said our goodbyes, the group was deeply engrossed in the details of how to move some of the trees and reposition them randomly so they wouldn't look like they had been planted.

—May God be with you, Mala. Thank you for your help, those fruits were definitely the best thing I've ever had.

—Thanks to you, Bill and Tar-Lee. It was great of you to come and see me today. I'm glad you liked the pilka; there's really nothing like it in the whole world. Don't hesitate to come and visit me next time.
Next time you're hungry. If the pilka aren't ripe, I'm sure we'll find something else almost as good.

As we were leaving, Tar-Lee said to me:

—I really enjoyed this little race we had; you know, in Panoptia, running was a chore the ancients had to do to stay in the sun and stay alive. However, back in my day, we had enough space to live on the entire planet, artificial light for food, and all that, but I guess it's in the blood. There was nothing I liked more than going out for hours on end. What more could there be?

I'd always loved running, even on Urantia, but with the morontia body, running is an incredible experience. The strength, control, and endurance of the morontia form far surpass what even the greatest Urantia athletes can achieve. Tar-Lee and I ran just for the joy of running, to feel the air blow through our hair, to hear the leaves of the trees rustle as we passed.

After a while, we reached the moving walkway again, which quickly took us to the residential neighborhood.

—By the way, Tar, I haven't asked you before, what is your sphere of residence now?

—Well, I spend a lot of time in the Father's world (and yes, I've had a look at little Adele; she's a delight), but my formal residence is in Jerusem.

—Great! Then I can come see you. I'm supposed to be visiting Jerusem with a large group in a few weeks. I think I'll have some free time. Maybe you can show me around.

—No problem, Bill, I'd love to. Among other things, I can show you the exhibit about my own world, so you can see for yourself how beautiful it can be.

—How long have you been living there, Tar?

—Well, it's been about ten years now. I went through the mansion world schools very quickly. Panoptia, as you know, is in the first stage of light and life. Much of what's taught on the first two mansion worlds is basically deficiency ministry. On a world like Panoptia, much of the material in those courses is taught as part of the basic education system, so we generally go through these probationary worlds very quickly.

—I sometimes get the impression that Urantia is considered a bit backward.

Tar-Lee looked at me with a peculiar expression.

—Your world has been through a comparatively difficult time. On Panoptia, we study the incarnation of Michael in school when we're little, and we're taken out at night in groups to observe the Blue Wanderer (that's what we call Urantia on our world) so we can contemplate God's love for his children; that he can send his son to a place like that.

—So Urantia looks like some kind of muddy pit, right?

—Well, you have to admit things aren't so wonderful over there. I mean, the very concept of war is so repugnant to my people that we simply can't fathom the depth of barbarity involved in killing another of our own kind. You may have accepted the reality of killing and brutality simply as a norm, but that same acceptance seems cruel to most of the rest of us.

—Okay, okay! I'm from the sewer of the universe, but anyway, what's the difference? Here I am!

—Good point, but hey, I'm not sneering at you. You're an Agondonite. When you get to Jerusem, you'll be living in a residential neighborhood with others of your kind. In a way, you could even say I'm a little jealous.

But look! We're almost there; I bet you'll feel better after seeing what this place is like.

—Oh, I've been here before. It's where they play those comedies and do other entertainment shows for groups.

—Exactly, except you might not know there are numerous small special interest reversal groups. Come on, follow me this way.

—Where the hell are we going! I thought all the shows were upstairs, on that other level.

—That's the case with most people, but I'll bet you've never seen one like this. Most people don't care, but like I said, I know you pretty well, and I think this one will drive you crazy.

We stopped in front of a small door in a narrow side alley. The sign on the door simply read Relief Club. The sound of voices and soft music could be heard coming from inside.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 5</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/7">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 7</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>