---
title: "Chapter 7"
description: "A Day in the Life of a Mansion Worlds Student – The Pearl of Wisdom"
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Life after death, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1994 Tom Maringer</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/6">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 6</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/8">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 8</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

We entered; the lighting was dim. There were chairs and tables scattered around the room, and a stage on which someone was speaking. I glanced at Tar-Lee, who was laughing excitedly. I looked back at the room. The whole setting was almost exactly like a nightclub back home. The only difference was that there was no smoking and the only drink served was water. We had apparently entered during one of the acts of a comedy show; the comedian was obviously an ascendant, but I couldn't tell where he came from. We found an empty table and sat down.

—...so I said to the guy, “What about the fork and the marshmallows?” and he said, “Damn! You're going to merge and I don't want to waste them.”

The crowd roared with laughter; then the comedian looked at us and spoke again.

—Hey, guys, it looks like we have some new arrivals. Would you please stand up and introduce yourselves? Name and homeworld will suffice.

Tar-Lee stood up.

—My name is Tar-Lee, I'm from Panoptia. I've been here before, but it's been a few years, although it's pretty much the same as always. Hello, everyone.

“Hey, Tar-Lee,” they chorused in unison. Tar-Lee nudged me in the ribs to encourage me to follow her.

—Oh, my name is Bill, I'm from Urantia, I've never been here, but I'm glad I came, it seems like a fun place.

“Hey Bill,” they chanted again, and a couple added, “Keep coming.”

—Okay, it's nice to have met you, Bill and Tar-Lee. My name is Lon, and I'm from Synoptia. By the way, speaking of Urantia, does anyone remember SEX? There was a guy from Urantia here the other day who said he'd miss sleeping with someone if only he could remember how to do it. The room roared with laughter; a hand went up in the back.

—Hi, my name is Frela, I'm from Synoptia.

—Hello Frela.

—Hi everyone, I just wanted to say that I don't really remember sex, and I'm truly grateful for that. After looking at some of the transcripts of my mortal life that my guardian seraphim have prepared for me, I realize that in that life I was a sex addict, an abuser, and a rapist. It took me a long time to accept Father's forgiveness, but I'm done, and I want to say that I'm glad to be here; I love you all, and I'm just going to get some relief.

—Thanks, Frela. You know what this club is about. In other words, we all have burdens to carry; we've come this far after a long journey, and both literally and figuratively, this is about lifting weights off our shoulders, letting God do the hard work, and GETTING THERE! I remember that all I could think about when I woke up in the first mansion world was the fact that I'd left my house in a real mess and who was going to do all that dirty laundry. Sometimes our anxieties take over.

—Hi, my name is Talm and I'm from Parmia.

—Hello Talm.

—I was just thinking about my old anxieties when you said that. I remember when I was on Parmia, a superbreather world, one of the outer planets in the Bilonia system. My grandfather had just died, and I was very worried about the survival of the soul. The tradition of our planet held that to achieve salvation, one must make a pilgrimage by flying under one's own power, at least once in one's life, to the site of the Planetary Prince's ancient seat. I knew my grandfather had never done so because as a young man, he lost a wing, and I was terribly worried about it because I loved him very much and couldn't bear the thought of coming to the mansion worlds without him. When I woke up in the Temple of New Life, there he was! All my worries were for nothing. I was very happy, but still a little uneasy at having spent so much time in unnecessary anguish. Anyway, I'm glad to be here with you all, so let's lighten up a bit!

—Thanks, Talm, that was a good example of what I'm talking about. By the way, my name is Lon, and I'm still with Synoptia.

—Hi, Lon.

—You know I don't want to criticize the food here, the moroncia fruits are really great and all that, but does anyone remember FOOD, I mean, real eating, that disgustingly sensual pleasure of being completely stuffed?

The room erupted in laughter and chants of “yes” and “introduce him.”

—And what about SLEEP? I must say it was one of my best escapes from the storm of daily existence when I was on my home world. I would retreat to my hovel, bolt the door, and give way to unconsciousness. It was wonderful—I had all this work I was supposed to be doing, but I'd fall asleep, and the day would be over before I'd even begun. “Well, it's too late now.” It was the most efficient method of procrastination ever invented, because you don't have to THINK about what you're supposed to be doing, or you're not doing it!

Lon had a wonderful way of saying things that practically had people rolling around in the aisles laughing.

—This reminds me of Galantia, a world familiar to all of you for its rapid advancement through the stages of planetary development. A fellow from Galantia told me that the first stage of light and life was so short that he slept too long one day and missed it entirely.

Groans were heard in the room.

—But hey, does anyone in this room remember drugs? I know they take different forms for those of you here, but there was always some form of addictive drug in every world. Anyone want to participate?

A hand was raised to our left.

—Hi, my name is Dana, I'm from Topaenia.

—Hi, Dana.

—On Topaenia, there was a drug called 'glut,' a derivative of a marine plant from this ocean world. I became involved in the illicit glut trade as a teenager living in the old “shoals” section of my city. At first, I was only interested in the money, but I began taking the substance because of its availability and soon became addicted, both physically and psychologically. My life became a nightmare; everything went to meet my glut needs, the first thought I ever woke up to was always about when I would take the glut I had or how I would get more. My death as a mortal came in a fight over territory with a rival glut smuggler, complete with harpoons. When I arrived on the mansion worlds, I had a terrible time for a while wondering if I deserved the gift of eternal life. Frankly, I couldn't remember anything I'd ever done that was worth mentioning, but with a lot of help and support from my seraph, my fellow morontia members, and a lot of people like you, I've learned to start accepting forgiveness and stop punishing myself. Thank you.

Another hand was raised; this time it was my own.

—Hi, my name is Bill and I'm from Urantia.

—Hi, Bill.

—As you all know, my little home world has a lot of problems. Among other things, there are tons of drugs used all over the world: heroin, cocaine, khat, alcohol, and many others, both synthetic and derived, but for me the worst was a herb called marijuana. I got caught up in it socially, and at first, it seemed harmless enough. People used it in groups, passing around a lit pipe or joint in a group, and it seemed like it was a wonderful thing since it brought all these people together. Then, as the years went by, I found myself spending more and more of my time getting my supply, and I started using it alone so I wouldn't have to share it. Eventually, I got to the point where I thought I had to do something because my life wasn't going well, so I joined a group that had a twelve-step method and I stopped using drugs completely. I realized then that the drugs had done more than just poison my body; there was also a spiritual deficit, keeping me separated from God and limiting my ability to be of use to my fellow human beings. With the help of my family and the support of my group, I was able to kick the habit of using, and I can say that this group has a lot in common with my old twelve-step program, and I think this is a place I want to return to. I can get some “relief”!

—Okay, Bill, thanks for sharing. This brings to mind someone who stopped by the other day. She was from one of those non-breather worlds in the Gorontia system and joked that her brain must have “fried” from too much time in the sun. She’d imagined her cousins were plotting against her politically and had signed a contract to kill them, when in fact, they’d been getting her a nice Mother’s Day present and keeping it a secret the whole time. She still felt pretty bad about it, even though all parties involved had forgiven her; but hey! People, that’s what the Relief Club is all about.

—Hi, my name is Tar-Lee, I'm from Panoptia.

—Hello, Tar-Lee.

—I am from a non-breathing world, as many of you know, and even though it has settled into the first stage of light and life, it should not be assumed that everything is perfect. On non-breathing worlds, we do not have the kind of chemical drugs you are familiar with on the atmospheric and marine worlds. For us, it is even more insidious and internal; it is the power of our imagination that draws us into addictive situations. It is difficult to explain how the imagination can conjure up images that take on the appearance of reality itself. I can recall a situation where my own son hated me and did everything he could to thwart my plans. The deception became so real that I almost fell into its clutches; it had to be my own thought adjuster who saved me by pointing out that the boy was simply a teenager thinking only of himself and that only my enormous ego had led me to believe that his actions were dictated by his hatred for me. Believe me, the perverse deviations of our imagination can be as destructive as any external chemical drug, and perhaps more so because they're always there waiting to catch us as soon as we give them a chance. I'm glad the new mind of morontia is so much more stable. I'm actually glad to be here; I haven't been for about a dozen years when I was a resident of this world, but you know, we can always use a little relief!

“Thanks, Tar-Lee, that was great. But does anyone want to dance?” There was a chorus of yeses.

A group of musicians emerged with ancient-looking instruments, obviously like those used on their home worlds. A lively little piece was played, and Lon led everyone in a dance that was very similar to a traditional dance I'd seen once. The dancers alternated partners intertwined, and by the end, everyone had danced with everyone else, and I was back with Tar-Lee.

—Hi, my name is Lon, I'm from Synoptia.

—Hi, Lon.

—I just want to say that this kind of dancing is just the beginning. We all watch the angels and other celestial beings do their three-dimensional “being positioning” performances. I’m looking forward to the time when we become fully developed spirits and can move through space without regard for the ground. Won’t that be great? There were murmurs of agreement from the crowd as we returned to our seats.

We were at the Relief Club for about three more hours; it was a wonderful time, I imagine you would call it a true “heart-relief.” We played yes-no games, charades, and various other large-group games. A few others shared some of their life experiences, and by the time it was over, we all knew each other by name and world of origin, and we all gathered at the end for a big group hug and circle prayer. I promised to return, and we all said our goodbyes, feeling we had formed a group we wanted to hang out with from time to time.

—Tell me, Tar, what's going on? Why hasn't anyone ever told me about this place? I would have come sooner if I'd known about it.

—Well, you know, Bill, it's not for everyone, and they like to fly under the radar. Almost everyone who comes here is personally brought by a friend or another colleague. I'm glad I was able to do this for you; I think you'll really enjoy these sessions.

—We really have a lot in common, don't you think?

—Yes, I think so; in the similarities in our lives, you can begin to see the effect our adjuster has had on us. My adjuster pulled me out of my deceptive addictions, and later, pulled you out of chemical ones. It's a wonderful thing we share.

—So what do you want to do now? We don't have anything else on the agenda. Should we go to a music show, or maybe we'll go see the Jesus diorama, or maybe an art exhibit?

—Well, I really need to stop in the Melchizedek sector sometime, do you want to walk with me there?
—Of course! But what's going on?

—I need to get back to Jerusem today, so I have to stop in that area to get authorization for a seraphic transport. I could just call them on the infoglobe, but I like the personal interaction of going there.

—What? So soon? I was hoping we'd spend more time together.

—Well Bill, we will, we will, time is something we have in abundance now.

—Yeah, I guess so. Okay, we'll run there or take a car.

—Let’s run, it’s not far.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/6">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 6</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/8">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 8</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>