---
title: "Chapter 8"
description: "A Day in the Life of a Mansion Worlds Student – The Pearl of Wisdom"
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Life after death, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1994 Tom Maringer</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/7">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 7</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/9">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 9</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

We ran for about an hour through the outskirts of the residential sector, passing several amphitheaters of higher learning, some beautiful parks, gardens, and displays of statues and art from the Morontian, and finally arrived at the majestic gates of the Melchizedek sector where I saw Henri and Henta apparently waiting for us.

They waved their hands when they saw us coming and gestured as we trotted up to where they stood near the flashing glass entrance doors.

“Hey, you two,” I said. “What's up? You look like you're waiting for someone.”

“Hi Bill,” Henri said, “we’re waiting for you, of course.”

-What are you saying?

Henri looked at Tar-Lee with questioning eyes.

—Haven't you told him?

—Oh, well, I thought it would be better if they heard it directly from you, I didn't want him to feel unnecessarily uncomfortable.

—What are you talking about?

Tar-Lee looked at me; she seemed a little embarrassed.

—Well, Bill, it was really necessary for me to come here to arrange the transportation I mentioned, but your presence was also required for a different reason.

I looked back at Henri and Henta, this time with my eyebrows raised.

Henri spoke.

—You see, Bill, you have just broken through to the third circle of cosmic progression. This is considered one of the major advances in the morontia career. It is not enough for US to certify this achievement; you must submit to the Melchizedek examiners in order to establish the exact level of your material-mental-spiritual attunement.

I felt a wave of anxiety wash over me.

—What? Do I have to be tested? I'm not ready, I have to study more!
Henri smiled and Tar-Lee looked away.

—Calm down, Bill. Your experiences today have been the best possible preparation. After your effort to break into the third circle, you had an invigorating snack and then some relaxing entertainment and stimulating exercise. We planned it this way so you'd be in optimal condition for this, and we deliberately kept you from informing you so you wouldn't become tense ahead of time.

—Okay, I know you're trying to do the right thing, and I trust your judgment. But what's this about? What should I expect?

—Actually, it's very simple. We'll go in and there will be an interview with three Melchizedeks, at least one of whom will be known to you. You'll sit and talk for a while, and when you're done, they'll tell you if you can go to Mansonia IV or if you have to stay here a while longer. In either case, it's not too important.

—Okay, all right then, let's do it.

Everyone smiled, and we entered the Melchizedek sector portals together. I had a flashback to The Wizard of Oz, and I was Dorothy passing through the imposing gates of the Wizard's castle with my three friends by my side.

However, after entering I was brought back to reality when I saw the friendly face of Melchizedek Laminefta greeting us.

—Hi Bill, long time no see!

—Hi! I didn't expect you to be here.

“Well, you know how it is. We hop from one place to another across the mansion worlds to be where we're needed most. In this case, I've stopped here only to be part of the committee that will examine you, since I'm more familiar with your case than the others.”

—Thanks, that sounds good to me.

—So, let's go ahead and get started.

“I'll see you later, Bill,” Tar-Lee said. “I have to go out and arrange my transportation.”

—Okay, Tar, then, see you later.

Tar-Lee headed into a hallway, and Laminefta and I, along with Henri and Henta, headed down another corridor to a small side room. The room looked quite comfortable, much like the quarters where he lived, but a bit larger and with several more chairs and an infoglobe. We stopped in the doorway, and Henri turned to me and said,

—See you in a bit, Bill. This is something you have to do on your own. Don't worry, you'll do great. We have a lot of faith in you.

“We will meet again in the eternity of our father's grace,” I said, and the two seraphim smiled as we left.

I entered the room with Laminefta and met two other Melchizedeks named Rolontola and Fumenteka. We greeted each other and sat down in the comfortable chairs in the room; we arranged them so we faced each other. Laminefta began:

“Since you came to the mansion worlds, Bill, you have done a great deal of work and have made considerable progress. We are here today to measure this progress and to determine if it is sufficient to promote you to the next sphere of training. Your progress has been rapid and orderly, and you have progressed steadily to the third psychic circle. At this point, we pause to certify this accomplishment, one of the major steps forward in your eternal career. From this point on, you will have more or less direct communication with your thought adjuster, and it is necessary to be certain that your mind is properly balanced to handle this new relationship without tendencies toward fanaticism or ego distortion.”

—Okay, what do you want to do?

—Well, if it's okay with you, we'll sit and talk for a while. Rolontola and Fumanteka have already become familiar with your transcripts; essentially, we need to discuss your current understanding of the MOTA of moroncia.

I answered carefully:

—As I understand mote, it's a kind of way of making a statement that unifies facts, meanings, and values into a single Gestalt. It's more than the highest form of philosophy; it is to philosophy what two eyes are to one; it has a stereoscopic effect on meanings and values.

—That's very good, Bill, almost word for word what you learned in the first Mansonia. Here, however, we don't simply want to know if you understand what the mote is, but rather if you can grasp that Gestalt. The three of us will enter your mind in the same way that the seraphim and transition ministers do during their classes. Rolontola will act as the recorder of the session, Fumanteka will ask the questions, and I will act as your advocate, helping you organize your thoughts constructively, though I won't add any of my own. Do you understand?

—Yes, I think so.

—Very well, then, let's begin.

I began the now familiar process of fading the present scene from my awareness as the three beings entered my mind and I became aware of their presence there. I heard Melchizedek Fumanteka begin to talk... well, I can't really call that 'talking'... it was more of a stream of images and situations that began to form in my mind, obviously originating from Fumanteka. At first I saw them as if I were 'outside,' but slowly I began to see myself IN the situations that were proposed to me and I was asked to decide how to act. There was no way to make a false choice; the examiners wanted to see what my thinking would choose; it was all quick and automatic.

First situation: I am in charge of the celestial government overseeing the progress of a lonely evolutionary world in space. I have absolute power to interfere with evolution whenever I see fit. Things are going badly on that world; if only I could adjust certain new factors of social evolution! If only I could get rid of that troublesome group!... but no, greatness lies not so much in possessing strength as in making wise and godly use of that strength.

Second situation: I'm visiting a close friend who has many serious personal problems. I think I know what I should do, but he doesn't ask for my help. I'm tempted to offer wise counsel... but no, whet your associates' appetite for the truth; give advice only when asked.

Third situation: I'm climbing up the face of a mountain; the face is steep and very difficult, perhaps even impossible. I'm hundreds of meters above the ground and only have a few dozen more to go to reach the summit. Anxiety and fear begin to take hold of me. I look down and start imagining myself falling, crashing against the rocks below and dying. In one of those lethal bouts of anxiety, I'm tempted to give in and rest; if I were to descend, I would be fully justified... but no, I refuse. I focus on the task at hand and put all my energy and concentration into overcoming the obstacle. Anxiety must be abandoned; the hardest disappointments to bear are those that never come.

Fourth situation: I am in an evolving world, and I am trying to spread the gospel of love to my fellow human beings. I strive to live God's teachings, but my efforts seem so paltry and ineffective that I am tempted to give up, to indulge in self-righteousness and resentment... but no, the evolving soul does not become divine by what it does, but by what it strives to do.

Fifth Situation: I'm debating with a colleague the truth of God's love, while he argues that God is more like a judgmental monarch looking for what's wrong with us. I KNOW for a fact and truth that I'm right, and I'm tempted to get angry and start shouting and using hurtful put-downs in my statements... but no, the argumentation required to defend any proposition is inversely proportional to the truth it contains.

Sixth Situation: I strive to achieve a goal, but with each attempt, I'm left with no answers. Nothing seems to go my way; it seems like every effort I make comes to nothing. I'm tempted to call it fate, to accept that the goal is beyond my strength and ability, to admit defeat... but no. Difficulties can challenge mediocrity and defeat the fearful, but they only serve as encouragement to true children of the Almighty.

Fumanteka continued presenting me with these situations that I had to solve, Laminefta helping me with stereoscopic perception of the problems, and I making the decisions myself, somewhere deep within me, almost unconsciously. It seemed as if I always knew in my “heart” what the correct option was in each situation. I began to trust this instinct, and Fumanteka began presenting situations to me more and more quickly, to the point where before I even had time to realize what was happening, he had already decided what to do. Finally, the interrogation stopped, and I felt the presence of the three Melchizedeks smiling at me. We left the state of mind fusion and sat back down in the room facing each other. I had no idea how much time had passed or how I had done on the test.

The three Melchizedeks stood up and Laminefta spoke to me:

“Give us a moment, Bill, to summarize our assessments of your performance. It won't take more than a minute. Don't worry, I think you did very well.” He smiled at me and winked.

Then they formed a circle and just stared at each other for a few seconds. I had the distinct impression that they said a lot to each other in those few moments, although they never did much more than blink and change their facial expressions like angels do.

They separated and turned their faces towards me, and it was Laminefta who spoke again.

“We are in complete agreement that you have fully achieved the third circle of progress toward personality integration, and we recommend that you be immediately promoted to reside on the fourth mansion world. Your transportation will be arranged in approximately ten days; you have some time to complete any projects you have started and to be prepared for the move. Do you have any questions?”

—Well, yes. What exactly happened here? Everything happened so fast that I didn't even realize what we were doing.


—You've managed to give your thought adjuster the power to decide, and HE has really been the one making the decisions in the small scenarios we've presented to you.

—Was it my thought adjuster? I really felt like I was being myself, I felt like I was the one making the decisions.

Laminefta smiled broadly and the other Melchizedeks waved goodbye as they left the room.

—You see, Bill, you have to stop thinking of the thought adjuster as a foreign thing dwelling within you. The adjuster lives in eternity. Think for a moment about what that means. Your adjuster is independent of time. It sees you not just as you are now, but also as all that you will ever be. The thought adjuster is not something outside of you; it is, in a sense, your real self, your future-perfect self, who has come back in time to guide you to where it came from. Your thought adjuster has already attained God in Paradise; it has simply leaped into time to, as it were, “ride along for the ride.”

—You mean my adjuster is actually my future self who has come back in time to talk to me?

—Well, that's a bit of a clumsy way of putting it, but I think your idea is correct. Imagine that you could do something like go back to your home world, go back in time to see yourself as a child. You find yourself about to make a mistake, and you, with the wisdom of experience, might be tempted to give your past self some advice. The child, of course, may refuse to admit it or act on your advice, but you can be absolutely certain that it's good advice because you went through the same thing in your youth. Now imagine the thought adjuster and its advantage of not just dozens but billions of years of experience. It's now trying to guide you to God with the same kind of wisdom of experience with which you would try to benefit your childhood self.

—So you're saying the thought adjuster can be trusted?

—Absolutely, yes; you yourself had that confidence just a few minutes ago, during the exam, when you gave him the power to decide.

—Wow, that's incredible! We've been studying the relationship with the thought adjuster for months in class, but no one has ever explained it to me the way you just did.

—This should give you something to chew on until you're ready for transport to Mansonia IV, but right now it looks like you have some guests waiting for you at the door.

I turned around and there were Henri, Henta and Tar-Lee standing by the front door smiling and congratulating me.

“Hey Bill!” Tar-Lee said. “Clear path! I wouldn't be surprised to see you with a crystal around your neck soon.”

—You're kidding me! But I'll take you up on your offer to show me Jerusem when I go on tour with the band, maybe in a few weeks.

—Like I told you, Bill, there's no problem. But right now, how about we head to the Sea of Glass? I've got a transport ship waiting for me in a couple of hours, and in the meantime, we can get the reports from space.

“I think it's great. What do you think?” Henri and Henta nodded, so we boarded a small transport vehicle and headed out toward the Sea of Glass, the shipping and receiving station for the entire planet, which was some distance from here.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/7">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 7</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/9">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 9</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>