---
title: "Chapter 9"
description: "A Day in the Life of a Mansion Worlds Student – The Pearl of Wisdom"
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Life after death, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1994 Tom Maringer</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/8">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 8</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/10">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 10</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Since it was a considerable distance to the Sea of Glass, Henri arranged for the car to travel at a high altitude, and we all settled into our seats to enjoy the view. From that height, the scenery was even more striking than from closer to the ground. It looked like the immense garden of a theme park dotted with small, clear lakes and tastefully executed architecture. The ground rose and fell in gentle hills, but there were no high mountains or great oceans. It was a beautiful world, and somehow I was sad to leave it, but I had taken advantage of attending the classes and knew that the beauty and grandeur of architectural worlds only increases as we progress along the long road of our eternal career. It was difficult to imagine a more beautiful place, although in my brief visits to Jerusem I had glimpsed some features of that world. I longed to spend more time there and explore it. I remembered then that Tar-Lee resided on Jerusem; I turned to her and saw her looking at me with a strange expression.

—You know I'll miss this place, it's wonderful.

—That's all right, Bill. No one will blame you for being a little homesick. I was just thinking that you'll leave us someday and continue on to the higher training worlds of the universe of universes. In a way, it's me who sent you there. You're a part of me, and when the stream of time pilgrims from outer space passes on to Paradise someday, I'll still be here. I might even help teach some pilgrim you've sent our way.

—All of that seems pretty remote to me now; for the moment, I can't see beyond achieving citizenship in Jerusalem. Although it's true that in some ways, it's becoming easier for me to visualize longer stretches of time, and I can imagine things further into the distant past and future than I've ever been able to.

Henri entered the conversation at this point.

—It's interesting you mention your perception of time, Bill, because that's precisely one of the things that constantly changes as you advance in your career. In its most basic form, the concept of eternity is the understanding of the eternal 'now.' As you go through life, your concept of 'now' constantly expands. When you're a young child, you think of 'now' as a single moment in time; when you're a teenager, it may be a day. An adult could possibly think of 'now' as 'this week,' and in your present state, you're perhaps beginning to think of it in terms of 'this year.' But as you go on and on, your perception of 'now' grows until eventually, when you reach the Paradise Father, you will realize that all time is 'now.'

—I see; so I must spend an eternity trying to find eternity where it has always been.

—Not bad, Bill. I've never heard anyone put it quite like that before, but it's close. You see, it's a mistake to visualize time as a straight line with the distant past at one end and the distant future at the other. Properly contemplated, time is more like a circle, or a hoop, if you will. From the standpoint of eternity, the eternal past and the eternal future are really the same thing—they're simply points on a hoop. It doesn't really matter where we are on the hoop; it matters that we grow and learn so that we become more real, becoming more like God.

—I like that, Henri, a hoop... I have to think about it.

Tar-Lee spoke again.

“Look down there!” On the horizon, we could see the sparkling plain of the Sea of Glass; our transport began to descend toward the landing zone at the edge of the glass field.

We landed at the nearest gate and left the transport, which hurried off on its own to attend to another service. Passing through the entrance gates, we found ourselves at the very edge of the Sea of Glass. Nearly seventeen kilometers wide and over fifty kilometers long, it was the base plane of a gigantic quartz crystal lying upside down. Henri had explained to me that the space broadcast communications system utilizes these crystals' ability to focus power. It is also advantageous for seraphim landing or taking off for other worlds to utilize the power pressure available within the crystal. They were cultivated very early in the period of local universe organization, some two hundred billion years ago. The crystals were the first elements of the architectural worlds to be built; the rest of these worlds were built around the crystals.

In the center of the crystal, about eight kilometers from where we were, the forms of several beings could be seen in the process of landing or taking off into space. Every few minutes, a silvery ray flashed in the sky; it was another seraphim being beginning its journey to another world. Those arriving did so more slowly, leaving no telltale wake in the atmosphere. Around the entire periphery of the crystal were several buildings designed to receive the various orders of beings, visiting students or tourists, from other local universes. There were also rows and rows of comfortable seats for viewing the broadcasts. We sat in some of them and watched what was going on. After a time, all the beings in the center of the crystal had either departed or gone to the reception area; the center of the crystal was deserted.

Finally, it was time for the broadcasts from other worlds in space. A glow began to fill the air above the center of the crystal field. Considering the distance, it must have been a bright sphere at least five kilometers in diameter. The reports from space began to arrive, a rapid flicker of images and words describing recent events on the worlds of the system. I caught a fleeting glimpse of a war on Urantia, but also the impression that the spiritual status of my former home world was doing well because of the extraordinary attentions lavished upon it by the celestial government.

Following these reports came a spread of Edentia which I really enjoyed, giving us a glimpse into the characteristics of life there and some glimpses into the perfection of its botanical grandeur.

Then came the report from Sálvington with news of Michael's recent actions, some news about problematic situations in several other constellations, and how those problems were intended to be exploited to increase, over time, the total goodness of those areas.

Finally, we had a broadcast from Uversa itself, along with a visual representation of a group of ascending beings being sent to Havona for the next great step in their eternal career.

To everyone's great surprise, there was then a brief broadcast of Paradise. I found it difficult to understand; I caught fleeting glimpses that I couldn't identify; however, my heart was filled with light and hope, and I felt a new thrill of emotion that impelled me to live, and a new willingness to work hard and face difficulties with joy.

It was an astonishing spectacle. At this point in the broadcasts, millions of us filled the seats surrounding this immense polar crystal, all captivated by the foretaste of eternity that the Paradise broadcast brought us. When it ended, the crowd began to disperse, and another pair of seraphim approached us.

They introduced themselves as Pesha and Pesho and had come to enseraph Tar-Lee for transport to Jerusem. After greeting each other, we began walking toward the focal point in the center of the crystal field. The surface was smooth but not slippery, and the crystal was perfectly transparent. It seemed as if one could look down and see far into the distance, and in the depths, colored lights seemed to dance as if gigantic energies were organizing.

When we arrived at the center, the transport seraphim merged their being complements and began the transformation that would give them the ability to transport another being through space at almost three times the speed of light.

As these preparations began, Tar-Lee turned to me.

—Well, Bill, I must go, but we'll see each other soon, and then we'll see each other many times before you finally say goodbye to Nebadon. When you come to Jerusem, just consult any infoglobe and you'll find me. Take care; congratulations on your move to number four.

—Goodbye, Tar, we will meet again in the eternity of our Father's grace.

At that point, the fused form of Pesha and Pesho began to glow brightly and elongate into the shape of a torpedo. What appeared to be two wings opened, and Tar-Lee jumped inside and was embraced by them as they closed, forming friction shields for the journey. The glow increased, and Tar-Lee's form visibly elongated as the torpedo-like shape grew longer and thinner. A harmonic humming could be heard, and below us, a bright light began to glow from the depths of the crystal.

“Step back a little, Bill,” Henri said, motioning me away from the glowing shape. “You don't want to be near the vortex when they leave.”

The buzzing began to crescendo and reached a high, piercing note when, suddenly, the seraph-encased form of Tar-Lee shot straight into the sky, leaving a thin white trail in the air that slowly faded away. I stared at it for a moment and then turned to Henri and Henta. They looked at each other meaningfully for a moment.

“I'm looking forward to seeing Tar again,” I said. “I've felt really close to her in this short time.”

—Remember, Bill, you already knew a lot about each other before you met. It's no surprise you liked each other. The consecutive relationship of creatures bonded by an adjuster is one of the reasons for the formation of primary associative groups of finaliters, or so we're told.

We started walking toward the edge of the glass, but in the same direction we'd come, so we ended up exactly opposite where we started. Henri signaled me to use the infoglobe and request a ride back to the residential area where he lived.

—Tell me, how long have you been planning this meeting with Tar-Lee? I think you could have let me know in advance.

—Actually, Bill, we had anticipated this meeting from the very first moment your adjuster fell in love with you. But the exact moment of the meeting, only from the moment you came into this world. You see, we maintain a kind of secrecy in situations like this; when we're trying to encourage someone to REALIZE something, it's sometimes better to start the relationship as a surprise. Telling you in advance would have lessened its emotional impact and perhaps blurred some of the benefits you've gained from the experience.

“Okay, if there's one thing I've learned around here, it's that you girls usually know best. Thanks!” I gave them both a big hug as we floated through a slowly darkening sky.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/8">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter 8</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Tom_Maringer/A_Day_in_the_Life_of_a_Mansion_Worlds_Student/10">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter 10</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>