---
title: "Urantian Migrations"
description: 
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Anthropology, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2008 M. José García<br>© 2008 Urantia Association of Spain</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_spain">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Urantia Association of Spain — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Urantian Migrations and Settlements María José García Gaete

This work deals with the Urantia migrations and settlements that occurred from the ancestors of the first human beings until the end of the migrations of the incipient human races and the participation of Adam's descendants in planetary racial progress and advancement. For this compilation, I used and synthesized papers 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, and 96.

1. 1,500,000 years ago, the lemur migrated west from North America across the Bering Bridge. It traveled southeast along the Asian coast until it reached the Mediterranean and the mountainous regions of the peninsula. The descendants of these lemurs, intermixed with other races favorable to western India, suddenly gave rise to proto-human mammals. In the seventieth generation of this order of proto-human mammals, intermediate mammals “suddenly” emerged. As these mammals became well established, they “suddenly” evolved into primates, this being the third vital mutation. 1,000,000 years ago, from the evolution of these primates, the first two human beings were born. They were born as twins, a male and a female.
2. 1,000,000 years ago, Urantia was recorded as an inhabited world. Along with the first human beings and members of the same tribe, the simian race was born, also as twins, settling in the warm, southern regions. 993,419 years ago, a pair of twins named Andon and Fonta were born in this region. They migrated north and southwest to Asia along a peninsula as far as Afghanistan.
3. 950,000 years ago, due to the 3rd Ice Age (1st for Urantian geologists) the Andonite dispersion begins (a Urantian race formed from Andon and Fonta) to the north from southwest Asia towards Europe, along the rivers that flow into the northern sea (warm at that time). On the river banks of France, Somme River. At this time England was connected to France by land and Africa to Europe by the Sicilian land bridge.
4. 950,000 years ago (approx.) some Andonites migrated eastward and westward, passing west through Europe as far as France and England. Later, these Andonites penetrated as far east as Java, reaching Australia. Australia was again isolated after this.
5. 900,000 years ago, due to the ice, inferior mixed-breeds (primates) migrated from southern France to the Alps and the Mediterranean in the south, northward from where the ice was. This is the “Heidelberg” race (which mixed with a prolific and somewhat superior people, the Andonites). They settled in England and on the land bridge, now submerged under the English Channel, and in the North Sea. A group of Andonites survived without mixing with other peoples and they gave rise to the “Foxhall” people, who preserve the Andonite traditions.
6. 900,000 years ago, Badonan (great-great-grandson of Andon) in northeast India (Afghanistan) preserved its traditions (like the Foxhall) by not intermingling with its neighbors. It waged a 1,000-year struggle, almost completely exterminating its inferior neighbors. The rest of them were amalgamated, and from this mixture emerged the Neanderthal race (Andonite plus ape strain).
7. 850,000 years ago Neanderthals traveled from northeast India (Afghanistan) to France in the west and China in the east and to North Africa.
8. 850,000 years ago, the Foxhall, driven out to sea by the ice (due to their overpopulation), built boats and set out to sea. The survivors reached Iceland and Greenland, thus establishing the Eskimos.
9. 750,000,000 years ago, Neanderthals, driven out by the ice of the 4th Ice Age, moved deeper into Europe.
10. 500,000,000 years ago, the original Badonan tribe (great-great-grandson of Andon), who remained in their place of origin (Afghanistan), sustained another great racial struggle for more than a hundred years. Only 100 families remained, the fittest for survival. From these 100 families, the Sangik family originated. This Sangik family had 19 children, who originated the 6 color races (the primary ones being red, yellow, and blue, and the secondary ones being green, orange, and indigo). This was in the northeast of this region (Persian Peninsula). This region was isolated by the 5th Ice Age (3rd for geologists), thus having to mix among themselves, but only to a certain extent. This isolation lasted almost 100,000 years. From then on, the primary Sangik, avoiding the tropical zone, began their migrations. The red man migrated northeast to Asia, followed by the yellow man. The blue man migrated northwest to Europe (the blue man who remained mixed mainly with the yellow man. Later, he was improved by Adamic influence, enduring as the brown-skinned nomadic tribes of modern Arabs). The secondary Sangiks were the last to migrate. The green man exterminates the orange man in Egypt. The indigo man was the last to migrate, passing south through Palestine, along the coast. Later, they invaded Egypt, exterminating the green man through sheer force of numbers, thus absorbing the remaining descendants of the orange man and much of the green man. Thanks to this, there was an improvement in the indigo race. These secondary Sangiks tended to head toward Africa via the newly appeared land bridge that separated the Mediterranean. At this time, the Mediterranean was in full retreat westward from the Indian Ocean, and the orange man was the first to descend the coast toward Africa. This orange man was exterminated by the green man, who later arrived in Africa. The last great struggle between the orange and green peoples took place in the lower Nile Valley region of Egypt. They fought for over 100 years, and at the end, the ruined remnants of the orange people were absorbed by the green people (both races were between 2.40 and 2.60 meters tall), who in turn were absorbed by the indigo men who appeared later. The orange race ceased to exist completely around 100,000 years ago. The green men (the least capable) split into three groups: the northern tribes, who were subjugated, enslaved, and absorbed by the yellow and blue races. The eastern group: They amalgamated with the peoples of India of that time, some traits still being found among them today. Southern group: They penetrated Africa and there they annihilated their orange cousins, almost equally inferior, and were finally absorbed by the indigo race. The indigo man was the last to emigrate from his native lands,They moved to Africa and took over the continent, remaining isolated there without any Adamic influence. The yellow men were the first to abandon hunting in favor of agriculture. By being socially and collectively united, they managed to develop a fraternal spirit, thus expelling the red men (who were very warlike among themselves). They expanded throughout Asia.
11. 500,000 years ago, coinciding with the emergence of the Sangik family, Prince Caligastia appeared in Mesopotamia, approximately in the center of the world's population. Dalamatia was located in the Persian Gulf, in Mesopotamia (present-day Kuwait). This city functioned for 300,000 years until the rebellion (skin color and language of the 100 Andonites modified). 162 years after the rebellion, Dalamatia was submerged by a tidal surge and still exists under the waters of the Persian Gulf.
12. 400,000 years ago, after the 5th Ice Age that held the Sangik back, the Red Man, unable to migrate, headed northeast, once the ice had retreated, skirting the Indian highlands (this same Ice Age caused the Neanderthal race, subhumans who were scattered throughout Eurasia, to move south). On his journey, the Red Man found this territory free of Neanderthals and began the founding of his center, the first to materialize outside the Sangik center. They covered Central Asia, reigning for almost 100,000 years until the Yellow Men appeared. This was 300,000 years ago. These Yellow Men invaded China from the south as coastal migrants. Each millennium they penetrated further and further into the continent, but they did not establish contact with the Tibetans until recent times. Growing population pressure caused the Yellow Man, in his northward movement, to begin penetrating the Red Man's hunting grounds. This encroachment, coupled with natural racial antagonism, culminated in increasingly serious hostilities, and thus began the crucial struggle for the fertile lands of Far Asia. For more than 200,000 years, these two superior races waged a tireless and bitter struggle. The Red Man generally won the battles and wreaked havoc among the Yellow Man colonies, but eventually, the Yellow Man, an accomplished student of the skills of war, quickly displayed a marked ability to live peacefully with his fellow countrymen, learning that in unity there is strength. Meanwhile, the Red Man continued their grave conflicts of mutual annihilation and began to suffer repeated defeats at the hands of the aggressive and implacable Chinese (the Yellow Man), who continued their inexorable march northward. As a result of this, the red man begins his retreat.
13. 400,000 years ago, due to the 5th Ice Age, the Blue Man migrated westward along the ancient Andon trails (from Afghanistan), invading Europe in successive waves, occupying most of the continent. Here, they soon encountered the Neanderthals (descendants of their common ancestor, Andon). These Neanderthals had been expelled by the 4th Ice Age. These two groups amalgamated, resulting in a racial improvement of these Neanderthals, who expanded to the East (during the next Ice Age, the 6th, they expanded from England to India).
14. 200,000 years ago, Lucifer rebelled, and Caligastia followed. A crucial struggle raged for seven years, and Van and his loyalists moved to an unwalled and poorly protected settlement, protected only by loyal midwayers, who stood guard for this purpose. This first settlement, which was temporary, was located east of Dalamatia. They then moved to the western highlands of India and established their center on a lake (now known as Lake Van) in the southeastern region of the Caspian Sea, near the Kopet Dagh Mountains in the foothills of Turkestan. This was the home of the Vanites for approximately 150,000 years, protecting the Tree of Life and perpetuating the city system of Dalamatia. Their race was derived from 144 modified Andonites, known as Amadonites (Amadon was a descendant of Andon) and was added by a later union of some rebel members of Nod's entourage. By the time of Adam and Eve these intermixed Nodites and Amadonites were the most cultured and advanced race on Earth.
15. The disloyal retinue led by Nod migrated north and east and divided into three groups. The central group remained in the vicinity of their homeland near the waters of the headwaters of the Persian Gulf. The eastern group migrated to the highland regions of Elam (Iran) east of the Euphrates Valley. The western group was located on the Syrian shores of the northeastern Mediterranean and in the adjacent territory. These Nodite groups intermarried freely with members of the Sangik races, leaving behind capable offspring. Some of these Nodites were those who joined the Amadonites at Lake Van and in the southeastern region of the Caspian Sea, north of Mesopotamia. Daligastia ordered sexual reproduction to perpetuate the stock (the 60 of the retinue did not have the tree of life, therefore they were destined to die) among the 60 members of the retinue and the 44 modified Andonites, with the germ plasm of the corporeal retinue, resulting in the eighth Urantian race, the Nodite. These Nodites established their center, building the new city of Dilmun (later Sumerians) 50,000 years after the death of Nod and when their offspring were very numerous, having already expanded as much as possible, even intermarrying with the Andonite and Sangik tribes contiguous to their borders, they decided to preserve racial unity through the plan of Bablot (descendant of Nod), which consisted of erecting a sumptuous tower, the Tower of Bablot. Bablot eventually became known as Bablod and eventually as Babel. This attempt failed after four and a half years of its beginning, ending in a great struggle and the dispersion of these Nodites 150,000 years ago (there was a second attempt to resume this plan by the Andites 12,000 years ago, but it also failed).
16. After the dissolution of Dilmun, 150,000 years ago, the Nodites established three of their four great centers. The Western or Syrian Nodites. The remnants of racial nationalism moved northward, where they united with the Andonites and founded the later Nodite centers in northwestern Mesopotamia. This constituted the largest group of the scattered Nodites, and they contributed much to the Assyrian strain that later appeared. The Eastern Nodites or Elamites. The proponents of culture and trade migrated in large numbers to eastern Elam and there united with the mixed Sangik tribes. The Elamites of 30 or 40,000 years ago had largely taken on the character of the Sangik, although they continued to maintain a civilization superior to that of the surrounding barbarians. After the second Garden was established, it became customary to refer to this settlement as the Land of Nod. During periods of relative peace between the Nodites and the Adamites, these two races mingled considerably, as the sons of God (Adanites) became increasingly accustomed to marrying the daughters of men (Nodites). The Nodites, or Sumerians, were a small group near the mouths of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers that maintained greater racial integrity. They lasted for thousands of years and, eventually, gave rise to the Nodite descendants who combined with the Adamites, thus founding the Sumerian peoples of historical times. The above explains how the Sumerians appeared so suddenly and mysteriously on the scene in Mesopotamia. These Sumerians originated 200,000 years ago, after the fall of Dalamatia, and suddenly appeared with a developed and superior culture that included temples, metallurgy, agriculture, animals, pottery, weaving, commercial law, civil codes, religious ceremonies, and an ancient writing system. The Dalamatian alphabet had already been lost long ago, so a particular writing system originating in Dilmun had been adopted. The Sumerian language, although almost lost to the world, was not Semitic; it had much in common with the so-called Aryan languages.
17. After the dissolution of Dilmun (the city founded by the Nodites after the fall of Dalamatia), 150,000 years ago, the Nodites dispersed into three main groups. Central group: vicinity of their homeland, headwaters of the Tigris and Euphrates, Persian Gulf (near the water). This group did not mix with other races until the arrival of the Andites, this mixing being the foundation of the Sumerian race. Eastern group: moved to the highlands of the land of Elam, east of the Euphrates valley (near the Second Garden). These Nodites mixed with members of the Sangik races. This settlement was known as the Land of Nod, and during the Second Garden, these were the Nodites who mixed with the Adamites. Western group: moved north to the Syrian banks of northeastern Mesopotamia, mixing with the Andonites. They contributed to the Assyrian strain that later appeared in this place.
18. 100,000 years ago, the red man, after a long battle with the yellow man, lasting more than 200,000 years and due to a dispute over territory, was forced to retreat to the ice of the last glacier. When the land passage to the east, over the Bering Strait, became passable, these tribes quickly abandoned the inhospitable coasts of the Asian continent for North America. Seven thousand men, women, and children left Asia. They were accompanied by three groups of mixed race people, red with orange and blue. These groups, not fraternizing with the pure red man, moved south to Mexico and Central America.
19. 85,000 years ago, the surviving red men (comparatively pure) moved in their entirety from Asia to North America (across the Bering Strait), thus completing the exodus that occurred after the struggle with the yellow man, which had begun 15,000 years earlier. Shortly after their arrival, the Bering Isthmus of land collapsed, thus cutting them off from the rest of the world. This group carried with them the teachings of their central seat, Dalamatia, joining the mestizo groups that existed between Mexico and Central America. In 5,000 years, this race amalgamated and subdivided into three groups, thus establishing the respective civilizations of Mexico, Central America, and South America. The South American branch was the only one to receive a hint of Adamic blood (this migration added red and yellow strains).
20. Between 85,000 and 80,000 years ago, a group of red men migrated from North America through the Northwest to Alaska, establishing a settlement there.
21. A little over 80,000 years ago, the freezing of the northern seas and the advance of the local ice sheets in Greenland forced the Eskimos to seek a new place of residence. They succeeded by safely crossing the narrow straits that separated Greenland from the northeastern land masses of North America. They reached the continent 2,100 years after the arrival of the red man in Alaska. Later, some of the mixed descendants of the blue man moved westward and amalgamated with the more recent Eskimos (the mixture of the reds with the Greenland Eskimos), this mixture being slightly beneficial to the Eskimos.
22. Van proposed the idea and recruited volunteers for the arrival of Adam and Eve. This consisted of building a city for them, which would be named the Garden of Eden. He worked for a total of 83 years until the arrival of the material children. Together with Amadon, they recruited 3,000 volunteers from their headquarters and 61 widely dispersed colonies. A commission set out to locate the site; this mission lasted three years. Upon the commission's return, a decision was made and a debate was held on the location, reaching unanimous agreement on three alternatives. This would be on a long, narrow peninsula, almost an island, projecting westward from the eastern shores of the Mediterranean Sea (Lebanon). The journey (including the Tree of Life) took two years to reach the first garden. They continued working for 78 years until Adam and Eve appeared. 162,152 years elapsed between the rebellion and the arrival of Adam and Eve.
23. 37,848 years ago Adam and Eve arrived at the first garden. 117 years passed until Eve's fall (this garden sank 4,000 years later to the eastern bottom of the Mediterranean Sea). The physical characteristics of the Adamite race (9th Urantian race, or violet race) were white skin, light, golden, red or brown hair, blue eyes and a height of over 1.80 m.
24. The first garden is moved after the misdemeanor because the Nodites decided to take revenge for what happened to Cano. Adam and his offspring left for the remote regions (Iraq) between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers. This decision was made by Adam based on the fact that the Nodites were coming north, while to the west they would have needed ships, which they didn't have, and to the south, the hills of this region were infested with hostile tribes. Therefore, the migration was eastward. Adam knew this place well, as it was one of the three sites chosen by the commission of Van and Amadon. Adam died here at 530 years old and Eve at 519. Adam and Eve decided to impregnate 1,682 women of the best races of the surrounding peoples with life plasma, most of whom happened to be Nodites. Eve was tasked with recruiting the women so that Adam could complete the task. As a result of this plan, 1,570 men and 112 women were born, thus giving rise to the Andite race, which consisted of a mixture of the Violet and Nodite races. These Andites were raised in their mothers' tribes.
25. 35,000 years ago, Adamson, the firstborn son of Adam and Eve, decided to set out on a journey (following the departure of his wife and most of his children, who had decided to leave for Edentia after the caravan had been traveling for three days and the seraphic ships appeared to deliver the unfortunate news of the loss and its consequences) after settling in the Second Garden. He went in search of the lands that Van and Amadon had established after the fall of Dalamatia. This settlement was near the Caspian Sea, in the southeastern region, near the Kopet Dagh Mountains, in the foothills of Turkestan. Adamson left the Second Garden with a company of 27 members heading north. Adamson, 120 years old, found his goal in just over three years of travel, when he settled and married Ratta. She was the last pure descendant of the corporeal retinue; they had 67 children, one in four of whom was of singular order. This was the origin of the secondary midwayers, and they numbered 2,000 in a period of 100 years (Adanson and Ratta intermarried them). For 7,000 years, these Adamsonites maintained a high level of culture. Later, they mixed with neighboring Nodites and modified Andonites. Adamson lived for 396 years. Here, four distinct cultures emerged at different times, fostered by four different groups of Adam's descendants. The second of these groups migrated westward to Greece and the Mediterranean islands. The remaining Adamsonite descendants subsequently migrated north and west, entering Europe with the combined strain of the last Andite wave that emerged in Mesopotamia. They were also among the Aryan Andite invaders of India.
26. After Adam's death, the second garden continued to function for approximately 20,000 years. These Adamites maintained their peaceful traditions, so when they felt overcrowded, they sent this surplus of inhabitants as teachers, merchants, and explorers, who mingled with their Nodite neighbors. From this mixture arose the first Andite saga (originated by Adam in the second garden). A few Adamites moved to the Nile Valley, and others moved eastward into Asia, but they constituted a minority. This Andite race originated in the adjacent regions of Mesopotamia.
27. Between 32,000 and 12,000 years ago, a great deal of epoch-making racial mixing occurred. This happened in southwest Asia. The migrating Adamites encountered inhabitants of the Turkestan highlands (they were a virile and vigorous people) and in northwest India, the settlement of Van and its culture. North of these settlements, the Andonites remained. The Adamites who began to move north absorbed these two races and cultures, facilitating progress in civilization, art, science, and social culture. This Adamite wave migrated from the Second Garden around 25,000 years ago to the north and west, mixing with other races, especially the Nodites. It was a gradual but steady wave, and they became completely interbred. Most made their way north and then westward around the Caspian Sea, eventually entering Europe. By the time they arrived in Europe they were highly mixed, so only very little pure Adamic strain arrived and the same thing happened in Asia.
28. Situation of the races after the Second Garden 30,000 years ago: Violet race: Adamites and Adamsonites. The Adamites in the Second Garden, located in the triangle of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, were the cradle of Western and Indian civilizations. The secondary or northern violet center was the Adamsonite headquarters on the southern shore of the Caspian Sea, near the Kopet Dagh Mountains. From these two centers, the culture and lifeblood that so immediately accelerated all races spread to the surrounding lands. Presumerians and other Nodites: Located in Mesopotamia, near the delta of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, were the remains of the ancient culture of the Dalamatian period. Over the millennia, this group mixed completely with the northern Adamites, but they never completely lost their Nodite traditions. Several Nodite groups that had settled in the Levant were, for the most part, absorbed by the later expanding Violet race. The Andonites: They maintained five or six fairly representative settlements north and east of the Adamsonite headquarters. They were also scattered throughout Turkestan, and at the same time, some settlements also persisted in isolated areas of Eurasia, especially in the mountainous regions. These aborigines continued to occupy the northern lands of the Eurasian continent, as well as Iceland and Greenland, but they had long since been expelled from the plains of Europe by the Blue Man and from the river basins of distant Asia by the expanding Yellow race. Red Men: They occupied the Americas after the last expulsion by the Yellow Man, more than 50,000 years before the advent of Adam. Yellow Man: established with dominion over eastern Asia. Their most advanced settlements were northeast of modern-day China, in the regions bordering Tibet. Blue Man: scattered throughout Europe. Their greatest cultural centers were located in the fertile valleys of the Mediterranean basin and northwestern Europe. Neanderthal absorption had slowed them considerably, but they were still the most aggressive, adventurous, and exploratory of the evolved peoples of Eurasia. Pre-Dravidian India: contained a complex mixture of all the races of the earth, but mostly green, orange, and indigo. They were slightly superior to the cultures of the bordering regions. Saharan Civilization: was made up of the superior elements of the indigo race, building the most progressive settlements. This indigo group carried considerable blood from the orange and green races, already submerged by this time. This took place in what is now the Sahara Desert, which was fertile at the time. Mediterranean Basin: The most mixed race outside of India occupied what is now the Mediterranean Basin.Here the blue men from the north and the Saharans from the south met and intermarried with the Nodites and Adamites from the east. This was the world landscape at the beginning of the expansion of the violet race, around 25,000 years ago.
29. Twenty-two thousand years ago, in India, its western population had already been tinged with Adamic blood. Never in the history of Urantia had any people combined so many different races. Unfortunately, the secondary Sangik stock predominated, and it was a real calamity that both the red and the blue men were largely absent from this melting pot. India is the only place where all the Urantia races combined, and the Andite invasion added the final stock. We will recall that in the heights of northwestern India (Afghanistan), the Sangik races were brought into existence, and without exception, in early times, members of each of them penetrated the Indian subcontinent, leaving in their wake the most heterogeneous race mixture that ever existed on Urantia. The earliest race mixtures in India were a combination of migratory red and yellow strains with the aboriginal Andonites. This group was later weakened by the absorption of the largest portion of the extinct green strain from the east, as well as large quantities of the orange race. It was slightly improved by a small addition of the blue man, but noticeably worsened through the assimilation of large quantities of the indigo race. It is worth noting that the so-called aborigines of India are rather representative of the lower, southern and eastern fringe, and that these were never completely absorbed either by the early Andites or by the later appearance of their Aryan cousins.
30. Twenty thousand years ago, the ancestors of the Chinese had built a dozen primitive centers of culture and learning, especially along the Yellow and Yangtze Rivers. Now these centers were beginning to be reinforced by the arrival of a steady stream of peoples of a superior mixture from Xinjiang and Tibet. Migration from Tibet to the Yangtze River valley was not as widespread as in the north, nor were the Tibetan centers as advanced as those in the Tarim Basin. But both movements carried with them eastward to the riverine colonies a certain amount of Andite blood. The superiority of the ancient yellow race was due to four major factors. Genetic: Unlike their blue cousins in Europe, both the reds and the yellows had been largely spared admixture with degraded human stock (Neanderthals). The northern Chinese, already improved with small amounts of the superior red and Andonite stocks, were soon to benefit from a considerable influx of Andite blood. The southern Chinese did not fare so well in this respect and suffered much more severely from the absorption of the green race. They were later further weakened by the infiltration of multitudes of inferior peoples who were driven out of India as a result of the Andite-Dravidian invasion. Today there is a marked difference between the northern and southern races. Social: The yellow race quickly learned the value of internal peace. Their pacifism contributed so much to the increase in population that it ensured the spread of their civilization to millions. From 25,000 to 5000 BC, the massive civilization of Urantia was located in central and northern China. The Yellow Man was the first to achieve racial solidarity and to attain a large-scale cultural, social, and political civilization. The Chinese of 17,000 years ago were aggressive militarists and had not been weakened by excessive reverence for the past. Numbering less than 12 million, they constituted a compact racial unit with a common language. During this period, they constituted a true nation, much more united and homogeneous than their political unions of historical times. Spiritual: In the era of the Andean migrations, the Chinese constituted one of the most spiritual peoples on earth. Their long-standing fidelity to the worship of the one truth proclaimed by Singlanton kept them ahead of most other races. The stimulus of a progressive and advanced religion is frequently a decisive factor in the cultural factor. While India languished, China advanced vigorously thanks to the invigorating stimulus of a religion in which truth was elevated as the supreme deity. This worship of truth stimulated fearless research and exploration of the laws of nature and the potentials of humanity.Even the Chinese of 6,000 years ago remained enthusiastic and energetic students in the search for truth. Geographically, China is protected by mountains to the west and by the Pacific Ocean to the east; only the north was open to attack, and from the days of the red men until the arrival of the descendants of the more recent Andites, the north was not occupied by aggressive races. Had it not been for the mountain barriers and the subsequent decline of spiritual culture, the yellow race would undoubtedly have attracted the bulk of the Andite migration from Turkestan and could undoubtedly have quickly dominated world civilization.
31. 18,000 years ago, a society of 100 Setite priests penetrated India and was on the verge of a religious conquest of the western half of the country. But since this people was polyglot, their religion did not persist, and within 5,000 years, their doctrines were changed from the trinity of paradise to a triple symbol of the God of fire. This was because when the Andite migrations came to an end, prolonging their traditions for another 7,000 years (in that their religious level was far higher than the world average), and when they were absorbed and plunged into the misery of the peoples of the south, this destiny of culture and religion did not come to fruition.
32. After 20,000 years of culture in the Second Garden, it began a steady decline, until approximately 17,000 years ago, when it was revived thanks to the revival of the Sethite priesthood, and under Amosad, they inaugurated a splendid era. This contributed greatly to the massive Andite wave that spread across Eurasia and North Africa, from Mesopotamia to Xianjiang (Xinjiang).
33. At this time, the civilization of Turkestan was constantly revived and renewed by the newcomers from Mesopotamia (Andites). Thus began the formation of the so-called Aryan language in the Turkestan Highlands. It consisted of a mixture of the Andonic dialect of this region with the language of the Adamsonites (descendants of Adamson, Adam's firstborn, who went to the lands of Van and formed his second lineage there) and the later Andites. From this language derives the modern language, originally from Central Asia, which spread through conquest to Europe, India, and the upper reaches of the Mesopotamian plains. This ancient language gave Western languages all the similarities designated under the heading Aryan.
34. By 17,000 years ago, the early Adamic migrations had already penetrated into Europe and Central Asia, with more Adamic stock present than anywhere else in the world, including Mesopotamia. The blue races were largely infiltrated by the Adamites. Russia and Turkestan (in their southern regions) had a large reservoir of Adamites mixed with Nodites, Andonites, and red and yellow Sangiks. Southern Europe and the Mediterranean coast were occupied by mixed races of orange, green, and indigo Andonites and Sangiks, with a sprinkling of Adamite stock. Asia Minor and Eastern Europe were predominantly occupied by Andonites. A mixed color race had been established in Egypt, which by this time was reinforced by arrivals from Mesopotamia (Andites), thus preparing to take over the disappearing Euphrates Valley culture (the Second Garden). The indigo race was moving further and further south into Africa and, like the red man, were virtually isolated. The Saharan civilization had been disrupted by droughts and the Mediterranean basin by floods. These first Adamite migrations spanned 10,000 years, from 27,000 years ago to 17,000 years ago (counting from today). It took these first Adamite waves so long to cross Eurasia that their culture was largely lost along the way.
35. A more recent migration of Adamites extended from about 17,000 years ago to 8,000 years ago. These migrations were carried out by Andites (this race consists of &frac16; to &frac18; violet blood plus Nodite and Sangik strains). But with the migrations and when they entered Turkestan and mixed with its superior inhabitants, a racial mixture was formed that spread the Andite type. These primitive Andites were not Aryan but pre-Aryan; they were not white but pre-white. This was the foundation of the so-called white race. These Andites constituted a complete human strain and the best since the times of the violet peoples. They comprised most of the superior types of Adamites and Nodites, and later some of the best blue, yellow, and green strains. This Andite race was neither western nor eastern. But this Andite heritage gave the polyglot mixture of the so-called white race the homogeneity of what has been called Caucasoid. The Adamites' first departure from the Second Garden was always peaceful, but as they mixed with the Nodites, a belligerent and militaristic race emerged. From then on, their movements were of a military and conquest nature. They were also adventurous and itinerant in nature.
36. Around 17,000 years ago, increasing population pressure from Turkestan and Iran caused the first mass movement of the Andites into India. For more than 15 centuries, these peoples penetrated through the highlands of Baluchistan, spreading up the Indus and Ganges valleys, and slowly moving southward into the interior of the Deccan. This Andite pressure from the northwest displaced many inferior peoples from the south and east into Burma and southern China, but not enough to save the invaders (Andites) from racial obliteration. India failed to achieve Eurasian homogeneity, primarily due to a problem of topography. Population pressure from the north merely succeeded in pushing most of the people southward into the Deccan territory, surrounded on each side by the sea. Had there been adjacent lands for migration, the inferior stocks would have spread far and wide, and the superior stock would have been able to acquire a higher civilization. As it happened, these early Andite conquerors made a desperate attempt to preserve their identity and stem the tide of racial submergence by establishing rigid restrictions on intermarriage. Despite this, by 10,000 BC the Andites had been submerged, although the entire mass of the peoples had been greatly improved by their absorption. This mixing of the Andite conquerors of India with the native stock eventually resulted in those mixed peoples who have been called Dravidians (they are the so-called South Indians and their racial mixture is composed of the red, yellow, Andonite and later green strains and very little blue. It was made worse by their later absorption of a large amount of indigo strain). Not long after the conquest of India these Andite-Dravidians lost their racial and cultural contact with Mesopotamia, but later the opening of sea lines and caravan routes made it possible to resume these connections, and for the last 10,000 years India has never been totally isolated from Mesopotamia in the west and China in the east, although mountain barriers greatly favored greater contact with the west. The thread of unbroken monotheism in India arose from the teachings of the Adamites in the Second Garden, and is due to the fact that many Setite priests (Set, son of Adam born at the age of 129, in charge of religion in the Second Garden) arrived in India, both with the first Andite invasion and with a recent Aryan invasion. Twentieth-century Brahmins are the direct cultural descendants of the Setite priests of the Second Garden, although their teachings are far removed from those of their illustrious predecessors.
37. 15,000 years ago, great and decisive climatic changes began, culminating in new migrations. With the retreat of the northern ice, the water-laden westerly winds shifted northward, gradually transforming the great grazing regions of the Sahara into a bare desert. This drought dispersed the smaller, dark-eyed, long-headed inhabitants of the great Sahara plain. The purer indigo elements moved southward to the forests of central Africa, where they have remained ever since. The more mixed groups dispersed in three directions: The superior tribes from the west migrated to Spain and from there to the areas adjacent to Europe, forming the nucleus of the future Mediterranean races with their long heads and swarthy complexions. This group consisted of the mixed indigo race, which carried significant strains of the extinct green and orange races (these Saharans were not involved in manufacturing goods or building cities). But they received a very limited amount of violet heritage before the upheaval of the lands and the shifting of the moisture-laden winds dispersed this prosperous and peaceful civilization (the Sahara had been until then an open grazing land). The Adamite migrations from Mesopotamia to Europe were interrupted by these relatively sudden climatic and geological changes. The less progressive group from the east of the Sahara plain migrated into Arabia and thence through northern Mesopotamia and India to distant Ceylon. The central group moved north and east up the Nile Valley and into Palestine. For over 30,000 years, Egypt simultaneously received a steady stream of Mesopotamians (Adanites), who brought with them their art and culture to enrich that of the Nile Valley. But the influx of large numbers of people from the Sahara greatly deteriorated the ancient civilization along the Nile, so that Egypt reached its lowest cultural level around 15,000 years ago. The result of these Saharan migrations is seen in a secondary substratum that suggests a certain degree of kinship between the modern peoples found in the Deccan (India), through Iran, Mesopotamia, and both shores of the Mediterranean.
38. Around the time of these climatic changes in Africa (Sahara), England separated from the continent and Denmark emerged from the sea. The Isthmus of Gibraltar, which protected the western Mediterranean basin, collapsed as a result of an earthquake, causing this inland lake to rapidly rise to the level of the Atlantic Ocean. The Sicilian land bridge was then submerged, creating a single Mediterranean Sea and connecting it to the Atlantic Ocean. This natural cataclysm inundated dozens of human settlements and caused the greatest loss of life from flooding in world history. This flooding immediately limited the westward movements of the Adamites, while the large influx of Saharans led them to seek outlets for their growing population to the north and east of Eden. As Adam's descendants moved northward from the Tigris and Euphrates valleys, they encountered mountain barriers and the then-more extensive Caspian Sea. And for many generations the Adamites hunted, tended their flocks, and worked the land around their settlements scattered throughout Turkestan. These Adamites slowly began to penetrate Europe from the east and encountered the culture of the Blue Man, thousands of years more primitive than that of Asia, since this region had been almost entirely isolated from Mesopotamia.
39. About 15,000 years ago, the Alpine forests were expanding widely. European hunters were being driven into the river valleys and sea coasts by the same climatic difficulties that had turned the once happy hunting grounds of the world into dry, arid deserts. As the rain-bearing winds shifted northward, the great grassland plains of Europe became covered with forests. These vast and relatively sudden climatic changes compelled the races of Europe to shift their activities from hunting in the open spaces to herding and, to some extent, fishing and farming. The blue men, who then dominated Europe, had no religious practices that were repulsive to the early migrating Adamites, and there was great sexual attraction between the violet race and the blue race. The best blue men considered it a great honor to be allowed to intermarry with the Adamites. Every Blue Man had the ambition to become so skillful and artistic as to win the affections of an Adamite woman, and it was the highest aspiration of superior Blue Women to receive the attentions of an Adamite. The ancient centers of Blue Man culture were located along all the rivers of Europe, but only the Somme now flows along the same course it followed before the Ice Age. Although we speak of the Blue Man as widespread throughout Europe, there were dozens of racial types. Even 35,000 years ago, the European Blue races were already highly mixed and carried both red and yellow strains in their blood, while on the Atlantic coasts and in the regions currently corresponding to Russia, they had absorbed a considerable amount of Andonite blood, and to the south, they were in contact with the Saharan peoples. But it would be fruitless to attempt to enumerate the many racial groups. The Blue Men were hunters, fishers, and food gatherers. They were expert boatbuilders. They made stone axes, felled trees, and erected partially subterranean log cabins with hide roofs. Similar cabins are still built in Siberia. Although the European blue man did not achieve a high cultural civilization on his own, he nevertheless provided the biological foundation which, when his Adonized strains mingled with the later Andite invaders, produced one of the most powerful races, an aggressive civilization the likes of which had not appeared on Urantia since the days of the violet race. The blood of Adam has been shared by most human races, but some received more than others. The mixed races of India and the darker peoples of Africa were not attractive to the Adamites. They would have mingled freely with the red man had he not been so far away in the Americas, and they were well disposed toward the yellow man.But this was equally difficult to reach in remote Asia. Consequently, when driven by adventure or altruism, or when they were expelled from the Euphrates Valley, they quite naturally opted for union with the blue races of Europe. Slowly, these migratory children of Eden united with the higher types of the blue race, invigorating their cultural practices while at the same time ruthlessly exterminating the remnants of the Neanderthal strains. This technique of race mixing, combined with the elimination of inferior strains, produced a dozen or more virile and progressive groups of superior blue men, one of whom you have called the Cro-Magnons. The Cro-Magnon peoples were a courageous and visionary race. They possessed an efficient system of childcare. Both parents participated in these tasks, and the older children cooperated fully. All children learned cave-keeping, arts, and stoneworking. At an early age, women were skilled in domestic arts and primitive agriculture, while men were skilled hunters and fearless warriors. The southern Cro-Magnons generally lived in caves and grottoes. As a result of these climatic changes, there were as many cultural advances as biological regressions. During the hunter-gatherer era prior to these changes, the blue men had interbred with the highest types of war prisoners (Andonites, Neanderthals, etc.) and had invariably destroyed those they considered inferior. But as they began to establish settlements and engage in agriculture and trade, they began to keep many mediocre prisoners as slaves, and it was the offspring of these slaves who later so considerably deteriorated the Cro-Magnon stock. This cultural regression continued until it received a new Andite impulse from the east, when the final mass invasion from Mesopotamia across Europe took place, rapidly absorbing the Cro-Magnon type and culture and initiating the civilization of the white races. The modern white races incorporate the surviving strains of the Adamic race that mixed with the Sangik races, a certain amount of red and yellow blood, but more particularly blue blood. There is a considerable percentage of original Andonite blood in all the white races, and even more of the early Nodite strains. In the eastern part of the Mediterranean, the Nodites had penetrated to some extent into southern Europe, but more specifically into North Africa.invigorating their cultural practices, while at the same time ruthlessly exterminating the remnants of the Neanderthal strains. This technique of race mixing, combined with the elimination of inferior strains, produced a dozen or more virile and progressive groups of superior blue men, one of whom you have called the Cro-Magnons. The Cro-Magnon peoples were a courageous and visionary race. They possessed an efficient childcare system. Both parents participated in these tasks, and the eldest children cooperated fully. All children learned cave care, the arts, and stonework. At an early age, women were skilled in domestic arts and primitive agriculture, while men were skilled hunters and fearless warriors. The southern Cro-Magnons generally lived in caves and grottoes. As a result of these climatic changes, there were as many cultural advances as biological regressions. The blue man during the hunting age prior to these changes had intermingled with the higher types of war prisoners (Andonites, Neanderthals, etc.) and had invariably destroyed those they considered inferior. But as they began to establish settlements and engage in agriculture and trade, they began to retain many mediocre prisoners as slaves, and it was the progeny of these slaves who later so considerably deteriorated the Cro-Magnon stock. This regression of culture continued until it received a new Andite impulse from the east, when the final mass invasion of Mesopotamia through all of Europe took place, rapidly absorbing the Cro-Magnon type and culture and initiating the civilization of the white races. The modern white races incorporate the surviving strains of the Adamic race that mixed with the Sangik races, a certain amount of red and yellow, but more particularly of blue blood. There is a considerable percentage of original Andonite blood in all the white races and even more of the earlier Nodite stocks. In the eastern part of the Mediterranean the Nodites had penetrated to some extent into southern Europe, but more specifically into North Africa.invigorating their cultural practices, while at the same time ruthlessly exterminating the remnants of the Neanderthal strains. This technique of race mixing, combined with the elimination of inferior strains, produced a dozen or more virile and progressive groups of superior blue men, one of whom you have called the Cro-Magnons. The Cro-Magnon peoples were a courageous and visionary race. They possessed an efficient childcare system. Both parents participated in these tasks, and the eldest children cooperated fully. All children learned cave care, the arts, and stonework. At an early age, women were skilled in domestic arts and primitive agriculture, while men were skilled hunters and fearless warriors. The southern Cro-Magnons generally lived in caves and grottoes. As a result of these climatic changes, there were as many cultural advances as biological regressions. The blue man during the hunting age prior to these changes had intermingled with the higher types of war prisoners (Andonites, Neanderthals, etc.) and had invariably destroyed those they considered inferior. But as they began to establish settlements and engage in agriculture and trade, they began to retain many mediocre prisoners as slaves, and it was the progeny of these slaves who later so considerably deteriorated the Cro-Magnon stock. This regression of culture continued until it received a new Andite impulse from the east, when the final mass invasion of Mesopotamia through all of Europe took place, rapidly absorbing the Cro-Magnon type and culture and initiating the civilization of the white races. The modern white races incorporate the surviving strains of the Adamic race that mixed with the Sangik races, a certain amount of red and yellow, but more particularly of blue blood. There is a considerable percentage of original Andonite blood in all the white races and even more of the earlier Nodite stocks. In the eastern part of the Mediterranean the Nodites had penetrated to some extent into southern Europe, but more specifically into North Africa.While men were skilled hunters and fearless warriors, the southern Cro-Magnons generally lived in caves and grottoes. These climatic changes brought about as many cultural advances as biological regressions. During the hunter-gatherer era prior to these changes, the blue men had intermingled with the highest types of war prisoners (Andonites, Neanderthals, etc.) and had invariably destroyed those they considered inferior. But as they began to establish settlements and engage in agriculture and trade, they began to keep many mediocre prisoners as slaves, and it was the offspring of these slaves who later so considerably deteriorated the Cro-Magnon stock. This regression of culture continued until it received a new Andite impulse from the east, when the final mass invasion from Mesopotamia across Europe took place, rapidly absorbing the Cro-Magnon type and culture and initiating the civilization of the white races. The modern white races incorporate the surviving strains of the Adamic race that intermixed with the Sangik races, a certain amount of red and yellow blood, but more particularly blue blood. There is a considerable percentage of original Andonite blood in all white races, and even more in the early Nodite strains. In the eastern part of the Mediterranean, the Nodites had penetrated to some extent into southern Europe, but more specifically into North Africa.While men were skilled hunters and fearless warriors, the southern Cro-Magnons generally lived in caves and grottoes. These climatic changes brought about as many cultural advances as biological regressions. During the hunter-gatherer era prior to these changes, the blue men had intermingled with the highest types of war prisoners (Andonites, Neanderthals, etc.) and had invariably destroyed those they considered inferior. But as they began to establish settlements and engage in agriculture and trade, they began to keep many mediocre prisoners as slaves, and it was the offspring of these slaves who later so considerably deteriorated the Cro-Magnon stock. This regression of culture continued until it received a new Andite impulse from the east, when the final mass invasion from Mesopotamia across Europe took place, rapidly absorbing the Cro-Magnon type and culture and initiating the civilization of the white races. The modern white races incorporate the surviving strains of the Adamic race that intermixed with the Sangik races, a certain amount of red and yellow blood, but more particularly blue blood. There is a considerable percentage of original Andonite blood in all white races, and even more in the early Nodite strains. In the eastern part of the Mediterranean, the Nodites had penetrated to some extent into southern Europe, but more specifically into North Africa.
40. Fifteen thousand years ago, the Andites and Andonites crossed the Titao Pass in large numbers and spread throughout the upper Yellow River valley and among the Chinese colonies of Kansu. From there, they penetrated eastward to Honan, where the most progressive communities were located. This infiltration from the east was approximately half Andonite and half Andite. The northern cultural centers along the Yellow River had always been more progressive than the southern colonies on the Changjiang River. Within a few thousand years, after the arrival of these superior, though few in number, mortals, the colonies along the Yellow River overtook the villages on the Changjiang River, achieving an advanced position they still maintain. This was due to the limited Andite infusion, which was sufficient to slightly stimulate their mental capacity and not disturb the innate stability of the Sangik type. Having lacked what was necessary to inspire them with the restlessness and exploratory curiosity characteristic of the white races of the north.
41. Fourteen thousand years ago, the ancestors of the Japanese peoples were displaced from the mainland by a powerful attack toward the southern coast by northern Chinese tribes. Their final exodus was due not so much to the pressure of population growth as to the initiative of a chieftain whom they came to regard as a divine figure. Many different races occupied the Pacific islands. In general, the southern islands, which were more extensive at that time, were inhabited by peoples with high percentages of green and indigo blood. The northern islands were dominated by the Andonites and later by races composed largely of red and yellow bloodlines. Like the peoples of India and the Levant, the victorious tribes of the Yellow Men established their first bases along the coasts and on the banks of rivers. The coastal colonies fared poorly in the following years due to increasingly frequent flooding and changing river courses, which made the situation in the lowland cities unsustainable.
42. Fourteen thousand years ago, a brilliant Andite tribe migrated to Crete from Mesopotamia. This was the only island colonized so early by a superior group, and it took nearly 2,000 years before the descendants of these seafarers spread to the neighboring islands. This group consisted of the narrow-headed, smaller-statured Andites who had intermarried with the Vanite division of the northern Nodites (a group of Nodites joined the Van and Amadon group when Van was centered on the Caspian Sea, after the Lucifer rebellion and prior to the first Garden). They were all less than 6 feet tall and had literally been driven off the mainland by their taller and shorter comrades. These migrants to Crete were highly skilled in weaving, metalworking, pottery, plumbing, and the use of stone as a building material. They used writing and were shepherds and farmers. Nearly 2,000 years after the colonization of Crete, a group of tall descendants of Adamson made their way across the northern islands to Greece, arriving there almost directly from their homeland in northern Mesopotamia (near the Kopet Dagh Mountains, Caspian Sea). These progenitors of the Greeks were led westward by Satto, a direct descendant of Adamson and Ratta. The group that eventually settled in Greece consisted of 375 of the selected and superior individuals who comprised the end of the second civilization of the Adamsonites. They carried the then invaluable stock of the budding white races. They were of high intellectual standing and, physically, the most beautiful men since the time of the first garden. Eventually, Greece and the Aegean island region succeeded Mesopotamia and Egypt as the western center of trade, art, and culture. But as in Egypt, so again, almost all the art and science of the Aegean world is derived from Mesopotamia, except for the culture of the Adamsonite ancestors of the Greeks. All the art and genius of this later-emerging people is the direct inheritance of the posterity of Adamson, the first son of Adam and Eve, and of his remarkable second wife, a daughter directly descended from the pure Nodite stock of Prince Caligastia. It is not surprising that the Greeks had mythological traditions tracing their origin directly to the gods and superhuman beings. The Aegean region passed through five distinct stages of culture, each less spiritual than the preceding, and before long the last glorious era of art perished under the weight of the rapidly multiplying mediocre descendants of the slaves from the Danube region, who had been imported by the more recent generations of Greeks. It was during this period in Crete that the cult of the mother of the descendants of Cain reached its peak. This cult glorified Eve in the worship of the “great Mother.”There were images of Eve everywhere. Thousands of public temples were erected throughout Crete and Asia Minor, and this cult of the Mother persisted until the time of Christ, later being incorporated into the early Christian religion under the guise of the glorification and worship of Mary, the earthly mother of Jesus. When Egypt followed Mesopotamia in cultural decline, many of the most capable and advanced families fled to Crete, thus greatly enhancing this already advanced civilization. When the arrival of inferior groups from Egypt later threatened Cretan civilization, the more cultured families moved westward to Greece. The Greeks were not only great teachers and artists, but they were also the greatest traders and colonizers in the world. Before succumbing to the overflow of inferiority that finally engulfed their art and commerce, they succeeded in establishing so many vanguards of culture to the west that many of the advances of early Greek civilization persisted in later peoples of southern Europe, and many mixed descendants of these Adamsonites were incorporated into the tribes of the adjacent lands.
43. 14,000 years ago, a group of Andites migrated from Mesopotamia to northern China and India. Many others penetrated remote parts of the world, serving as missionary teachers and merchants for the people groups north of the Sahara. Very few of these teachers and merchants ventured further south into Africa than the headwaters of the Nile. Later, mixed-race Andites and Egyptians followed the eastern and western coasts of Africa down well beyond the Equator, but without reaching Madagascar. These Andites were known as the Dravidian conquerors and later as the Aryans of India. Their presence in Central Asia enhanced the Turanian stock. Much of this race moved to China through Xinjiang and Tibet, adding qualities to the more recent Chinese strain. Small groups moved into Japan, Formosa, the West Indies, and southern China, although very few entered southern China by the coastal route. From here, 132 members of this race embarked on a flotilla of small boats from Japan, eventually reaching South America and intermarrying with the natives of the Andes, thus establishing the lineage of future Inca emperors. This journey across the Pacific was made in easy stages, stopping on the many islands they encountered along the way (at that time there were more islands and they were larger than today). These Andean sailors, along with others who followed them, biologically modified the native groups, and as a result, many flourishing centers of civilization developed on these now-submerged lands. Easter Island was one of these, and it lasted a long time as a religious and administrative center. Only this group reached the Americas; there were other attempts, but they failed.
44. 14,000 years ago, $3/4$ of the world's Andite descendants resided in northern and eastern Europe, and later, when the final exodus from Mesopotamia occurred, 65\% of these final waves of migration entered Europe.
45. Around 12,000 years ago, increasing drought caused the great exodus of Andites from the Caspian Sea. This wave of migration began to veer from north to south, and the Babylonian cavalry began its penetration into Mesopotamia. This increased aridity in Central Asia further contributed to reducing the population and making these people less warlike. Due to the decreasing rainfall in the north, the nomadic Andonites were forced to move south, resulting in a massive exodus of Andites from Turkestan. This movement of the so-called Aryans toward the Levant and India, benefiting from this dispersal of Adam's mixed descendants, all Asian peoples and most of the Pacific islands. With this excessive Andonite displacement (to the south), the Andites were diluted in Central Asia (until they almost disappeared), thus depriving them of their homelands in Mesopotamia and Turkestan. But even in the 20th century, traces of Andite blood can still be seen among the Turanians and Tibetans, as can be seen in the blond types sometimes found in these regions. The earliest Chinese annals record the presence of red-haired nomads north of the peaceful colonies on the Yellow River, and paintings still survive that faithfully demonstrate the presence of the blond Andite type and the dark-skinned Mongolian type in the Tarim Basin (Xinjiang region of China) long ago.
46. 12,000 years ago, following climatic changes in Turkestan and the arrival of the last Andite immigration, the Chinese people began to build cities and engage in manufactured production. This infusion of new blood did not add much to the civilization of the Yellow Man, but it rapidly stimulated and developed the latent tendencies of the higher lineages. From Honan to Chensi, the potential for an advanced civilization was beginning to materialize. Metalworking and all the manufacturing arts date from that time. These more recent waves of Andites carried with them some of the Mesopotamian cultural advances, particularly the latest ones from the west, significantly improving the economic and educational practices of the northern Chinese. There was also a short-lived influence on their religious culture, but their later descendants contributed greatly to the subsequent spiritual awakening. Furthermore, the Andite traditions of the beauty of Eden and Dalamatia influenced Chinese traditions. Early legends place “the land of the Gods” in the west (the second garden). The similarities between some early Chinese and Mesopotamian methods of timekeeping, astronomy, and government administration were due to trade relations between these two distant centers. Chinese merchants traveled the overland routes through Turkestan into Mesopotamia even in the days of the Sumerians. This was not a one-way exchange, as the Euphrates Valley also benefited, as did the peoples of the Ganges plains. But climatic changes and nomadic invasions in the third millennium BC greatly reduced the volume of trade along the caravan trails in Central Asia.
47. Around 10,000 years ago, the commercial metropolis of Central Asia, the city of Adonia, was founded. The city rapidly adopted the trade of stones, metals, wood, and pottery. Adonia was located near Ashgabat (currently the capital of Turkmenistan, in an oasis in the Karakum Desert, next to the Kopet Dagh Mountains, close to the border with Iran). It emerged from various more civilized tribes who opted for trade instead of the natural passage that would have been pastoralism, having to abandon hunting. Hunting became a fruitless activity due to the aridity caused by climate change, which slowly forced the Andites to leave the high regions of Central Asia in search of riverside areas and coastal areas, leading them to the valleys of the Nile, Euphrates, Indus, and Yellow Rivers. This shift from hunting to trade produced a new class of people, merchants, who spread from Egypt through Mesopotamia and Turkestan to the rivers of China and India. This exchange took place both over land and rivers.
48. From 10,000 to 8,000 years ago, the final 3 waves of Andites emerged from Mesopotamia. Pressure from colonial tribes in the east and harassment from the plainsmen in the west drove them out of Mesopotamia. These Andites from the Euphrates Valley and adjacent territory undertook their final exodus by various routes: 65% entered Europe through the Caspian Sea, eventually conquering and amalgamating with the newly emerging white races (a combination of blue and Andites). 10%, including a large group of Sethite priests, moved eastward through the Elamite Highlands (Iran) to the Iranian Plain and Turkestan (Central Asia, between the Caspian Sea and the Gobi Desert). Later, many of their descendants were pushed from the northern regions to India, with their Aryan brethren. 10% were headed north and turned east, entering Xinjiang, where they mixed with the yellow-Andite inhabitants. This racial union eventually entered China, immediately ameliorating the northern division of the yellow race. 10% of these fleeing Mesopotamian Andites made their way through Arabia and entered Egypt. 5% refused to leave their homes, just as they had refrained from intermarrying with inferior neighboring tribes. This group represented the survival of many superior strains of Nodites and Adamites.
49. From 10,000 to 8,000 years ago, the last Andite dispersals occurred through migratory conquests. As they left Mesopotamia, they continually depleted the biological reserves of their homelands, but at the same time they strengthened the surrounding peoples. They contributed humor, art, adventure, music, and craftsmanship. They were also expert animal domesticators and skilled farmers. They also contributed, at least initially, to the religious beliefs and moral practices of the older races. In this way, Mesopotamian culture spread silently throughout Europe, India, China, North Africa, and the Pacific islands.
50. By 9,000 years ago, the Dravidians had settled and established their cultural centers in the river valleys, primarily the Indus and Ganges, and in the Deccan, along the three great rivers that flow to the sea. By this time, the Dravidians had regular camel caravans traveling to distant Mesopotamia. Their navy ventured toward the Sumerian cities of the Persian Gulf via the Arabian Sea and sailed the Bay of Bengal to the East Indies. These navigators and merchants imported an alphabet and the art of writing from Sumer, thus refining the urban life of these Dravidians through these trade relations. This allowed for further diversification of this cosmopolitan culture. Their refinements, even luxury, were a hindrance when the later Aryans arrived in India. They did not recognize in the Dravidians their Andite cousins already intermixed with the Sangik races, but they did recognize an advanced civilization there. Despite their biological limitations, the Dravidians founded a superior civilization, which spread throughout India and has survived into modern times in the Deccan.
51. Around 8,500 years ago, a decline occurred in the spiritual heritage of the Andites. The descendants of Adam were widely dispersed, having been virtually absorbed into the older and more numerous human races. This decline of Andite civilization, along with the disappearance of their religious standards, left the spiritually impoverished races of the world in a deplorable state.
52. Between 9,000 and 8,000 years ago, the vigorous Andite horsemen appeared. This allowed the last groups of Andite knights to move rapidly, allowing them to reach Europe in cohesive groups, thus maintaining their superior culture to a certain extent. It was the horse that was the revolutionary factor that determined the Andites' dominance in the West. The horse gave the dispersed Andites the previously nonexistent advantage of mobility, allowing the last waves of Andite knights to advance rapidly around the Caspian Sea until they dominated all of Europe. All previous waves of Andites had moved so slowly that they tended to disintegrate as they moved away from Mesopotamia. As they moved eastward across the Russian plains, they absorbed the best of the blue man and exterminated the worst. They mingled until they produced a single people. These were the so-called Nordic races, the precursors of the Scandinavian, German, and Anglo-Saxon peoples. It wasn't long before the superior blue strains were completely absorbed by the Andites throughout northern Europe. Only Lapland and Britain retained, to some extent, even a distant semblance of identity from the more ancient Andonites. This region of northern Europe was constantly reinforced and elevated by the steady stream of migration from Mesopotamia through the regions from Turkestan to southern Russia. There were seven major invasions by the Andites, although a steady flow into Europe remained, the last three being cavalry waves. Some penetrated through the Aegean islands and up the Danube valley, but most of the more primitive and pure strains migrated to northwestern Europe by the northern route, through the pasturelands of the Volga and the Don. Between the third and fourth invasions, a horde of Andonites entered Europe from the north, coming from Siberia along the Russian and Baltic rivers. They were immediately assimilated by the northern Andite tribes. The primitive expansions of the purest violet race were much more peaceful. It was the union of the Nodite strains with the violet strain that resulted in the militaristic Andites (since the Nodites were more warlike). Later, when they mixed with the Sangik races, the skilled and aggressive Andites were produced, who made military conquests. Thus, when the last three waves of Andite cavalry swept across Europe, there were already more men of Andite heritage in this region of northern Europe than anywhere else in the world. For three thousand years, these Andites maintained their northern military center, specifically in Denmark. From this central point, successive waves of conquests began, becoming less and less Andite and increasingly white.As the centuries passed, the Mesopotamian conquerors and the conquered peoples finally united. These peoples were, on the one hand, the Blue Man, and on the other, the Cro-Magnon man, a mixture of the Blue Man and the Violet Race.
53. By the year 8000 (counting from today) the Andites had completely evacuated this region (Mesopotamia), although their descendants, largely mixed with the surrounding Sangik races, and the Andonites of Asia Minor remained to do battle much later with invaders from the north and east. The increasing infiltration of inferior stocks surrounding the garden ended the garden's cultural age, and civilization shifted westward to the Nile and the Mediterranean islands. This invasion of the inferior stocks prepared the way for the later conquest of Mesopotamia by barbarians from the north, who expelled the remaining capable stocks. The remnant of cultured elements remained, still harboring grudges against the presence of the ignorant and crude invaders. This group of Andites who remained in their homeland near the delta of the Euphrates and Tigris rivers were the Sumerians. These Sumerians had by this time largely become Andites, but their culture was more exclusively Nodite, clinging to the traditions of Dalamatia. This Mesopotamian race was interbred (as evidenced by the skulls in tombs of this era). The first Sumerian city to be flooded and then rebuilt on higher ground was Susa (located east of the Tigris River, southwest of present-day Iran). Then came Ur (near present-day Iraq), which around 7,000 years ago stood on the shores of the Persian Gulf (subsequently, alluvium deposits modified the land, giving it its present boundaries). Let us remember that by this time, river dwellers were accustomed to the flooding of rivers at certain times; these periodic floods were annual events in their lives. But new dangers threatened the Mesopotamian Valley as a result of progressive geological changes in the north. For thousands of years after the submersion of the first Eden (Lebanon), the mountains along the eastern Mediterranean coast and those in northwestern and northeastern Mesopotamia continued to rise. About 7,000 years ago, this uplift of the highlands accelerated considerably, which, together with increased snowfall in the northern mountain ranges, produced unprecedented spring flooding throughout the Euphrates Valley. These spring floods became increasingly worse, so that eventually the inhabitants of the riverine regions were forced to move to the eastern highlands. For nearly a thousand years, dozens of cities were virtually abandoned due to these vast floods. (This was the river flood predicted by Noah, and which 5,000 years later his fellow Hebrew priests in Babylonian captivity reimagined as a worldwide flood.) These Sumerians were industrious potters and peaceful grain farmers.They had long been harassed by barbarians from Turkestan (located between the Caspian Sea and the Gobi Desert) and the Iranian plateau (the Andonites). Around this time, an invasion of the Euphrates Valley was planned, motivated by the drying up of the highland grasslands. This invasion was all the more serious since these shepherds and hunters possessed large numbers of trained horses. This clear advantage over the Andites (their wealthy neighbors to the south) allowed them to infest all of Mesopotamia, driving the final waves of culture that spread throughout Europe, western Asia, and north Africa. These horsemen from the northwest, while infesting the Euphrates Valley, failed to conquer the remnants of the Sumerians who dwelt on the banks of the Persian. These Sumerians had superior intelligence, better weapons, and a vast system of military canals, consisting of a network attached to their ditches, which communicated with each other. In addition to being united by having a single religion, unlike their invaders, each city had its municipal god, and they fought over the importance of each. These northern invaders, who brought with them much of the best Andean stock and mixed northern Turkestan strains, including the Adamsonite stock, willingly assimilated the remnants of Mesopotamian civilization, soon coming to trust and appreciate these peace-loving Sumerians as teachers. Here, these mixed peoples became the peoples found in the Euphrates Valley at the beginning of recorded history.Here these mixed peoples became the peoples found in the Euphrates Valley at the beginning of recorded history.Here these mixed peoples became the peoples found in the Euphrates Valley at the beginning of recorded history.
54. 7,000 years ago, there was an acceleration in the elevation of the highlands (mountains) located along the eastern Mediterranean coast and those in northwestern and northeastern Mesopotamia. This elevation had been sustained since the submersion of the first Garden. This further acceleration of the highlands, along with increased snowfall in the northern mountain ranges, produced unprecedented floods throughout the Euphrates Valley each spring, forcing its inhabitants to move to the eastern highlands, as these floods became increasingly worse. This marked the final dissolution of the Andean civilization. At the end of this period of floods, the second Garden no longer existed. Only in the south and among the Sumerians were there few traces of its former glory. Remnants of this civilization are found in these regions of Mesopotamia and to the northeast and northwest of them. But even more ancient vestiges of the days of Dalamatia exist beneath the waters of the Persian Gulf, and the first Eden lies submerged beneath the eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea. This was the flood from which Noah was saved, after his own observation of the rising waters, and it was the one from which 5,000 years later the Hebrew priests, who remained captives in Babylon, and in retracing the steps of the Jewish people back to the time of Adam, met with great difficulty in reconstructing history; one thought of abandoning the effort, in order to let the world drown in the wickedness of the time of Noah's flood, and thus be in a better position to trace Abraham's origin from one of Noah's three surviving sons.
55. Seven thousand years ago, Mesopotamia was beginning to experience a period of flooding, and the Andites began to migrate toward Egypt. When the last Andite exodus from the Euphrates Valley occurred, Egypt had the fortunate privilege of gaining many of the best and most skilled artists and craftsmen. These Andite artisans found themselves very comfortable, as they were well-versed in river life, its flooding, drip irrigation, and dry seasons. They enjoyed the protected location of the Nile Valley, were much less exposed to hostile attacks and invasions than those along the Euphrates, and contributed greatly to the Egyptians' metallurgical skills. Here they worked iron from Mount Sinai, rather than ore from the Black Sea regions. The Nile Valley also suffered flooding shortly before these floods occurred in Mesopotamia. Egypt was compensated by the continued flow of Andite migrants, so that this culture, although effectively derived from the Euphrates region, seemed to progress independently. When, thanks to the Andite migrations, the culture in the Euphrates valley declined, the immediate center of civilization shifted to the Nile valley, and thus Egypt became the successor to Mesopotamia as the center of the most advanced group on earth. The Andites built stone structures in Egypt. The first and most exquisite of the stone pyramids was erected by Imhotep, an Andite architectural genius, then prime minister. Previous buildings had been built of brick, and although many stone structures had been built in different parts of the world, this was the first in Egypt. This brilliant period of culture was interrupted by internal guerrilla warfare along the Nile, and soon the country was invaded, as Mesopotamia had been, by the inferior tribes from inhospitable Arabia and by the Negroes from the south. As a result, the social process declined steadily for over 500 years. During the decline of Mesopotamian culture, a higher civilization persisted for some time on the Mediterranean islands.
56. Seven thousand years ago, a powerful host of progressive Mesopotamians left the Euphrates Valley and settled on the island of Cyprus. This civilization was eliminated some two thousand years later by barbarian hordes from the north. Around this same time, another large colony was established in the Mediterranean, near what later became Carthage, and from North Africa, large numbers of Andites entered Spain. Later, they mingled in Switzerland with their brethren, who had previously come to Italy from the Aegean Islands.
57. Seven thousand years ago, the three purest strains of Adam's descendants were in Sumeria, northern Europe, and Greece. All of Mesopotamia was slowly deteriorating under the influence of the mixed and darker races that infiltrated from Arabia. The arrival of these inferior peoples further contributed to the dispersal of the biological and cultural residue of the Andites. From throughout the Fertile Crescent (the fertile zone in the Levant), the most adventurous peoples dispersed westward to the islands (Cyprus). These emigrants cultivated grain as well as vegetables and brought domestic animals with them.
58. Around 7,000 years ago, the evolving white races dominated throughout northern Europe, including northern Germany, northern France, and the British Isles. Central Europe was for a time controlled by the Blue Man and the Round-Headed Andonites. The latter were mainly located in the Danube Valley and were never entirely displaced by the Andites. However, the Blue Man had been absorbed in the north and eventually succumbed to the White Cavalry conquerors penetrating from the south. The advancing tribes of the mixed white race (Andite plus Blue Man, mixed with their Andonite and Neanderthal slaves) encountered stubborn and prolonged resistance from the Cro-Magnons (Blue Man plus Violet Man, by this time already mixed with their inferior slaves), but superior intelligence and steadily increasing biological reserves enabled them to completely eliminate this ancient race. The decisive battles between the white man and the blue Cro-Magnon man were fought in the Somme River valley. Here, the cream of the blue Cro-Magnon race fought relentlessly against the advancing Andites, and for over 500 years these Cro-Magnons successfully defended their territory before succumbing to the superior military strategy of the white invaders. Thor the Victorious, commander of the northern armies at the final Battle of the Somme, became a hero to the northern white tribes and was later revered as a god by some of them. The Cro-Magnon man's longest-lasting strongholds were located in southern France, but the last major military resistance was overcome along the Somme. Further conquest progressed through commercial penetration, population pressure along the rivers, and intermarriage with the superior beings, combined with the ruthless extermination of the inferior ones at the hands of the tribal council of Andite elders. When these elders judged a prisoner to be inferior, he was handed over, through an elaborate ceremony, to the shaman priests, who led him to the river and administered the rites of initiation into the happy hunting grounds—lethal drowning. In this way, the white invaders of Europe exterminated all the peoples they encountered who were not quickly absorbed into their own ranks, and thus the blue man quickly met his end. Thus the Cro-Magnon blue man formed the biological foundation of the modern European races. But only the aspect absorbed by the later virile conquerors of their lands survived. The blue stock contributed many robust features and much physical vigor to the white races of Europe, but the humor and imagination of the mixed European peoples were derived from the Andites.This union of Andean and blue Cro-Magnon peoples, which produced the northern white races, resulted in a significant gap in Andean civilization, a temporary delay. Eventually, the latent superiority of these northern barbarians manifested itself and culminated in the European civilization of today.
59. Primitive European culture consisted of the Andite peoples of the Euphrates Valley who migrated northward into Europe to intermix with the Blue Men and westward into the Mediterranean regions to intermix with the already admixed remnants of the Saharans, as well as with the Blue Men of the south. These two branches of the white race were and are widely separated by the broad-headed survivors of the mountains of the early Andonite tribes who had long inhabited these central regions. These descendants of Andon were scattered throughout most of the mountainous regions of central and southeastern Europe. They were frequently reinforced by influences from Asia Minor, a region they occupied with considerable strength (Andon and Fonta base their descent in what is now Afghanistan). The ancient Hittites (a Semitic tribe) were directly descended from the Andonite stock; their pale complexion and broad heads were typical of this race. This strain shared Abraham's heritage and contributed greatly to the characteristic facial appearance of his more recent Jewish descendants (a tribe of Semites, who, due to their peculiar religious beliefs, were called the Children of Israel and later Hebrews, Jews, and “the Chosen People”), who, although they had a culture and religion derived from the Andites, spoke a very distinct language. Their language was distinctly Andonite. The tribes who lived in houses erected on wooden pillars or beams, on the lakes of Italy, Switzerland, and southern Europe, were the expanding foothills of the African, Aegean, and more specifically Danube Valley migrations. The Danubians were Andonites, farmers and shepherds who had entered Europe through the Balkan Peninsula and were slowly moving northward along the Danube Valley. They were potters, worked the land, and preferred to live in the valleys. The northernmost settlement of the Danubians was at Liège (Belgium). These tribes rapidly deteriorated as they moved away from the center and source of their culture. The finest pottery is the product of these more primitive settlements. The Danubians became Mother worshippers as a result of missionary work from Crete. These tribes later amalgamated with seafaring Andonite groups who arrived along the coast of Asia Minor and who were also Mother worshippers. Thus, much of central Europe was settled early by these mixed, broad-headed, white types who practiced Mother worship and the religious rite of cremating the dead, for it was the custom of those who worshipped the Mother to cremate their dead in stone huts.
60. Between 6,000 and 2,500 years ago, the political reunification of the yellow race was consummated, but the cultural union of the centers of the Yellow and Changjiang Rivers had already been achieved. This political reunification of the last tribal groups did not occur without conflict, but the concept of warrior remained discredited in society. Ancestor worship, the rise of dialects, and the lack of military action for thousands upon thousands of years made this an ultra-peaceful people. While the red man (people of archers) suffered the consequences of excessive wars, it would not be entirely incorrect to say that the development of statehood among the Chinese was delayed by the scrupulous conquest of Asia. They had a great tendency toward racial solidarity, but it failed to develop properly because the driving stimulus of the constant danger of external aggression was lacking.
61. Around 5,000 years ago, a second Andite invasion occurred: the Aryan invasion, lasting almost 500 years. This migration marked the final exodus of the Andites from their homelands of Turkestan, lands located between the Caspian Sea and the Gobi Desert (driven to migrate by climate change and constant hostile invasions). The first Aryan centers were scattered across the northern half of India, particularly in the northwest. These invaders failed to complete their conquest of the country and were subsequently destroyed as a result. Their inferior numbers made them vulnerable to absorption by the Dravidians from the south, who subsequently invaded the entire peninsula except for the Himalayan provinces. These Aryans left little racial imprint on India, except in the northern provinces. In the Deccan, their influence was more cultural and religious than racial. From then until 3,000 years ago, there was a continuous infiltration of Aryan blood into the Punjab region, the last influx coming in the form of a Hellenistic campaign (of a warlike nature). This, coupled with their presence in greater numbers and the fact that this presence was reinforced by these conquerors, allowed for a greater persistence of Aryan blood in northern India. These Aryans mixed with the Dravidians, eventually, in the Ganges plains, producing a high culture. This center was later reinforced by contributions from the northeast coming from China. The most notable characteristic of this society was the persistence of the large social castes that were taught by the Aryans in an effort to perpetuate racial identity. This complicated caste system has been preserved to the present day (the four great castes were created, with the exception of the first, which emerged from the Sethite master priests, with the futile idea of preventing the racial amalgamation of the Aryan conquerors with their inferiors, the Dravidians).
62. 5,000 years ago, racial mixtures in Europe toward the close of the Andite migrations were generalized into three white races. The Northern White Race—this so-called Nordic race—consisted primarily of the more Andite blue man but also contained a considerable amount of Andonite blood with smaller amounts of red and yellow Sangik. The Northern White Race thus comprised these four most desirable races. But the major heritage came from the blue man. The typical primitive Nordic race had elongated heads, and were tall and blond. But this race long ago became considerably mixed with all other branches of the white peoples. The primitive culture of Europe encountered by the invading Nordics was that of the receding Danubians, mixed with the blue man. The Nordic-Danish culture and the Danube-Andonite culture met and mixed at the Rhine, as evidenced by the existence of two racial groups in Germany today. The Norse continued the amber trade from the Baltic coast, building up a large exchange with the broad-headed inhabitants of the Danube valley across the Brenner Pass. This considerable contact with the Danubians led these northerners to the worship of the Mother, and for several thousand years the ceremony of cremating the dead was almost universal throughout Scandinavia. This explains why the remains of the primitive white races, although buried throughout Europe, cannot be found—only their ashes are found in urns of stone and clay. These white men also built dwellings; they never lived in caves. This again explains why there is so little evidence of primitive white human culture, even though the earlier Cro-Magnon type is well preserved where it has been safely sealed away in caves and grottoes. As it appears, there exists in northern Europe one day a primitive culture of the receding Danubian and Blue Man, and the next day a vastly superior and suddenly emerging White Man culture. The central white race: although this group includes strains of Blue Man, Yellow Man, and Andite, it is predominantly Andonite. These peoples are broad-headed, brown-skinned, and robust. They are driven so that they form a wedge between the Nordic and Mediterranean races, with the broad base resting in Asia and the apex penetrating into eastern France. For almost 20,000 years the Andonites had been pushed farther and farther northward into Central Asia (from Afghanistan) by the Andites. Around 3000 BC, increasing aridity was driving these Andonites back to Turkestan. This Andonite push south continued for over 1000 years and, branching out around the Caspian and Black Seas, they penetrated Europe through both the Balkans and Ukraine.This invasion included the remaining groups of Adamson's descendants and, during the second half of the invasion period, carried with it large numbers of Andites from Iran as well as many of the Setite priests. By 2500 BC, the westward thrust of the Andonites reached Europe, and this inundation was throughout Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, and the Danube basin by the barbarians of the Turkestan hills. It constituted the most serious and most lasting cultural backwardness to occur at that time. These invaders definitively Andonized the character of the Central European races, which from this time on have remained characteristically Alpine. The southern white race: This brown Mediterranean race consisted of a mixture of Andite and Blue Man, with a minor Andonite strain; in the north, this group absorbed a considerable amount of secondary Sangik blood through the Saharans. In later times, this southern division of the white races received an infusion of strong Andite elements from the eastern Mediterranean. The Mediterranean shores were not permeated by the Andites; however, until the time of the great Norman invasions of 2500 BC (4,500 years ago), overland traffic and commerce were practically suspended during these centuries, when nomads invaded the eastern Mediterranean districts. This interference with overland travel produced the great expansion of maritime traffic and commerce; Mediterranean trade was at its height 4,500 years ago. This development of maritime traffic resulted in a sudden expansion of the descendants of the Andites throughout the length and breadth of the entire coastal territory of the Mediterranean basin. These racial mixtures laid the foundation for the southern European race, the most mixed of all. And since those days, this race has undergone still further admixture, notably with the blue-yellow Andite people of Arabia. This Mediterranean race is indeed so freely mixed with the adjacent peoples that it is almost impossible to discern it as a separate type, but in general those who belonged to it are short, long-headed, and dark-skinned. In the north, the Andites, through war and intermarriage, obliterated the blue man, but in the south, the blue man survived in great numbers. The Basques and the Hebrews represent the survival of two branches of these races, but even these people have mixed considerably with the Saharans.These invaders definitively Andonized the character of the Central European races, which from that time on have remained characteristically Alpine. The southern white race: This brown Mediterranean race consisted of a mixture of Andite and Blue Man, with a minor Andonite strain; in the north, this group absorbed a considerable amount of secondary Sangik blood through the Saharans. In later times, this southern division of the white races received an infusion of strong Andite elements from the eastern Mediterranean. The shores of the Mediterranean were not permeated by the Andites; however, until the time of the great Norman invasions of 2500 BC (4,500 years ago), overland traffic and trade were practically suspended during these centuries, when nomads invaded the eastern Mediterranean districts. This interference with overland travel led to the great expansion of maritime traffic and trade; Mediterranean trade was at its height 4,500 years ago. This development of maritime traffic resulted in a sudden expansion of the descendants of the Andites throughout the entire coastal territory of the Mediterranean basin. These racial mixtures laid the foundation for the southern European race, the most mixed of all. And since those days, this race has undergone yet another admixture, notably with the blue-yellow Andite people of Arabia. This Mediterranean race is indeed so freely mixed with the adjacent peoples that it is almost impossible to discern it as a separate type, but in general, those who belonged to it are short, long-headed, and dark-skinned. In the north, the Andites, through war and intermarriage, obliterated the blue man, but in the south, the blue man survived in great numbers. The Basques and the Hebrews represent the survival of two branches of these races, but even these people have intermixed considerably with the Saharans.These invaders definitively Andonized the character of the Central European races, which from that time on have remained characteristically Alpine. The southern white race: This brown Mediterranean race consisted of a mixture of Andite and Blue Man, with a minor Andonite strain; in the north, this group absorbed a considerable amount of secondary Sangik blood through the Saharans. In later times, this southern division of the white races received an infusion of strong Andite elements from the eastern Mediterranean. The shores of the Mediterranean were not permeated by the Andites; however, until the time of the great Norman invasions of 2500 BC (4,500 years ago), overland traffic and trade were practically suspended during these centuries, when nomads invaded the eastern Mediterranean districts. This interference with overland travel led to the great expansion of maritime traffic and trade; Mediterranean trade was at its height 4,500 years ago. This development of maritime traffic resulted in a sudden expansion of the descendants of the Andites throughout the entire coastal territory of the Mediterranean basin. These racial mixtures laid the foundation for the southern European race, the most mixed of all. And since those days, this race has undergone yet another admixture, notably with the blue-yellow Andite people of Arabia. This Mediterranean race is indeed so freely mixed with the adjacent peoples that it is almost impossible to discern it as a separate type, but in general, those who belonged to it are short, long-headed, and dark-skinned. In the north, the Andites, through war and intermarriage, obliterated the blue man, but in the south, the blue man survived in great numbers. The Basques and the Hebrews represent the survival of two branches of these races, but even these people have intermixed considerably with the Saharans.Mediterranean trade was at its height 4,500 years ago. This development of maritime traffic resulted in a sudden expansion of the descendants of the Andites throughout the entire coastal territory of the Mediterranean basin. These racial mixtures laid the foundation for the southern European race, the most mixed of all. And since those days, this race has undergone still further admixture, notably with the blue-yellow Andite people of Arabia. This Mediterranean race is indeed so freely mixed with adjacent peoples that it is almost impossible to discern it as a separate type, but in general, those who belonged to it are short, long-headed, and dark-skinned. In the north, the Andites, through warfare and intermarriage, obliterated the blue man, but in the south, the blue man survived in large numbers. The Basques and the Hebrews represent the survival of two branches of these races, but even these people have intermixed considerably with the Saharans.Mediterranean trade was at its height 4,500 years ago. This development of maritime traffic resulted in a sudden expansion of the descendants of the Andites throughout the entire coastal territory of the Mediterranean basin. These racial mixtures laid the foundation for the southern European race, the most mixed of all. And since those days, this race has undergone still further admixture, notably with the blue-yellow Andite people of Arabia. This Mediterranean race is indeed so freely mixed with adjacent peoples that it is almost impossible to discern it as a separate type, but in general, those who belonged to it are short, long-headed, and dark-skinned. In the north, the Andites, through warfare and intermarriage, obliterated the blue man, but in the south, the blue man survived in large numbers. The Basques and the Hebrews represent the survival of two branches of these races, but even these people have intermixed considerably with the Saharans.
63. Around 5,000 years ago were the times of the New Stone Age, which would supersede the incipient Bronze Age. This Bronze Age was in Scandinavia and was associated with Mother worship. In southern France and Spain, it was the New Stone Age and was associated with sun worship. This was the time of the construction of circular, roofless temples dedicated to the sun. The white European races were energetic builders, who enjoyed placing large stones as tributes to the sun, just as their later descendants did at Stonehenge. The fashion for sun worship indicates that this was a great period for agriculture in southern Europe. The superstitions of this comparatively recent era of sun worship still persist today in the folklore of Brittany. Although they have been Christianized for over 1,500 years, these Bretons still retain New Stone Age amulets to protect themselves from the evil eye. They still keep thunderstones in their fireplaces as protection against lightning. The Bretons never interbred with the Norse of Scandinavia; they are the survivors of the original Andonite inhabitants of Western Europe, mixed with the Mediterranean strain.
64. Thus we conclude with the settlements and foundations of the white race in Europe and its picture of race mixtures. Despite the Adamic fault, the higher types did mix. But it is a mistake to attempt to classify white peoples as Nordic, Alpine, and Mediterranean. There has generally been too much mixing to permit such grouping. At one time, there was a relatively well-defined division of the white race into such groups, but the mixing that has occurred since then makes it impossible to identify these distinctions with any clarity. Even 500 years ago, the ancient social groups no longer belonged to a single race, with the exception of the present-day inhabitants of North America (red man). This European culture continued to grow for 500 years and to some extent to mix. But the language barrier prevented the full interaction of the different Western nations. Over the last century, this culture has been experiencing its best opportunity to blend into the cosmopolitan population of North America, and the future of this continent will be determined by the quality of the racial factors allowed into its present and future population, as well as the level of social culture that is maintained.
65. Around 4,500 years ago, the Sumerians suffered severe setbacks at the hands of the Sumites and Gites from the north. Lagash, the Sumerian capital built on alluvial hills, collapsed. Erech succumbed after Akkad, under the rule of Hammurabi, and thus the Sumerians were absorbed into the northern Semitic population, and with them the Mesopotamian Andites disappeared from the pages of history. The Semites then became heirs of the Sumerians, having several branches, one of which was the Eastern Semites, who were skilled horsemen, well-organized and well-led, who invaded the western regions of the fertile crescent and there united with the Babylonians. Then there were the Western Semites, and among these were the Chaldeans from near Ur, considered the most advanced of this Semitic branch. Of the western Semites of Palestine, those who held this section along the Mediterranean coast were the Phoenicians, who were a superior and well-organized group of mixed Semites. The Arabian Semites knew of the northern promised land, the land “flowing with milk and honey,” and fought their way there, but were repulsed by the better-organized and more highly civilized Semites and Hittites of the north. But racially, the Semites were among the most mixed of the Urantian peoples, exhibiting hereditary factors of nearly all of the nine world races.
66. From 4,500 to 4,000 years ago, nomads ravaged everything they found from the Atlantic to the Pacific. The Nerites constituted the final explosion of the Caspian group of Mesopotamian descendants of the mixed Andite and Andonite races. The subsequent climatic changes succeeded in achieving what the barbarians lacked to effect Mesopotamian ruin.
67. 2,600 years ago, a great ethical, moral, and semi-religious awakening culminated, beginning as a formative period of Chinese civilization with the arrival of the Andites. Chinese tradition preserves the confusing record of the evolutionary past, the transition from the maternal to the paternal family, the establishment of agriculture, the development of agriculture, the initiation of industry, and all these factors narrated successively. Furthermore, the belief in and worship of the one truth as taught by Singlanton never completely ceased to exist, but as time passed, this search for a new and higher truth became eclipsed by a growing tendency to venerate that which was already established. Slowly, the genius of the yellow race deviated from what had been the search for the unknown. And this is the reason for the stagnation of what had been the most rapidly progressing civilization in the world. Another point to note is writing. Its further development, together with the development of schools, contributed to the dissemination of knowledge on an unprecedented scale. But the cumbersome nature of the ideographic writing system imposed a numerical limitation on the educated classes, despite the early appearance of the printing press. Above all, the process of social normalization and religio-philosophical dogmatization continued. The religious development of ancestor worship became even more complicated due to the inundation of superstitions that presupposed nature worship, but vestiges of a real concept of God persisted in the imperial worship of Shang-ti. The awareness of past achievements (somewhat diminished today), the conservatism of an overwhelmingly agricultural people, and a highly developed family life gave rise to ancestor veneration, which culminated in the custom of honoring the men of the past almost to the point of worship (a very similar attitude prevailed among the white races of Europe for some 500 years after the disintegration of Greco-Roman civilization). The great weakness of ancestor veneration is that it promotes a retrograde philosophy. Although it is prudent to glean wisdom from the past, it is foolish to consider the past as the sole source of truth. Truth is relative and extensible; it “lives” in the present, achieving new expressions in each generation of humankind, even in each human life. The great strength of ancestor veneration is the value this attitude confers on the family. The surprising stability and persistence of Chinese culture is a consequence of the supreme position accorded to the family, since civilization is directly dependent on the effective functioning of the family. And in China, the family attained a social importance, even a religious significance, that very few peoples have been able to achieve.This ancient culture has contributed greatly to human happiness. Millions of human beings have lived and died blessed by its achievements. For centuries, this civilization has rested on the laurels of the past, but it is reawakening to once again visualize the transcendental goals of mortal existence, once again facing the tireless struggle for endless progress.
68. In the year 1200, the last great manifestation of the submerged military genius of the Andeans of Central Asia occurred when the Mongols under Genghis Khan began the conquest of most of the Asian continent. These warriors proclaimed the existence of “one God in heaven,” but the premature dissolution of their empire long delayed cultural exchange between West and East, and greatly delayed the development of a monotheistic concept in Asia.

With sincere love

Maria José García Gaete, September 2008.



## References

- [This article on the Urantia Association of Spain website](http://aue.urantia-association.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/6/2018/03/MIGRACIONES-URANTIANAS.pdf)


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_spain">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Urantia Association of Spain — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>