---
title: "A Study of the Master Universe — Chapter IV – Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Universes"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Astronomy
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Study_of_the_Master_Universe/The_Absonite_Story">The Absonite Story</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Study_of_the_Master_Universe/5">Chapter V – The Transformation of Synthesis</a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Author: **William S. Sadler, Jr.**

At this point in our study of the master universe, it is desirable to introduce two new words: “nucleus” and “cytoplasm.” If the master universe could be likened to a growing organism, and in many ways it is, then we could think of it as having a nucleus which is surrounded by cytoplasm. Some definitions are now very much in order:

_Nucleus_ is defined (in Webster) as follows: “An organ present in the proto­plasm of most plant and animal cells, and regarded as an essential agent in their constructive metabolism, growth, and reproduction and in the hereditary transmission of characters.”

_Cytoplasm_ stands in contrast to nucleus, and is, in part, defined (in Webster) as follows: “. . . the protoplasm of the cell exclusive of the nucleus.”

_Illustration_: In an egg, the yellow portion (the yolk) is the nucleus and the surrounding white (or translucent portion) is the cytoplasm.

This study advances the theory that the master universe has more than one nucleus. We believe it has two of them: one is existential, and the other is a combi­nation of existential-experiential. The Havona nucleus is existential; the grand universe nucleus (the seven superuniverses plus Havona) is existential-experiential. Let us examine the evidence available to see if there is any support for this proposi­tion.

## § 1. Havona, the Nucleus of the Grand Universe

The central creation does appear to be the nucleus of the presently organized and inhabited creation, the grand universe. The Isle of Paradise does not appear to be a true nucleus because it is not really a part of the master universe, or of any universe. But Havona is a real part of the master creation; the Havona space level is the first space level of the master universe, and the age of Havona is the First Universe Age.

If Havona really is a nuclear universe, then what special characteristics identify it as such? We would suggest that the following qualities are characteristic of, and serve to identify, a nuclear universe:
- (a) _Unique Nature._ Havona is, in nature, radically different from the superuniverses. Havona has an eternity origin and is perfect in the existential sense. The superuniverses have a time origin, are imperfect, are perfecting by slow evolution, and will eventually become perfected in the experiential sense.
- (b) _Deity Appearance._ The appearance of eternal Havona is associated with the simultaneous appearance of new Deity, the Infinite Spirit.
- (c) _Trinity Formation._ Havona appears at the same “time” as the appearance of the Infinite Spirit, and the appearance of the Infini­te Spirit makes it possible for the three Deities to unite in the Paradise Trinity.
- (d) _Transmissive._ Hereditary characteristics of divine perfection are transmitted to the outlying, or cytoplasmic, superuniverses by the Paradise-Havona creators and administrators who serve in the time-space creations. The ministry of the Supreme Creators is a good example of this.

It seems quite obvious that Havona is the nucleus of the grand universe. This immediately raises another question: Is Havona also the nucleus of the master universe? We would answer this question in the negative. We believe that the grand universe is the nucleus of the master creation because its completed evolution will produce another series of events that are analogous to those which we have associ­ated with Havona in identifying it as a nuclear creation.

## § 2. The Grand Universe as the Nucleus of the Master Universe

We submit the proposition that the grand universe is the Second Nuclear Universe, and that it will function as the existential-experiential nucleus of the master universe. If this is a valid theory, then it should be possible to make a comparison between the grand universe and the central universe concerning those events which we have associated with the appearance of a nuclear creation. Such a comparison should be made between original Havona and the _completed_ grand universe – the grand universe at the end of the present age, when the seven super­universes are settled in light and life, and the Supreme being has completed his evolutionary growth and has emerged as a fully functional and fully contactable Deity.

The perfected grand universe discloses the following characteristics, and its achievement of perfected status is associated with the following events:
- (a) _Unique Nature._ The perfected grand universe is, in nature, radically unlike the outer space universes. Nothing else in the master universe could be like the grand universe because it is the space-stage on which the Supreme Being completes his experiential growth. All subsequent creations will be post-Supreme in nature and in growth potential; they will be devoid of all finite experience.
- (b) _Deity Appearance._ The perfection and completion of the grand universe is associated with the emergence of new Deity – the Supreme Being.
- (c) _Trinity Formation._ The final emergence of the Supreme Being makes it possible to form the First Experiential Trinity. This Trinity is made up of the Master Architects, the Supreme Cre­ators, and the Supreme Being. Until the Supreme Being has fully emerged he cannot function in this Trinity, and this Trinity can­not, therefore, complete its factual formation prior to the comple­tion of the grand universe.
- (d) _Transmissive._ Hereditary qualities from the grand universe – finite experience – will be transmitted to the cytoplasmic universes of outer space by the Supreme Being, by the First Experiential Trin­ity, and by a host of finaliters and others who will be serving in these realms.

The events associated with the completion of the grand universe seem to be quite analogous to the events which are associated with the appearance of the central universe. We are, accordingly, of the opinion that both are nuclear universes. Havona is the First Nuclear Universe, the nucleus of the grand universe; the grand universe is the Second Nuclear Universe, the nucleus of the master universe.

## § 3. The Outer Space Levels are cytoplasmic Universes

If Havona is the first nucleus, and the grand universe is the second, then would it not logically follow that the completed development of the Primary Space Level would produce the Third Nuclear Universe? We would answer that question in the negative. We submit that the completed development of the first outer space level will not result in the formation of a third, and larger, nucleus of the master universe.

Let us test the validity of this proposition by applying to the Primary Space Level the same measurements we have used in determining that the central universe and the grand universe are nuclear creations:
(a) _Unique Nature._ As nearly as this study can determine, the four outer space levels are not different from each other in the radical way that Havona is different from all post-Havona creations, and that the grand universe is different from the outer space universes. The universes of all four outer space levels are post-Supr­eme universes, creations that are organized after the full emergence of the Supreme Being.
(b) _Deity Appearance._ No new deity appears with the completion of the development of the first outer space level.
(c) _Trinity Formation._ Without the appearance of new experiential deity there can be no formation of a new experiential trinity.
(d) _Transmissive._ No new deity or trinity appears as the vehicle for the transmission of hereditary characteristics; each of the four suc­ceeding outer space levels appears to be an extension and a was expansion of the preceding one.

When we apply these measurements to the Primary Space Level, it does not appear that it will be associated with the grand universe to form a new nuclear creation. The same measurements may also be applied to the Secondary and the Tertiary Space Levels with the same negative conclusions. This study, therefore, submits that the four outer space levels are a single cytoplasmic unit in relation to the grand universe which serves as their nucleus.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Study_of_the_Master_Universe/The_Absonite_Story">The Absonite Story</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Study_of_the_Master_Universe/5">Chapter V – The Transformation of Synthesis</a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>