---
title: "Sharing Our Spiritual Experience"
description: "Sermon Series on Spiritual Growth"
published: true
date: 2023-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: The Spiritual Fellowship Journal, Spiritual Fellowship, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 1998 Rev. Gregory Young<br>© 1998 The Christian Fellowship of Students of <i>The Urantia Book</i></p>

¡Early one morning recently while out jogging I was excited to see the first robins of the season. Then on my way to the church office I saw a number of red-winged blackbirds in the wetland on the north side of the Donges Bay road. Great, I thought, these are the harbingers of spring. Its time to get ready to plant our garden!

Over the past several years, as some of you know, I have become increasingly interested in gardening and feeding the birds in our yard. A few weeks ago I was in a new store handling all kinds of bird feed and equipment. I discovered that Kit and George Harrison, nationally renowned wildlife authors, were there promoting and signing books. I picked up one of their books on the characteristics and habits of songbirds common to this area. The book seemed very interesting so I decided to purchase it.

That evening I began reading about the robin, the first bird discussed in the book. I learned that male robins come back to nesting areas first, when the average temperature is about 37 degrees. The female, I was surprised to find out, sometimes gets disoriented while building her nest and will build several nests close to each other. Robins tenaciously protect their territory, but will sometimes share a nest area with another bird of an entirely different species.

Now before you think my sermon this morning is for the birds, I want to reassure you that I don't want to give you an introductory lecture on ornithology, but I should like to make this point: Before I became really interested in wild birds, I knew a few basic things about birds such as when robins appear, spring is not too far away. Beyond such common knowledge, I knew very little about birds. Now that I have read the Harrison book, a whole new world has been opened to me. I'm so enthused with my new found knowledge that I want to share it with those close to me.

When something really inspires us, we need to share it. Think, when was the last time that you learned something, were so enthused over a new view, that you had to share it with others? I'm not referring to gossip. When was the last time that you were excited about something that opened up your mind and world so much that it changed the way you looked at life from that time on? When was the last time that you became passionately involved in something so important that you just had to share it?

True and living spiritual awareness and spiritual growth are these kinds of life-changing experiences. You may assume that I'm going to suggest doing something that in our tradition is not considered to be good manners. We are taught that there are two things that we should never talk about in normal social conversation: religion and politics. While there is some wisdom in this advice, I should like to suggest that there is more to the ways we act as Christians than in the good deeds we do. There are many people who are looking for something to believe in, an anchor for their lives. Those who are consciously or unconsciously searching for meaning in their lives are deeply influenced by people who live with passionate conviction, and have an irrepressible enthusiasm for their vision of reality. These hungering people are intrigued by those who seem to see more meaning and purpose to life than they do.

I'm not talking about people who are overpowering, insensitive, or have proselytizing intentions. I' $m$ referring, rather, to those people who are caring and believe that their faith is so helpful and inspiring that they are willing to share it when there is an opportunity in an appropriate context. There is a vast difference between religion and spirituality. What a lot of people share is their religion, their particular brand of dogma, and I believe it has given sharing spiritual Good News a bad name. There is a pronounced difference between the religion about Jesus and the religion of Jesus. The one is based on intellectual belief, doctrine, and the other is rooted in personal spiritual values, truth, beauty, and goodness.

While there has been a decline of interest in traditional forms of religion in our society, there is an unprecedented expansion of interest in spirituality. People hunger and thirst for deep spiritual meaning in a world that seemingly has lost a relevant spiritual orientation. For a number years now books on spirituality have consistently been at the top of the best seller list. People are looking for something to give meaning and purpose to their lives.

> _While there has been a decline of interest in traditional forms of religion in our society, there is an unprecedented expansion of interest in spirituality.... For a number years now books on spirituality have consistently been at the top of the best seller list. People are looking for something to give meaning and purpose to their lives._

In the Sermon on the Mount Jesus said, “Happy are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness for they shall be filled.” Many of us misunderstand the kind of spiritual ministry that will satisfy this hunger. Sharing the Good News of Jesus' message is not actualized in pointing our finger at the evils of society and standing in judgment of those around us. Not many people are inspired to develop a dynamic faith by listening to hellfire and brimstone lectures. True spirituality communicates on a deeper level. It points to universal truths and goodness that ignite a spark in the human soul and inspire us to live these truths and actualize this goodness.

We are not accustomed to talking about our spiritual lives. It seems awkward, confusing, even embarrassing. Sharing powerful and meaningful spiritual experience may be associated with preaching, and none of us like preachy people. Each of us, however, is a gold mine of rich experience, a walking story still in progress. We learn and grow from the mutual sharing of each other's insights and experiences. Sharing what is spiritual means to share something personal, very important, and life enriching to us with others when they seek it.

Think about the conversations that you have had with people over the years. Do any of these conversations stand out in your mind? I suspect that the discussions which come to mind are the heart-to-heart talks that you have had, exchanges that might be called spiritual in nature, conversations that were deep and meaning-filled. The discussions that I have had with people who have had “near death experiences” have been very powerful and spiritual for me. They have contributed meaning and perspective to my life.

As followers of Jesus, we all belong to the brother/sisterhood of humankind, and are called to share the Good News of God's love. We are called to bring meaning and purpose through our sharing and service to each other's lives. So in closing, I ask you: “Are you the personalization of a sponge or a light?” We know that a sponge takes in a lot of liquid and won't give it up until it is forced to do so. A light when it is turned on gives light everywhere. When Jesus used analogies in referring to human life, he spoke of the sons and daughters of God as lights of the world: “You are the light of the world.... Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and be led to glorify your Father who is in heaven.” ([Matt. 5:16](/en/Bible/Matthew/5#v16)) I hope that we may all find ways to share the light of our lives with others that will enrich both the giver and the receiver.

> _Gregory Young is pastor of St. John United Church of Christ in Germantown,Wisconsin._
{.is-info}

> “_The modern age will refuse to accept a religion which is inconsistent with facts and out of harmony with its highest concepts of truth, beauty, and goodness. The hour is striking for a rediscovery of the true and original foundatilns of present-day distorted and comptomised Christiasnity — the real life and teachings of Jesus._” ([UB 195:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p9_5))