---
title: "6. — 10."
description: "The Gateless Gate"
published: true
date: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
tags: Buddhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">1. — 5.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/15">
          <span class="pr-2">10. — 15.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="c6"></span>

## 6\. Buddha Twirls a Flower

When Buddha was in Grdhrakuta mountain he turned a flower in his fingers and held it before his listeners. Every one was silent. Only Maha-Kashapa smiled at this revelation, although he tried to control the lines of his face.

Buddha said: “I have the eye of the true teaching, the heart of Nirvana, the true aspect of non-form, and the ineffable stride of Dharma. It is not expressed by words, but especially transmitted beyond teaching. This teaching I have given to Maha-Kashapa.”

_Mumon's comment:_ Golden-faced Gautama thought he could cheat anyone. He made the good listeners as bad, and sold dog meat under the sign of mutton. And he himself thought it was wonderful. What if all the audience had laughed together? How could he have transmitted the teaching? And again, if Maha-Kashapa had not smiled, how could he have transmitted the teaching? If he says that realization can be transmitted, he is like the city slicker that cheats the country dub, and if he says it cannot be transmitted, why does he approve of Maha-Kashapa?

_At the turning of a flower_
_His disguise was exposed._
_No one in heaven or earth can surpass_
_Maha-Kashapa's wrinkled face_.

<span id="c7"></span>

## 7\. Joshu Washes the Bowl

A monk told Joshu: “I have just entered the monastery. Please teach me.”

Joshu asked: “Have you eaten your rice porridge?”

The monk replied: “I have eaten.”

Joshu said: “Then you had better wash your bowl.”

At that moment the monk was enlightened.

_Mumon's comment:_ Joshu is the man who opens his mouth and shows his heart. I doubt if this monk really saw Joshu's heart. I hope he did not mistake the bell for a pitcher.

_It is too clear and so it is hard to see._
_A dunce once searched for a fire with a lighted lantern._
_Had he known what fire was,_
_He could have cooked his rice much sooner_.

<span id="c8"></span>

## 8\. Keichu's Wheel

Getsuan said to his students: “Keichu, the first wheel-maker of China, made two wheels of fifty spokes each. Now, suppose you removed the nave uniting the spokes. What would become of the wheel? And had Keichu done this, could he be called the master wheel-maker?”

_Mumon's comment:_ If anyone can answer this question instantly, his eyes will be like a comet and his mind like a flash of lightning.

_When the hubless wheel turns,_
_Master or no master can stop it._
_It turns above heaven and below earth,_
_South, north, east, and west_.

<span id="c9"></span>

## 9\. A Buddha before History

A monk asked Seijo: “I understand that a Buddha who lived before recorded history sat in meditation for ten cycles of existence and could not realize the highest truth, and so could not become fully emancipated. Why was this so?”

Seijo replied: “Your question is self-explanatory.”

The monk asked: “Since the Buddha was meditating, why could he not fulfill Buddhahood?”

Seijo said: “He was not a Buddha.”

_Mumon's comment:_ I will allow his realization, but I will not admit his understanding. When one ignorant attains realization he is a saint. When a saint begins to understand he is ignorant.

_It is better to realize mind than body._
_When mind is realized one need not worry about body._
_When mind and body become one_
_The man is free. Then he desires no praising_.

<span id="c10"></span>

## 10\. Seizei Alone and Poor

A monk named Seizei asked of Sozan: “Seizei is alone and poor. Will you give him support?”

Sozan asked: “Seizei?”

Seizei responded: “Yes, sir.”

Sozan said: “You have Zen, the best wine in China, and already have finished three cups, and still you are saying that they did not even wet your lips.”

_Mumon's comment:_ Seizei overplayed his hand. Why was it so? Because Sozan had eyes and knew with whom to deal. Even so, I want to ask: At what point did Seizei drink wine?

_The poorest man in China,_
_The bravest man in China,_
_He barely sustains himself,_
_Yet wishes to rival the wealthiest_.


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">1. — 5.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/15">
          <span class="pr-2">10. — 15.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
