---
title: "10. — 15."
description: "The Gateless Gate"
published: true
date: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
tags: Buddhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/10">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">6. — 10.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/20">
          <span class="pr-2">16. — 20.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="c11"></span>

## 11\. Joshu Examines a Monk in Meditation

Joshu went to a place where a monk had retired to meditate and asked him: “What is, is what?”

The monk raised his fist.

Joshu replied: “Ships cannot remain where the water is too shallow.” And he left.

A few days later Joshu went again to visit the monk and asked the same question.

The monk answered the same way.

Joshu said: “Well given, well taken, well killed, well saved.” And he bowed to the monk.

_Mumon's comment:_ The raised fist was the same both times. Why is it Joshu did not admit the first and approved the second one? Where is the fault?

Whoever answers this knows that Joshu's tongue has no bone so he can use it freely. Yet perhaps Joshu is wrong. Or, through that monk, he may have discovered his mistake.

If anyone thinks that the one's insight exceeds the other's, he has no eyes.

_The light of the eyes is as a comet,_
_And Zen's activity is as lightning._
_The sword that kills the man_
_Is the sword that saves the man_.

<span id="c12"></span>

## 12\. Zuigan Calls His Own Master

Zuigan called out to himself every day: “Master.”

Then he answered himself: “Yes, sir.”

And after that he added: “Become sober.”

Again he answered: “Yes, sir.”

“And after that,” he continued, “do not be deceived by others.”

“Yes, sir; yes, sir,” he answered.

_Mumon's comment:_ Old Zuigan sells out and buys himself. He is opening a puppet show. He uses one mask to call “Master” and another that answers the master. Another mask says “Sober up” and another, “Do not be cheated by others.” If anyone clings to any of his masks, he is mistaken, yet if he imitates Zuigan, he will make himself fox-like.

_Some Zen students do not realize the true man in a mask_
_Because they recognize ego-soul._
_Ego-soul is the seed of birth and death,_
_And foolish people call it the true man_.

<span id="c13"></span>

## 13\. Tokusan Holds His Bowl

Tokusan went to the dining room from the meditation hall holding his bowl. Seppo was on duty cooking. When he met Tokusan he said: “The dinner drum is not yet beaten. Where are you going with your bowl?”

So Tokusan returned to his room.

Seppo told Ganto about this. Ganto said: “Old Tokusan did not understand ultimate truth.”

Tokusan heard of this remark and asked Ganto to come to him. “I have heard,” he said, “you are not approving my Zen.” Ganto admitted this indirectly. Tokusan said nothing.

The next day Tokusan delivered an entirely different kind of lecture to the monks. Ganto laughed and clapped his hands, saying: “I see our old man understands ultimate truth indeed. None in China can surpass him.”

_Mumon's comment:_ Speaking about ultimate truth, both Ganto and Tokusan did not even dream it. After all, they are dummies.

_Whoever understands the first truth_
_Should understand the ultimate truth_.
_The last and first,_
_Are they not the same?_

<span id="c14"></span>

## 14\. Nansen Cuts the Cat in Two

Nansen saw the monks of the eastern and western halls fighting over a cat. He seized the cat and told the monks: “If any of you say a good word, you can save the cat.”

No one answered. So Nansen boldly cut the cat in two pieces.

That evening Joshu returned and Nansen told him about this. Joshu removed his sandals and, placing them on his head, walked out.

Nansen said: “If you had been there, you could have saved the cat.”

_Mumon's comment:_ Why did Joshu put his sandals on his head? If anyone answers this question, he will understand exactly how Nansen enforced the edict. If not, he should watch his own head.

_Had Joshu been there,_
_He would have enforced the edict oppositely._
_Joshu snatches the sword_
_And Nansen begs for his life_.

<span id="c15"></span>

## 15\. Tozan's Three Blows

Tozan went to Ummon. Ummon asked him where he had come from.

Tozan said: “From Sato village.”

Ummon asked: “In what temple did you remain for the summer?”

Tozan replied: “The temple of Hoji, south of the lake.”

“When did you leave there?” asked Ummon, wondering how long Tozan would continue with such factual answers.

“The twenty-fifth of August,” answered Tozan.

Ummon said: “I should give you three blows with a stick, but today I forgive you.”

The next day Tozan bowed to Ummon and asked: “Yesterday you forgave me three blows. I do not know why you thought me wrong.”

Ummon, rebuking Tozan's spiritless responses, said: “You are good for nothing. You simply wander from one monastery to another.”

Before Ummon's words were ended Tozan was enlightened.

_Mumon's comment:_ Ummon fed Tozan good Zen food. If Tozan can digest it, Ummon may add another member to his family.

In the evening Tozan swam around in a sea of good and bad, but at dawn Ummon crushed his nut shell. After all, he wasn't so smart.

Now, I want to ask: Did Tozan deserve the three blows? If you say yes, not only Tozan but every one of you deserves them. If you say no, Ummon is speaking a lie. If you answer this question clearly, you can eat the same food as Tozan.

_The lioness teaches her cubs roughly;_
_The cubs jump and she knocks them down._
_When Ummon saw Tozan his first arrow was light;_
_His second arrow shot deep_.


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/10">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">6. — 10.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/20">
          <span class="pr-2">16. — 20.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
