---
title: "16. — 20."
description: "The Gateless Gate"
published: true
date: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
tags: Buddhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/15">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">10. — 15.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/25">
          <span class="pr-2">21. — 25.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="c16"></span>

## 16\. Bells and Robes

Ummon asked: “The world is such a wide world, why do you answer a bell and don ceremonial robes?”

_Mumon's comment:_ When one studies Zen one need not follow sound or color or form. Even though some have attained insight when hearing a voice or seeing a color or a form, this is a very common way. It is not true Zen. The real Zen student controls sound, color, form, and actualizes the truth in his everyday life.

Sound comes to the ear, the ear goes to sound. When you blot out sound and sense, what do you understand? While listening with ears one never can understand. To understand intimately one should see sound.

_When you understand, you belong to the family;_
_When you do not understand, you are a stranger._
_Those who do not understand belong to the family,_
_And when they understand they are strangers_.

<span id="c17"></span>

## 17\. The Three Calls of the Emperor's Teacher

Chu, called Kokushi, the teacher of the emperor, called to his attendant: “Oshin.”

Oshin answered: “Yes.”

Chu repeated, to test his pupil: “Oshin.”

Oshin repeated: “Yes.”

Chu called: “Oshin.”

Oshin answered: “Yes.”

Chu said: “I ought to apologize to you for all this calling, but really you ought to apologize to me.”

_Mumon's comment:_ When old Chu called Oshin three times his tongue was rotting, but when Oshin answered three times his words were brilliant. Chu was getting decrepit and lonesome, and his method of teaching was like holding a cow's head to feed it clover.

Oshin did not trouble to show his Zen either. His satisfied stomach had no desire to feast. When the country is prosperous everyone is indolent; when the home is wealthy the children are spoiled.

Now I want to ask you: Which one should apologize?

_When prison stocks are iron and have no place for the head, the prisoner is doubly in trouble.
When there is no place for Zen in the head of our generation, it is in grievous trouble.
If you try to hold up the gate and door of a falling house,
You also will be in trouble_.

<span id="c18"></span>

## 18\. Tozan's Three Pounds

A monk asked Tozan when he was weighing some flax: “What is Buddha?”

Tozan said: “This flax weighs three pounds.”

_Mumon's comment:_ Old Tozan's Zen is like a clam. The minute the shell opens you see the whole inside. However, I want to ask you: Do you see the real Tozan?

_Three pounds of flax in front of your nose,_
_Close enough, and mind is still closer._
_Whoever talks about affirmation and negation_
_Lives in the right and wrong region_.

<span id="c19"></span>

## 19\. Everyday Life Is the Path

Joshu asked Nansen: “What is the path?”

Nansen said: “Everyday life is the path.”

Joshu asked: “Can it be studied?”

Nansen said: “If you try to study, you will be far away from it.”

Joshu asked: “If I do not study, how can I know it is the path?”

Nansen said: “The path does not belong to the perception world, neither does it belong to the nonperception world. Cognition is a delusion and noncognition is senseless. If you want to reach the true path beyond doubt, place yourself in the same freedom as sky. You name it neither good nor not-good.”

At these words Joshu was enlightened.

_Mumon's comment:_ Nansen could melt Joshu's frozen doubts at once when Joshu asked his questions. I doubt though if Joshu reached the point that Nansen did. He needed thirty more years of study.

_In spring, hundreds of flowers; in autumn, a harvest moon;_
_In summer, a refreshing breeze; in winter, snow will accompany you._
_If useless things do not hang in your mind,_
_Any season is a good season for you_.

<span id="c20"></span>

## 20\. The Enlightened Man

Shogen asked: “Why does the enlightened man not stand on his feet and explain himself?” And he also said: “It is not necessary for speech to come from the tongue.”

_Mumon's comment:_ Shogen spoke plainly enough, but how many will understand? If anyone comprehends, he should come to my place and test out my big stick. Why, look here, to test real gold you must see it through fire.

_If the feet of enlightenment moved, the great ocean would overflow;_
_If that head bowed, it would look down upon the heavens._
_Such a body has no place to rest. . . ._
_Let another continue this poem_.


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/15">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">10. — 15.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/25">
          <span class="pr-2">21. — 25.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
