---
title: "36. — 40."
description: "The Gateless Gate"
published: true
date: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
tags: Buddhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/35">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">31. — 35.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/45">
          <span class="pr-2">41. — 45.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="c36"></span>

## 36\. Meeting a Zen Master on the Road

Goso said: “When you meet a Zen master on the road you cannot talk to him, you cannot face him with silence. What are you going to do?”

_Mumon's comment:_ In such a case, if you can answer him intimately, your realization will be beautiful, but if you cannot, you should look about without seeing anything.

_Meeting a Zen master on the road,_
_Face him neither with words nor silence._
_Give him an uppercut_
_And you will be called one who understands Zen_.

<span id="c37"></span>

## 37\. A Buffalo Passes Through the Enclosure

Goso said: “When a buffalo goes out of his enclosure to the edge of the abyss, his horns and his head and his hoofs all pass through, but why can't the tail also pass?”

_Mumon's comment:_ If anyone can open one eye at this point and say a word of Zen, he is qualified to repay the four gratifications, and, not only that, he can save all sentient beings under him. But if he cannot say such a word of true Zen, he should turn back to his tail.

_If the buffalo runs, he will fall into the trench;_
_If he returns, he will be butchered._
_That little tail_
_Is a very strange thing_.

<span id="c38"></span>

## 38\. An Oak Tree in the Garden

A monk asked Joshu why Bodhidharma came to China.

Joshu said: “An oak tree in the garden.”

_Mumon's comment:_ If one sees Joshu's answer clearly, there is no Shakyamuni Buddha before him and no future Buddha after him.

_Words cannot describe everything._
_The heart's message cannot be delivered in words._
_If one receives words literally, he will be lost,_
_If he tries to explain with words, he will not attain enlightenment in this life_.

<span id="c39"></span>

## 39\. Ummon's Sidetrack

A Zen student told Ummon: “Brilliancy of Buddha illuminates the whole universe.”

Before he finished the phrase Ummon asked: “You are reciting another's poem, are you not?”

“Yes,” answered the student.

“You are sidetracked,” said Ummon.

Afterwards another teacher, Shishin, asked his pupils: “At what point did that student go off the track?”

_Mumon's comment:_ If anyone perceives Ummon's particular skillfulness, he will know at what point the student was off the track, and he will be a teacher of man and Devas. If not, he cannot even perceive himself.

_When a fish meets the fishhook_
_If he is too greedy, he will be caught._
_When his mouth opens_
_His life already is lost_.

<span id="c40"></span>

## 40\. Tipping Over a Water Vase

Hyakujo wished to send a monk to open a new monastery. He told his pupils that whoever answered a question most ably would be appointed. Placing a water vase on the ground, he asked: “Who can say what this is without calling its name?”

The chief monk said: “No one can call it a wooden shoe.”

Isan, the cooking monk, tipped over the vase with his foot and went out.

Hyakujo smiled and said: “The chief monk loses.” And Isan became the master of the new monastery.

_Mumon's comment:_ Isan was brave enough, but he could not escape Hyakujo's trick. After all, he gave up a light job and took a heavy one. Why, can't you see, he took off his comfortable hat and placed himself in iron stocks.

_Giving up cooking utensils,_
_Defeating the chatterbox,_
_Though his teacher sets a barrier for him_
_His feet will tip over everything, even the Buddha_.


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/35">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">31. — 35.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/45">
          <span class="pr-2">41. — 45.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
