---
title: "41. — 45."
description: "The Gateless Gate"
published: true
date: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
tags: Buddhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/40">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">36. — 40.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/49">
          <span class="pr-2">46. — 49.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="c41"></span>

## 41\. Bodhidharma Pacifies the Mind

Bodhidharma sits facing the wall. His future successor stands in the snow and presents his severed arm to Bodhidharma. He cries: “My mind is not pacified. Master, pacify my mind.”

Bodhidharma says: “If you bring me that mind, I will pacify it for you.”

The successor says: “When I search my mind I cannot hold it.”

Bodhidharma says: “Then your mind is pacified already.”

_Mumon's comment:_ That broken-toothed old Hindu, Bodhidharma, came thousands of miles over the sea from India to China as if he had something wonderful. He is like raising waves without wind. After he remained years in China he had only one disciple and that one lost his arm and was deformed. Alas, ever since he has had brainless disciples.

_Why did Bodhidharma come to China?_
_For years monks have discussed this._
_All the troubles that have followed since_
_Came from that teacher and disciple._

<span id="c42"></span>

## 42\. The Girl Comes Out from Meditation

In the time of Buddha Shakyamuni, Manjusri went to the assemblage of the Buddhas. When he arrived there, the conference was over and each Buddha had returned to his own Buddha-land. Only one girl was yet unmoved in deep meditation.

Manjusri asked Buddha Shakyamuni how it was possible for this girl to reach this state, one which even he could not attain. “Bring her out from Samadhi and ask her yourself,” said the Buddha.

Manjusri walked around the girl three times and snapped his fingers. She still remained in meditation. So by his miracle power he transported her to a high heaven and tried his best to call her, but in vain.

Buddha Shakyamuni said: “Even a hundred thousand Manjusris could not disturb her, but below this place, past twelve hundred million countries, is a Bodhisattva, Mo-myo, seed of delusion. If he comes here, she will awaken.”

No sooner had the Buddha spoken than that Bodhisattva sprang up from the earth and bowed and paid homage to the Buddha. Buddha directed him to arouse the girl. The Bodhisattva went in front of the girl and snapped his fingers, and in that instant the girl came out from her deep meditation.

_Mumon's comment:_ Old Shakyamuni set a very poor stage. I want to ask you monks: If Manjusri, who is supposed to have been the teacher of seven Buddhas, could not bring this girl out of meditation, how then could a Bodhisattva who was a mere beginner?

If you understand this intimately, you yourself can enter the great meditation while you are living in the world of delusion.

_One could not awaken her, the other could._
_Neither are good actors._
_One wears the mask of god, one a devil's mask._
_Had both failed, the drama still would be a comedy_.

<span id="c43"></span>

## 43\. Shuzan's Short Staff

Shuzan held out his short staff and said: “If you call this a short staff, you oppose its reality. If you do not call it a short staff, you ignore the fact. Now what do you wish to call this?”

_Mumon's comment:_ If you call this a short staff, you oppose its reality. If you do not call it a short staff, you ignore the fact. It cannot be expressed with words and it cannot be expressed without words. Now say quickly what it is.

_Holding out the short staff,_
_He gave an order of life or death._
_Positive and negative interwoven,_
_Even Buddhas and patriarchs cannot escape this attack_.

<span id="c44"></span>

## 44\. Basho's Staff

Basho said to his disciple: “When you have a staff, I will give it to you. If you have no staff, I will take it away from you.”

_Mumon's comment:_ When there is no bridge over the creek the staff will help me. When I return home on a moonless night the staff will accompany me. But if you call this a staff, you will enter hell like an arrow.

_With this staff in my hand_
_I can measure the depths and shallows of the world._
_The staff supports the heavens and makes firm the earth._
_Everywhere it goes the true teaching will be spread_.

<span id="c45"></span>

## 45\. Who Is He?

Hoen said: “The past and future Buddhas, both are his servants. Who is he?”

_Mumon's comment:_ If you realize clearly who he is, it is as if you met your own father on a busy street. There is no need to ask anyone whether or not your recognition is true.

_Do not fight with another's bow and arrow._
_Do not ride another's horse._
_Do not discuss another's faults._
_Do not interfere with another's work_.


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/40">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">36. — 40.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/49">
          <span class="pr-2">46. — 49.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
