---
title: "46. — 49."
description: "The Gateless Gate"
published: true
date: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
tags: Buddhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-6T11:53:28Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/45">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">41. — 45.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="c46"></span>

## 46\. Proceed from the Top of the Pole

Sekiso asked: “How can you proceed on from the top of a hundred-foot pole?” Another Zen teacher said: “One who sits on the top of a hundred-foot pole has attained a certain height but still is not handling Zen freely. He should proceed on from there and appear with his whole body in the ten parts of the world.”

_Mumon's comment:_ One can continue his steps or turn his body freely about on the top of the pole. In either case he should be respected. I want to ask you monks, however: How will you proceed from the top of that pole? Look out!

_The man who lacks the third eye of insight_
_Will cling to the measure of the hundred feet._
_Such a man will jump from there and kill himself,_
_Like a blind man misleading other blind men_.

<span id="c47"></span>

## 47\. Three Gates of Tosotsu

Tosotsu built three barriers and made the monks pass through them. The first barrier is studying Zen. In studying Zen the aim is to see one's own true nature. Now where is your true nature?

Secondly, when one realizes his own true nature he will be free from birth and death. Now when you shut the light from your eyes and become a corpse, how can you free yourself?

Thirdly, if you free yourself from birth and death, you should know where you are. Now your body separates into the four elements. Where are you?

_Mumon's comment:_ Whoever can pass these three barriers will be a master wherever he stands. Whatever happens about him he will turn into Zen.

Otherwise he will be living on poor food and not even enough of that to satisfy himself.

_An instant realization sees endless time._
_Endless time is as one moment._
_When one comprehends the endless moment_
_He realizes the person who is seeing it_.

<span id="c48"></span>

## 48\. One Road of Kembo

A Zen pupil asked Kembo: “All Buddhas of the ten parts of the universe enter the one road of Nirvana. Where does that road begin?”

Kembo, raising his walking stick and drawing the figure one in the air, said: “Here it is.”

This pupil went to Ummon and asked the same question. Ummon, who happened to have a fan in his hand, said: “This fan will reach to the thirty-third heaven and hit the nose of the presiding deity there. It is like the Dragon Carp of the Eastern Sea tipping over the rain-cloud with his tail.”

_Mumon's comment:_ One teacher enters the deep sea and scratches the earth and raises dust. The other goes to the mountain top and raises waves that almost touch heaven. One holds, the other gives out. Each supports the profound teaching with a single hand. Kembo and Ummon are like two riders neither of whom can surpass the other. It is very difficult to find the perfect man. Frankly, neither of them know where the road starts.

_Before the first step is taken the goal is reached._
_Before the tongue is moved the speech is finished_._
_More than brilliant intuition is needed_
_To find the origin of the right road_.

<span id="c49"></span>

## 49\. Amban's Addition

Amban, a layman Zen student, said: "Mu-mon has just published forty-eight koans and called the book _Gateless Gate_. He criticizes the old patriarchs’ words and actions. I think he is very mischievous. He is like an old doughnut seller trying to catch a passerby to force his doughnuts down his mouth. The customer can neither swallow nor spit out the doughnuts, and this causes suffering. Mu-mon has annoyed everyone enough, so I think I shall add one more as a bargain. I wonder if he himself can eat this bargain. If he can, and digest it well, it will be fine, but if not, we will have to put it back into the frying pan with his forty-eight also and cook them again. Mu-mon, you eat first, before someone else does:

“Buddha, according to a sutra, once said: ‘Stop, stop. Do not speak. The ultimate truth is not even to think.’”

_Amban's comment:_ Where did that so-called teaching come from? How is it that one could not even think it? Suppose someone spoke about it then what became of it? Buddha himself was a great chatterbox and in this sutra spoke contrarily. Because of this, persons like Mu-mon appear afterwards in China and make useless doughnuts, annoying people. What shall we do after all? I will show you.

Then Amban put his palms together, folded his hands, and said: “Stop, stop. Do not speak. The ultimate truth is not even to think. And now I will make a little circle on the sutra with my finger and add that five thousand other sutras and Vimalakirti's gateless gate all are here!”

_If anyone tells you fire is light,_
_Pay no attention._
_When two thieves meet they need no introduction:_
_They recognize each other without question_.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate/45">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">41. — 45.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Gateless_Gate">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
