---
title: "Revelation And Patience"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: The Spiritual Fellowship Journal, Spiritual Fellowship, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 2000 Stephen R. Johnson<br>© 2000 The Christian Fellowship of Students of <i>The Urantia Book</i></p>

In reading _The Urantia Book_, or in pondering remarks made by fellow readers, I often ask myself two questions: (1) What methods are desirable in spreading the teachings? (2) What are reasonable expectations concerning the pace of growth of readership? Note that it is inevitable that some people will be exposed to certain or various phases of the teachings without direct contact with the book. Nevertheless, fostering study groups is basic and very important, since these study groups comprise a core educational experience for serious readers. In addition, library placements of the book, making sure the book is available in or through bookstores, and demonstrating the book at book fairs and expositions are indeed all very helpful. Making quality translations of the book available is another fundamentally important activity. And there are other methods of dissemination, such as the text of the book in electronic form made available on compact disk or even online for Internet users, with search engines included.

However, with respect to the two questions posed, some underlying principles can be delineated which may assist us at both an individual and a group level in our sharing of _The Urantia Book_ and its superlative teachings. Such things as forbearance, understanding, patience, forgiveness, kindness, and love are each important in general, and are certainly very pertinent when attempting to share revealed truth. Wisdom must be mentioned, especially that wisdom which reflects to us the receptivity and readiness of our fellows with whom we would share. It is well known that light can blind as well as guide. Though the given list of principles, or attributes, is not exhaustive, I wish to center the ensuing discussion around the issue of patience. Perhaps looking back at some previous epochal revelations will be instructive in gaining insights into patience with regard to sharing revealed truth.

## Historic Patience

The Planetary Prince's staff was comprised of graduates of the Satania mansion worlds. But the book states: “These wise beings knew better than to undertake the sudden transformation, or en masse uplifting, of the primitive races of that day. They well understood the slow evolution of the human species, and they wisely refrained from any radical attempts at modifying man's mode of life on earth.” ([UB 66:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/66#p6_3)) Advancement was approached slowly and naturally. Notwithstanding the acceleration of the evolution of human society brought about by these Dalamatia teachers, “Their motive was progression by evolution and not revolution by revelation.” ([UB 66:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/66#p6_6)) These beings purposed to work within the fundamental modus operandi of growth on our planet's evolution to achieve desirable changes over time. Overteaching and over enlightenment result in confusion and dismay, and tend to rob the recipients of what enlightenment they do possess. Often we must patiently await further experience to accrue for the requisite receptivity to ripen in our fellows before sharing certain gifts of truth and understanding we ourselves possess. In this regard we might remember: “Whet the appetites of your associates for truth; give advice only when it is asked for.” ([UB 48:7.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p7_16))

> _Overteaching and over enlightenment result in confusion and dismay, and tend to rob the recipients of what enlightenment they do possess. Often we must patiently await further experience to accrue for the requisite receptivity to ripen in our fellows before sharing certain gifts of truth and understanding we ourselves possess._

Patience was clearly a problem for Adam and Eve. They began their mission under difficult and complex circumstances. The planet is described as experimental, rebellion-seared, and isolated. This Material Son and Daughter had unenviable tasks confronting them, since it is stated: “No Adam of the planetary service was ever set down on a more difficult world; the obstacles seemed insuperable and the problems beyond creature solution.” ([UB 75:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/75#p1_3)) Words such as “tremendous sense of loneliness” and “consternation” are used to describe their condition. However, success would have come to Adam and Eve “had they been more farseeing and patient. ...they were not willing to settle down to the long, long endurance test.” ([UB 75:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/75#p1_6)) How many of us stand here from time to time with the fires of the truths of the Fifth Epochal Revelation burning in our hearts! Perhaps endurance is another facet of dealing with and wisely sharing revealed truth. The quality of the believers rather than the quantity seems to be comparatively more important in building a foundation for subsequent long-term steady and stable growth. Jesus well knew this principle, and it was borne out in his experiences before and after he fed the five thousand. Even though there are few if any short-term solutions to the manifold problems of our planet, it's probably helpful to remember that “The acts of today are the destiny of tomorrow.” ([UB 48:7.26](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p7_26))

In a paper on Machiventa Melchizedek it is stated that “You who today enjoy the advantages of the art of printing little understand how difficult it was to perpetuate truth during these earlier times.” ([UB 93:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p7_4)) However, the observation is also made that “A new revelation is always contaminated by the older evolutionary beliefs.” ([UB 93:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p7_4)) This statement is made without qualification as to whether the revelation is in printed form or not. Paul spearheaded the early and rapid spread of Christianity and the gospel about the risen Christ. He was a shrewd theological trader. We are told that “The New Testament is a superb Christian document, but it is only meagerly Jesusonian.” ([UB 196:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p2_1)) The fact that we have a copyrighted book for the Fifth Epochal Revelation is a clear advantage, but this doesn't necessarily guarantee the purity of its application over time. Human beings are adaptive, and they will often take a good idea and bend it so that it will more “comfortably” fit within their existing belief structure and conceptual framework. But the quality of the lives of those who sincerely and honestly pursue the teachings of _The Urantia Book_ will strongly tend to demonstrate the authenticity of its truths. Lives that are inspired by Jesus' life and how he lived it, and loyal lives, are the only external “proof” of the integrity, veracity, and goodness of this newest epochal revelation. After all, Jesus taught that if we love one another as he loves us, then all persons would know that we are his disciples. If we can temper our enthusiasm with patience, we will be the more wise, and probably be able to achieve a better understanding of and love for our fellow mortals. This would lead to the growth of peace, notwithstanding any lack of philosophical uniformity. I doubt that revelation is an end in itself, but rather a means to help bring about progress and growth at an individual level, a planetary level, a system level, and so forth.

## Viewing the Future

Assume, for the sake of argument, that the readership of _The Urantia Book_ will have a constant growth rate of 50% every twenty years. This rate of growth might seem conservative. It is interesting to note, however, that given this growth rate, there would be approximately 1.8 billion readers in the world by the year 2500 . (This calculation is based on an estimate of the number of readers in 1986.) These, of course, are just numbers. There are many imponderable factors and considerations not accounted for in this simple calculation. In a paper entitled “Personalities of the Grand Universe,” it is pointed out that not all personalities are revealed. The Mighty Messenger states: “Such conceptual expansion would hardly be desirable as it would deprive the thinking mortals of the next thousand years of that stimulus to creative speculation which these partially revealed concepts supply. It is best that man not have an overrevelation.” ([UB 30:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p0_2)) One might deduce from this that there's ample time for the growth and spread of the Fifth Epochal Revelation. Also, we are reminded that the Planetary Prince's staff eschewed overteaching and over enlightenment in the comment about “overrevelation.” In terms of revealed truth there seems to be a “law of readiness” which applies to both individuals and worlds, and it seems to be highly correlated with the evolutionary process.

> _How many of us stand here from time to time with the fires of the truths of the Fifth Epochal Revelation burning in our hearts! Perhaps endurance is another facet of dealing with and wisely sharing revealed truth. The quality of the believers rather than the quantity seems to be comparatively more important in building a foundation for subsequent long-term steady and stable growth._

And finally, in a paper entitled “Planetary Mortal Epochs,” it is stated: “The only technique for accelerating the natural trend of social evolution is that of applying spiritual pressure from above, thus augmenting moral insight while enhancing the soul capacity of every mortal to understand and love every other mortal.” ([UB 52:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/52#p6_7))

## Epilogue

We have embarked upon the so-called information age. Many segments of society have been significantly impacted by the availability of rapidly advancing computer and communications technology. However, it should be kept in mind that a parcel of information doesn't necessarily comprise or contain true knowledge. Further, these technologies and their associated applications are not the actual _engine_ of social evolution. True intellectual achievement and genuine spiritual attainment are much more basic to the progressive evolution of human society. Many techniques can now be employed using computer and communications technology in a clever manner to present or impart material that may or may not be of value. Regardless, cleverness is usually not a substitute for thoughtful and enlightened wisdom.

> _Stephen R. Johnson has an undergraduate degree and considerable graduate workinmathematics. Most of his working career was spent in a large aerospace firm as a programmer and system analyst, dealing with areas of computer aided design and computer aided manufacturing. He has been a student of_ The Urantia Book _for over twemty four years._
{.is-info}