---
title: "The Universe Around Us — Introduction"
description: 
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Cosmology, Astronomy
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sir_James_Jeans/The_Universe_Around_Us/Preface">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Preface</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sir_James_Jeans/The_Universe_Around_Us#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sir_James_Jeans/The_Universe_Around_Us/1">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter I — Exploring the Sky</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Author: **Sir James Jeans, M. A., D. Sc., Sc. D., LL. D., F. R. S.**

<span id="p1">[<sup><small>p. 1</small></sup>]</span>

## The Study of Astronomy 

On the evening of January 7, 1610, a fateful day for the human race, Galileo Galilei, Professor of Mathematics in the University of Padua, sat in front of a telescope he had made with his own hands. 

More than three centuries previously, Roger Bacon, the inventor of spectacles, had explained how a telescope could be constructed so as “to make the stars appear as near as we please.” He had shewn how a lens could be so shaped that it would collect all the rays of light falling on it from a distant object, bend them until they met in a focus and then pass them on through the pupil of the eye on to the retina. Such an instrument would increase the power of the human eye, just as an ear trumpet increases the power of the human ear by collecting all the waves of sound which fall on a large aperture, bending them, and passing them through the orifice of the ear on to the ear drum. 

Yet it was not until 1608 that the first telescope had been constructed by Lippershey, a Flemish spectacle-maker. On hearing of this instrument, Galileo had set to work to discover the principles of its construction and had soon made himself a telescope far better than the original. His instrument had created no small sensation in Italy. Such extraordinary stories had been told of its powers that he had been commanded to take it to Venice and exhibit it to the Doge and Senate. The citizens of Venice had then seen the most aged of their Senators climbing the highest bell-towers to spy through the telescope at ships which were too far out <span id="p2">[<sup><small>p. 2</small></sup>]</span> at sea to be seen at all without its help. The telescope admitted about a hundred times as much light as the unaided human eye, and, according to Galileo, it shewed an object at fifty miles as clearly as if it were only five miles away. 

Perhaps it need hardly be said that this is quite insignificant in comparison with the power of modern instruments. The telescope of 100-inch aperture at Mount Wilson, California, the largest at present in existence, admits 2500 times as much light as Galileo's tiny instrument, and so 250,000 times as much light as the unaided eye. It is hoped that a 200-inch telescope will shortly be built in California; this will admit four times as much light as the 100-inch instrument, or about a million times as much light as the unaided eye. 

The absorbing interest of his new instrument had almost driven from Galileo's mind a problem to which he had at one time given much thought. Over two thousand years previously, Pythagoras and Philolaus had taught that the earth is not fixed in space but rotates on its axis every twenty-four hours, thus causing the alternation of day and night. Aristarchus of Samos, perhaps the greatest of all the Greek mathematicians, had further maintained that the earth not only turned on its axis, but also described a yearly journey round the sun, this being the cause of the cycle of the seasons. 

Then these doctrines had fallen into disfavour. Aristotle had pronounced against them, asserting that the earth formed a fixed centre to the universe. Later Ptolemy had explained the tracks of the planets across the sky in terms of a complicated system of cycles and epicycles; the planets moved in circular paths around moving points, which themselves moved in <span id="p3">[<sup><small>p. 3</small></sup>]</span> circles around an immoveable earth. The Church had given its sanction and active support to these doctrines. Indeed, it is difficult to see what else it could have done, for it seemed almost impious to suppose that the great drama of man's fall and redemption, in which the Son of God had Himself taken part, could have been enacted on any lesser stage than the very centre of the Universe. 

Yet, even in the Church, the doctrine had not gained universal acceptance. Oresme, Bishop of Lisieux, and Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa, had both declared against it, the latter writing in 1440: 

> I have long considered that this earth is not fixed, but moves as do the other stars. To my mind the earth turns upon its axis once every day and night. 

At a later date those who held these views incurred the active hostility of the Church, and in 1600 Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake. He had written : 

> It has seemed to me unworthy of the divine goodness and power to create a finite world, when able to produce beside it another and others infinite; so that I have declared that there are endless particular worlds similar to this of the earth; with Pythagoras I regard it as a star, and similar to it are the moon, the planets and other stars, which are infinite in number, and all these bodies are worlds. 

The most weighty attack on orthodox doctrine had, however, been delivered neither by theologians nor philosophers, but by the Polish astronomer, Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543). In his great work _De revolutionibus orbium coelestium_ Copernicus had shewn that Ptolemy's elaborate structure of cycles and epicycles was unnecessary, because the tracks of the planets across the sky could be explained quite simply <span id="p4">[<sup><small>p. 4</small></sup>]</span> by supposing that the earth and the planets all moved round a fixed central sun. The sixty-six years which had elapsed since this book was published had seen these theories hotly debated, but they were still neither proved nor disproved. 

Galileo had already found that his new telescope provided a means of testing astronomical theories. As soon as he had turned it on to the Milky Way, a whole crowd of legends and fables as to its nature and structure had vanished into thin air; it proved to be nothing more than a swarm of faint stars scattered like golden dust on the black background of the sky. Another glance through the telescope had disclosed the true nature of the moon. It had on it mountains which cast shadows, and so proved, as Giordano Bruno had maintained, to be a world like our own. What if the telescope should now in some way prove able to decide between the orthodox doctrine that the earth formed the hub of the universe, and the new doctrine that the earth was only one of a number of bodies, all circling round the sun like moths round a candle- flame? 

And now Galileo catches Jupiter in the field of his telescope and sees four small bodies circling around the great mass of the planet — like moths round a candle-flame. What he sees is an exact replica of the solar system as imagined by Copernicus, and it provides direct visual proof that such systems are at least not alien to the architectural plan of the universe. On January 30th he writes to Belisario Vinta that these small bodies move round the far greater mass of Jupiter “just as Venus and Mercury, and perhaps the other planets, move round the sun.” 

Any lingering doubts that Galileo may have felt as <span id="p5">[<sup><small>p. 5</small></sup>]</span> to the significance of his discovery are removed nine months later when he observes the phases of Venus. Venus might have been self-luminous, in which case she would always appear as a full circle of light. If she were not self-luminous but moved in a Ptolemaic epicycle, then, as Ptolemy had himself pointed out, she could never shew more than half her surface illuminated. On the other hand, the Copernican view of the solar system required that both Venus and Mercury should exhibit “phases” like those of the moon, their shining surfaces ranging in appearance from crescent-shape through half moon to full moon, and then back through half moon to crescent-shape. That such phases were not shewn by Venus had indeed been urged as an objection to the Copernican theory. 

Galileo's telescope now shews that, as Copernicus had foretold, Venus passes through the full cycle of phases, so that, in Galileo's own words, we “are now supplied with a determination most conclusive, and appealing to the evidence of our senses, of two very important problems, which up to this day have been discussed by the greatest intellects with different conclusions. One is that the planets are not self-luminous. The other is that we are absolutely compelled to say that Venus, and Mercury also, revolve around the sun, as do also all the rest of the planets, a truth believed indeed by the Pythagorean school, by Copernicus, and by Kepler, but never proved by the evidence of our senses, as is now proved in the case of Venus and Mercury.” 

These discoveries of Galileo made it clear that Aristotle, Ptolemy and the majority of those who had thought about these things in the last 2000 years had been utterly and hopelessly wrong. In estimating his <span id="p6">[<sup><small>p. 6</small></sup>]</span> position in the universe, man had up to now been guided mainly by his own desires, and his self-esteem; long fed on boundless hopes, he had spurned the simpler fare offered by patient scientific thought. Inexorable facts now dethroned him from his self- arrogated station at the centre of the universe ; hence- forth he must reconcile himself to the humble position of the inhabitant of a speck of dust, and adjust his views on the meaning of human life accordingly. 

The adjustment was not made at once. Human vanity, reinforced by the authority of the Church, contrived to make a rough road for those who dared draw attention to the earth's insignificant position in the universe. Galileo was forced to abjure his beliefs. Well on into the eighteenth century the ancient University of Paris taught that the motion of the earth round the sun was a convenient but false hypothesis, while the newer American Universities of Harvard and Yale taught the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems of astronomy side by side as though they were equally tenable. Yet men could not keep their heads buried in the sand for ever, and when at last its full implications were accepted, the revolution of thought initiated by Galileo's observations of January 7, 1610, proved to be the most catastrophic in the history of the race. The cataclysm was not confined to the realms of abstract thought; henceforth human existence itself was to appear in a new light, and human aims and aspirations would be judged from a different standpoint. 

This oft-told story has been told once again, in the hope that it may serve to explain some of the interest taken in astronomy to-day. The more mundane sciences prove their worth by adding to the amenities and <span id="p7">[<sup><small>p. 7</small></sup>]</span> pleasures of life, or by alleviating pain or distress, but it may well be asked what reward astronomy has to offer. Why does the astronomer devote arduous nights, and still more arduous days, to studying the structure, motions and changes of bodies so remote that they can have no conceivable influence on human life? 

In part at least the answer would seem to be that many have begun to suspect that the astronomy of to-day, like that of Galileo, may have something to say on the enthralling question of the relation of human life to the universe in which it is placed, and on the beginnings, meaning and destiny of the human race. Bede records how, some twelve centuries ago, human life was compared in poetic simile to the flight of a bird through a warm hall in which men sit feasting, while the winter storms rage without. 

> The bird is safe from the tempest for a brief moment, but immediately passes from winter to winter again. So man's life appears for a little while, but of what is to follow, or of what went before, we know nothing. If, therefore, a new doctrine tells us something certain, it seems to deserve to be followed. 

These words, originally spoken in advocacy of the Christian religion, describe what is perhaps the main interest of astronomy to-day. Man “only knowing Life's little lantern between dark and dark” wishes to probe further into the past and future than his brief span of life permits. He wishes to see the universe as it existed before man was, as it will be after the last man has passed again into the darkness from which he came. The wish does not originate solely in mere intellectual curiosity, in the desire to <span id="p8">[<sup><small>p. 8</small></sup>]</span> see over the next range of mountains, the desire to attain a summit commanding a wide view, even if it be only of a promised land which he may never hope himself to enter; it has deeper roots and a more personal interest. Before he can understand himself, man must first understand the universe from which all his sense perceptions are drawn. He wishes to explore the universe, both in space and time, because he himself forms part of it, and it forms part of him. 

We may well admit that science cannot at present hope to say anything final on the questions of human existence and human destiny, but this is no justification for not becoming acquainted with the best that it has to offer. It is rare indeed for science to give a final “Yes” or “No” answer to any question propounded to her. When we are able to put a question in such a definite form that either of these answers could be given in reply, we are generally already in a position to supply the answer ourselves. Science advances, rather by providing a succession of approximations to the truth, each more accurate than the last, but each capable of endless degrees of higher accuracy. To the question, “where does man stand in the universe?” the first attempt at an answer, at any rate in recent times, was provided by the astronomy of Ptolemy: “at the centre.” Galileo's telescope provided the next, and incomparably better, approximation: “man's home in space is only one of a number of small bodies revolving round a huge central sun.” Nineteenth-century astronomy swung the pendulum still further in the same direction, saying: "there are millions of stars in the sky, each similar to our sun, each doubtless surrounded, like our sun, by a family of planets on which life may be kept in <span id="p9">[<sup><small>p. 9</small></sup>]</span> being by the light and heat received from its sun." Twentieth-century astronomy suggests, as we shall see, that the nineteenth century had swung the pendulum too far; life now seems to be more of a rarity than our fathers thought, or would have thought if they had given free play to their intellects. 

We are setting out to explain the approximation to the truth provided by twentieth-century astronomy. No doubt it is not the final truth, but it is a step on towards it, and unless we are greatly in error it is very much nearer to the truth than was the teaching of nineteenth-century astronomy. It claims to be nearer the truth, not because the twentieth-century astronomer claims to be better at guessing than his predecessors of the nineteenth century, but because hB\ has incomparably more facts at his disposal. Guessing' has gone out of fashion in science; it was at best a poor substitute for knowledge, and modern science/ eschewing guessing severely, confines itself, except on very rare occasions, to ascertained facts and the inferences which, so far as can be seen, follow unequivocally from them. 

It would of course be futile to pretend that the whole interest of astronomy centres round the questions just mentioned. Astronomy offers at least three other groups of interest which may be described as utilitarian, scientific and aesthetic. 

At first astronomy, like other sciences, was studied for mainly utilitarian reasons. It provided measures of time, and enabled mankind to keep a tally on the flight of the seasons; it taught him to find his way across the trackless desert, and later, across the trackless ocean. In the guise of astrology, it held out hopes of telling him his future. There was nothing intrinsically <span id="p10">[<sup><small>p. 10</small></sup>]</span> absurd in this, for even to-day the astronomer is largely occupied with foretelling the future movements of the heavenly bodies, although not of human affairs — a considerable part of the present book will consist of an attempt to foretell the future, and predict the final end, of the material universe. Where the astrologers went wrong was in supposing that terrestrial empires, kings and individuals formed such important items in the scheme of the universe that the motions of the heavenly bodies could be intimately bound up with their fates. As soon as man began to realise, even faintly, his own insignificance in the universe, astrology died a natural and inevitable death. 

The utilitarian aspect of astronomy has by now shrunk to very modest proportions. The national observatories still broadcast the time of day, and help to guide ships across the ocean, but the centre of astronomical interest has shifted so completely that the remotest of nebulae arouse incomparably more enthusiasm than “clock-stars,” and the average astronomer totally neglects our nearest neighbours in space, the planets, for stars so distant that their light takes hundreds, thousands, or even millions, of years to reach us. 

Recently, astronomy has acquired a new scientific interest through establishing its position as an integral part of the general body of science. The various sciences can no longer be treated as distinct; scientific discovery advances along a continuous front which extends unbroken from electrons of a fraction of a millionth of a millionth of an inch in diameter, to nebulae whose diameters are measured in hundreds of thousands of millions of millions of miles. A gain of astronomical knowledge may add to our knowledge <span id="p11">[<sup><small>p. 11</small></sup>]</span> of physics and chemistry, and vice versa. The stars have long ago ceased to be treated as mere points of light. Each is now regarded as an experiment on a heroic scale, a high temperature crucible in which nature herself operates with ranges of temperature and pressure far beyond those available in our laboratories, and permits us to watch the results. In so doing, we may happen upon properties of matter which have eluded the terrestrial physicist, owing to the small range of physical conditions at his command. For instance matter exists in nebulae with a density at least a million times lower than anything we can approach on earth, and in certain stars at a density nearly a million times greater. How can we expect to understand the whole nature of matter from laboratory experiments in which we can command only one part in a million million of the whole range of density known to nature? 

Yet for each one who feels the purely scientific appeal of astronomy, there are probably a dozen who are attracted by its aesthetic appeal. Many even of those who seek after knowledge for its own sake, driven by that intellectual curiosity which provides the fundamental distinction between themselves and the beasts, find their main interest in astronomy, as the most poetical and the most aesthetically gratifying of the sciences. They want to exercise their faculties and imaginations on something remote from everyday trivialities, to find an occasional respite from “the long littleness of life,” and they satisfy their desires in contemplating the serene immensities of the outer universe. To many, astronomy provides something of the vision without which the people perish. 

Before proceeding to describe the results of the <span id="p12">[<sup><small>p. 12</small></sup>]</span> modern astronomer's survey of the sky, let us try to envisage in its proper perspective the platform from which his observations are made. 

Later on, we shall see how the earth was born out of the sun, something like two thousand millions of years ago. It was born in a form in which we should find it hard to recognise the solid earth of to-day with its seas and rivers, its rich vegetation and overflowing life. Our home in space came into being as a globe of intensely hot gas on which no life of any kind could either gain or retain a foothold. 

Gradually this globe of gas cools down, becoming first liquid, then plastic. Finally its outer crust solidifies, rocks and mountains forming a permanent record of the irregularities of its earlier plastic form. Vapours condense into liquids, and rivers and oceans come into being, while the “permanent” gases form an atmosphere. Gradually the earth assumes a condition suited to the advent of life, which finally appears, we know not how, whence or why. 

It is not easy to estimate the time since life first appeared on earth, but it can hardly have been more than a small fraction of the whole 2000 million years of the earth's existence. Still, there was probably life on earth at least 300 million years ago. The first life appears to have been wholly aquatic, but gradually fishes changed into reptiles, reptiles into mammals, and finally man emerged from mammals. The evidence favours a period of about 300,000 years ago for this last event. Thus life has inhabited the earth for only a fraction of its existence, and man for only a tiny fraction of this fraction. To put it in another way, the astronomical time-scale is incomparably longer than the human time-scale — the generations of man, and <span id="p13">[<sup><small>p. 13</small></sup>]</span> even the whole of human existence, are only ticks of the astronomer's clock. 

Most of the 10,000 or so of generations of men who connect us up with our ape-like ancestry must have lived lives which did not differ greatly from those of their animal predecessors. Hunting, fishing and warfare filled their lives, leaving but little time or opportunity for intellectual contemplation. Then, at last, man began to awake from his long intellectual slumber, and, as civilisation slowly dawned, to feel the need for occupations other than the mere feeding and clothing of his body. He began to discover revelations of infinite beauty in the grace of the human form or the play of light on the myriad-smiling sea, which he tried to perpetuate in carefully chiselled marble or exquisitely chosen words. He began to experiment with metals and herbs, and with the effects of fire and water. He began to notice, and try to understand, the motions of the heavenly bodies, for to those who could read the writing in the sky, the nightly rising and setting of the stars and planets provided evidence that beyond the confines of the earth lay an unknown universe built on a far grander scale. 

In this way the arts and sciences came to earth, bringing astronomy with them. We cannot quite say when, but compared even with the age of the human race, they came but yesterday, while in comparison with the whole age of the earth, their age is but a twinkling of the eye. 

Scientific astronomy, as distinguished from mere star-gazing, can hardly claim an age of more than 3000 years. It is less than this since Pythagoras, Aristarchus and others explained that the earth moved around a fixed sun. Yet the really significant figure for  <span id="p14">[<sup><small>p. 14</small></sup>]</span> our present purpose is not so much the time since men began to make conjectures about the structure of the universe, as the time since they began to unravel its true structure by the help of ascertained fact. The important length of time is that which has elapsed since that evening in 1610 when Galileo first turned his telescope on to Jupiter — a mere three centuries or so. 

We begin to grasp the true significance of these round-number estimates when we re-write them in tabular form. We have: 

Ages | Time
--- | ---:
Age of earth | about 2,000,000,000 years 
Age of life on earth | „ 300,000,000 „ 
Age of man on earth | „ 300,000 „ 
Age of astronomical science | „ 3,000 „ 
Age of telescopic astronomy | „ 300 „ 

When the various figures are displayed in this form we see what a very recent phenomenon astronomy is. Its total age is only a hundredth part of the age of man, only a hundred-thousandth part of the time that life has inhabited the earth. During 99,999 parts out of the 100,000 of its existence, life on earth was hardly concerned about anything beyond the earth. But whereas the past of astronomy is to be measured on the human time-scale, a hundred generations or so of men, there is every reason to expect that its future will be measured on the astronomical time-scale. We shall discuss the probable future stretching before the human race in a later chapter. For the moment it is not unreasonable to suppose that this future will probably be terminated by astronomical causes, so that its length is to be measured on the astronomical time-scale. As the earth has already existed for 2000 million years, it is a priori reasonable to suppose that it will exist for at least something of the order of 2000 million years yet to come, and humanity and <span id="p15">[<sup><small>p. 15</small></sup>]</span> astronomy with it. Actually we shall find reasons for expecting it to last far longer than this. But if once it is conceded that its future life is to be estimated on the astronomical time-scale, no matter in what exact way, we see that astronomy is still at the very opening of its existence. This is why its message can claim no finality — we are not describing the mature convictions of a man, so much as the first impressions of a new- born babe which is just opening its eyes. Even so they are better than the idle introspective dreamings in which it indulged before it had learned to look around itself and away from itself. 

And so we set out to learn what astronomy has to tell us about the universe in which we live our lives. Our inquiry will not be entirely limited to this one science. We shall call upon other sciences, physics, chemistry and geology, as well as the more closely allied sciences of astrophysics and cosmogony, to give help, when they can, in interpreting the message of observational astronomy. The information we shall obtain will be fragmentary. If it must be compared to anything, let it be to the pieces of a jig-saw puzzle. Could we get hold of all the pieces, they would, we are confident, form a single complete consistent picture, but many of them are still missing. It is too much to hope that the incomplete series of pieces we have already found will disclose the whole picture, but we may at least collect them together, arrange them in some sort of methodical order, fit together pieces which are obviously contiguous, and perhaps hazard a guess as to what the finished picture will prove to be when all its pieces have been found and finally fitted together. 

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sir_James_Jeans/The_Universe_Around_Us/Preface">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Preface</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sir_James_Jeans/The_Universe_Around_Us#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sir_James_Jeans/The_Universe_Around_Us/1">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter I — Exploring the Sky</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>