---
title: "On the Giants"
description: "The Works of Philo of Alexandria"
published: true
date: 2025-2-7T10:38:1Z
tags: Judaism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-7T10:38:1Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/The_Works_Philo_of_Alexandria/On_the_Posterity_of_Cain_and_His_Exile">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">On the Posterity of Cain and His Exile</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/The_Works_Philo_of_Alexandria">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/The_Works_Philo_of_Alexandria/On_the_Unchangableness_of_God">
          <span class="pr-2">On the Unchangableness of God</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## INTRODUCTION

Emil Schürer writes (_The Literature of the Jewish People in the Time of Jesus_, pp. 329-331):

> While this shorter explanation in a catechetical form \[Questions and Answers on Genesis\] was intended for more extensive circles, Philo's special and chief scientific work is his _large allegorical commentary on Genesis_, Νομων ιερων αλληγοριαι (such is the title given it in Euseb. _Hist. eccl._ ii. 18. 1, and Photius, _Bibliotheca cod._ 103. Comp. also Origen, _Comment. in Matth._ vol. xvii. c. 17; _contra Celsum_, iv. 51). These two works frequently approximate each other as to their contents. For in the _Quaestiones et solutiones_ also, the deeper allegorical significance is given as well as the literal meaning. In the great allegorical commentary on the contrary, the allegorical interpretation exclusively prevails. The deeper allegorical sense of the sacred letter is settled in extensive and prolix discussion, which by reason of the copious adducting of parallel passages often seems to wander from the text. Thus the entire exegetic method, with its draggin in of the most heterogeneous passages in elucidation of the idea supposed to exist in the text, forcibly recalls the method of Rabbinical Midrash. This allegorical interpretation however has with all its arbitrariness, its rules and laws, the allegorical meaning as once settled for certain persons, objects and events being afterwards adhered to with tolerable consistency. Especially is it _a fundamental thought_, from which the exposition is everywhere deduced, _that the history of mankind as related in Genesis is in reality nothing else than a system of psychology and ethic_. The different individuals, who here make their appearance, denote the different states of soul (τροποι της ψυχης) which occur among men. To analyse these in their variety and their relations both to each other and to the Deity and the world of sense, and thence to deduce moral doctrines, is the special aim of this great allegorical commentary. Thus we perceive at the same time, that Philo's chief interest is _not_—as might from the whole plan of his system be supposed—speculative theology for its own sake, but on the contrary psychology and ethic. To judge from his ultimate purpose he is not a speculative theologian, but a psychologist and moralist (comp. note 183).
> 
> The commentary at first follows the text of Genesis verse by verse. Afterwards single sections are selected, and some of them so fully treated, as to grow into regular monographs. Thus _e.g._ Philo takes occasion from the history of Noah to write two books on drunkenness (περι μεθης), which he does with such thoroughness, that a collection of the opinions of other philosophers on this subject filled the first of these lost books (Mangey, i. 357).
> 
> The work, as we have it, begins at Gen. ii. 1; Και ετελεσθησαν οι ουρανοι και η γη. The creation of the world is therefore not treated of. For the composition, _De opificio mundi_, which precedes it in our editions, is a work of an entirely different character, being no allegorical commentary on the history of the creation, but a statement of that history itself. Nor does the first book of the _Legum allegoriae_ by any means join on to the work _De opificio mundi_; for the former begins at Gen. ii. 1, while in _De opif. mundi_, the creation of _man_ also, according to Gen. ii, is already dealt with. Hence—as Gfrörer rightly asserts in answer to Dähne—the allegorical commentary cannot be combined with _De opif. mundi_ as though the two were but parts of the same work. At most may the question be raised, whether Philo did not also write an allegorical commentary on Gen. i. This is however improbable. For the allegorical commentary proposes to treat of the history of _mankind_, and this does not begin till Gen. ii. 1. Nor need the abrupt commencement of _Leg. alleg._ i seem strange, since this manner of starting at once with the text to be expounded, quite corresponds with the method of Rabbinical Midrash. The later books too of Philo's own commentary begin in fact in the same abrupt manner. In our manuscripts and editions only the first books bear the title belonging to the whole work, Νομων ιερων αλληγοριαι. All the later books have special titles, a circumstance which gives the appearance of their being independent works. In truth however _all that is contained in Mangey's first vol.—_viz. the works which here follow—belongs to the book in question (with the sole exception of _De opificio mundi_).

Emil Schürer comments: “Περι γιγαντων. _De gigantibus_ (Mangey, i. 262-272). On Gen. vi. 1-4. Οτι ατρεπτον το θειον. _Quod deus sit immutabilis_ (Mangey, i. 272-299). On Gen. vi. 4-12. These two paragraphs, which are in our editions separated, form together but _one_ book. Hence Johannes Monachus ineditus cites passages from the latter paragraph with the formula εκ του περι γιγαντων (Mangey, i. 262, note, 272, note). Euseb. _H. E._ ii. 18. 4: περι γιγαντων η \[elsewhere και\] περι του μη τρεπεσθαι το θειον.” (_The Literature of the Jewish People in the Time of Jesus_, pp. 334-335)

J. H. A. Hart writes (_The Jewish Quarterly Review_ Original Series 17, pp. 95-97):

> The division between the tracts _Concerning Giants_ and _That the Divine is unchangeable_ seems hardly warranted, as the former ends with the words “Having said thus much—sufficient for the present at any rate—concerning the giants, let us turn to the sequel of the narrative. And it is this.” It is not uncommon to find two different subjects treated in the same tract (cf. e. g. _Concerning the Progeny of Cain, etc_.).
> 
> The “many men” of Gen. vi. 1 are obviously impious men, because their children are daughters. The story of the union of these daughters with the angels of God is not a myth. Just as the universe is animated (εψυχωσθαι) throughout all its parts, earth, water, fire (especially, it is reported, in Macedonia) and heaven (with stars), so the air must be filled with living things, invisible to us like the element in which they live. What Moses calls angels other philosophers call demons, souls flying about in the air. Surely air which gives life to all creatures has a natural right to a population of its own. Well, then, some souls have descended into bodies and some of them are able to resist the current of human life and fly up again: these are the souls of true philosophers, who from beginning to end practise dying to bodily life (βιου) that they may share the bodiless and incorruptible life (ζωης). Other souls, again, disdained union with any part of earth, and these hallowed souls, who are concerned with the service of the Father, the Creator is wont to use as servants and ministers for the protection (επιστασιαν) of mortals. These are of course the good angels, angels worthy of the name. There are bad angels also, of whom the many speak as bad demons or souls, and it is they who descended to converse with the daughters of men.
> 
> Here Philo is once more in agreement with the Stoics, who held that the souls of the dead (or of the righteous dead) existed in the air until the great conflagration in which the universe was to be consumed, and that there were also demons sympathetic with men, watchers (εποπτας) of human affairs (_Diog_. vii. 151, 156, 157). The statement that the universe is alive (εμψυχον) and full of demons is attributed to Thales and Heraclitus. Philo expounds again his doctrine of demons or angels in _de Somn_. i. §§ 134ff. in connexion with Jacob's dream of a ladder reaching from earth to heaven. The body he regards, with Plato, as a prison or tomb, and the purest and best souls or spirits are those which never yearned for earthly life, the proconsuls of the All-ruler, who correspond to the lesser deities with whom Plato surrounds the Creator (_Tim_. 41 A).
> 
> But in evil men God's spirit cannot remain permanently (ου καταμενει, Gen. vi. 3). It remains indeed on occasion “For who is so devoid of reason or soul as never, willing or unwilling, of his own will or without, to receive a conception of the Best? Nay, indeed, even upon the accursed there alights often of a sudden the appearance of the Good (του καλου), but they cannot appropriate it or keep it with themselves. For it departs, removing straightway, renouncing the stranger in the land who has forsaken (εκδεδιητημενους) law and right, to whom it would never have come at all save to convict them as having chosen base things instead of honourable.”
> 
> Such men are flesh; and the fleshy nature is the foundation of ignorance. But the Law, in the ordinance against unlawful unions, commands us to despise the flesh (Lev. xviii. 6). A man that is truly a man—such an one as one of the ancients (Diogenes the Cynic) sought with lighted lantern at noon—will not approach that which belongs to his flesh. The emphatic repetition of the word _man_ in the (Greek) text of the passage shows that it is not the ordinary human being but the virtuous man who is meant (ανθρωπος ανθρωπος προς παντα οικειον σαρκος αυτου ου προσελευσεται). They who fail to keep this law degrade themselves, “reveal their unseemliness”; and such are the self-styled wise who sell wisdom and cheapen their wares like cheapjacks in the market.
> 
> The giants who issue from this union are not those of Greek mythology: “Moses wishes to impress upon you that some are men of earth, others men of heaven, and others men of God. The men of earth are the hunters of bodily pleasures, who practise the use and enjoyment thereof and provide whatever contributes to each one of them. The men of heaven are all artists, craftsmen and scholars; for the heavenly part of ourselves—the mind—practises general education, and the other arts, one and all, sharpening and whetting, exercising and training itself in the ideal things (τοις νοητοις). The men of God are priests and prophets who disdained any state connected with this world . . . and have emigrated to the ideal world where they dwell, enrolled in the state of incorruptible and bodiless ideas.” For example, Abram, “lofty father,” is a man of heaven and rises to become Abraham “elect father of sound,” that is a man of God (Gen. xvii. 1). Whereas the children of earth, like Nebrod (Gen. x. 8), are deserters degraded from their proper rank to the lifeless and motionless nature of flesh, as it is written “they twain shall be one flesh” (Gen. ii. 24).

F. H. Colson and G. H. Whitaker write (_Philo_, vol. 2, pp. 443-445):

> This short, but in many ways beautiful and more than usually Platonic treatise, is very closely connected, as the last words show, with the succeeding “Quod Deus,” which will follow in Vol. III. of this translation. It is a dissertation on the words of Gen. vi. 1-4.
> 
> (a) And it came to pass when men began to become many upon the earth that daughters were born to them. <span id="v1">(1)</span>
> 
> (b) And the angels of God, seeing the daughters of men that they were fair, took to themselves wives from all, such as they chose. <span id="v2">(2)</span>
> 
> (c) And the Lord God said, “My spirit shall not abide in man for ever, because they are flesh; but their days shall be a hundred and twenty years.” <span id="v3">(3)</span>
> 
> (d) And there were giants on earth in those days. <span id="v4">(4)</span>
> 
> (a) is dismissed shortly (1-5) with the remarks that the words “many” and “daughters” following on the mention of the birth of Noah, the just man, and his three sons (at the end of chap, v.) emphasize the truth that the unjust are many and the just few, and that the spiritual offspring of the latter are the masculine or higher qualities, while that of the former are the feminine or lower.
> 
> (b) The words are interpreted (6-18) in the sense that as angels, demons, and souls are really three names for the same thing, “the angels of God,” while including God's spiritual messengers, here indicate the wicked souls which woo the “daughters of men,” _i.e._ the merely sensual pleasures. In the course of these sections we have a remarkable passage (12-15), in which Philo, with many echoes of Plato, speaks of the human soul as having descended from some higher region to be incarnate in the body.
> 
> The discussion of (c) (19-57) forms the bulk of the treatise. He first treats (19-27) of the nature of God's spirit, dwelling particularly on the thought that when it is given to men, it is not thereby diminished, and on the unworthiness of the fleshly life (28-31). This leads him on to a long digression on Lev. xviii. 6, “a man, a man shall not go near to any that is akin to his flesh, to uncover shame.” This text, which of course is really a prohibition of incest, is worked by Philo into an elaborate allegory, in which every phrase is treated separately (32-47). The repetition of “a man, a man” indicates the “true man” <span id="v33">(33)</span>. The words “go near” show us that while many earthly advantages, such as riches, though “akin to the flesh,” must be accepted, if they come to us, and used for the best, we must not seek them (84-38). “Uncovering shame” means <span id="v39">(39)</span> that those who follow such things introduce a false and shameful philosophy. The final words, “I am the Lord,” are an appeal to us to take our stand with God against pleasure (40-44), but the use of “Lord” rather than “God” emphasizes his attitude of sovereignty of which we are bidden to stand in awe (45-47). We now return to the thought of what is meant by God's spirit abiding. Such an abiding can only be the privilege of those who lead the tranquil and contemplative life, which with the support of various texts he ascribes to Moses (47-55). The words “their days shall be an hundred and twenty years” are then touched on for a few lines <span id="v56">(56)</span>, but dismissed with a promise of subsequent treatment, which if ever given has not come down to us <span id="v57">(57)</span>.
> 
> (d) After a protest against regarding the story as a myth (58-59), we have a meditation (60-67) on the three classes of souls, the earth-born (who of course are the giants, γιγας being connected with γηγενης), the heaven-born, and the God-born. Of these the heaven-born are those who cultivate our heavenly part, the mind, and follow secular learning <span id="v60">(60)</span>, and the God-born are those whose thoughts are fixed on God alone <span id="v61">(61)</span>. These two are illustrated by Abram (before his change of name) and Abraham respectively (62-64). The earth-born, of course, are those who are given up to the fleshly life, and are typified by Nimrod (who in the LXX is called a giant) whose name signifying “desertion” marks the earth-born “giants” as deserters from the good (65-67).


## ON THE GIANTS

I. <span id="v1">(1)</span> “And it came to pass when there began to be many men upon the earth, that daughters also were born to Them.”[^1] I think it here worth while to raise the question why, after the birth of Noah and his sons, our race increased to a degree of great populousness. But, perhaps, it is not difficult to explain the cause of this; for it always happens if anything appears to be rare that its contrary is found exceedingly numerous. <span id="v2">(2)</span> Therefore, the good disposition of one displays the evil disposition of myriads, and the fact of those things which are done in accordance with art, and science, and virtue, and beauty, being few, shows how incalculable a number of things devoid of art, and of science, and of justice, and, in short, utterly worthless, lie concealed beneath. <span id="v3">(3)</span> Do you not see that in the universe, also, the sun, being one body, by his shining forth dissipates the thick and dense darkness which is shed over earth and sea? With great propriety, therefore, the generation of the just Noah and his sons is represented as bringing into existence a great number of unjust persons; for it is by the contrary that it is especially the nature of contraries to be known. <span id="v4">(4)</span> And no unjust man at any time implants a masculine generation in the soul, but such, being unmanly, and broken, and effeminate in their minds, do naturally become the parents of female children; having planted no tree of virtue, the fruit of which must of necessity have been beautiful and salutary, but only trees of wickedness and of the passions, the shoots of which are womanlike. <span id="v5">(5)</span> On account of which fact these men are said to have become the fathers of daughters, and that no one of them is said to have begotten a son; for since the just Noah had male children, as being a man who followed reason, perfect, and upright, and masculine, so by this very fact the injustice of the multitude is proved to be altogether the parent of female children. For it is impossible that the same things should be born of opposite parents; but they must necessarily have an opposite offspring.

II. <span id="v6">(6)</span> “And when the angels of God saw the daughters of men that they were beautiful, they took unto themselves wives of all of them whom they Chose.”[^2] Those beings, whom other philosophers call demons, Moses usually calls angels; and they are souls hovering in the air. <span id="v7">(7)</span> And let no one suppose, that what is here stated is a fable, for it is necessarily true that the universe must be filled with living things in all its parts, since every one of its primary and elementary portions contains its appropriate animals and such as are consistent with its nature; —the earth containing terrestrial animals, the sea and the rivers containing aquatic animals, and the fire such as are born in the fire (but it is said, that such as these last are found chiefly in Macedonia), and the heaven containing the stars: <span id="v8">(8)</span> for these also are entire souls pervading the universe, being unadulterated and divine, inasmuch as they move in a circle, which is the kind of motion most akin to the mind, for every one of them is the parent mind. It is therefore necessary that the air also should be full of living beings. And these beings are invisible to us, inasmuch as the air itself is not visible to mortal sight. <span id="v9">(9)</span> But it does not follow, because our sight is incapable of perceiving the forms of souls, that for that reason there are no souls in the air; but it follows of necessity that they must be comprehended by the mind, in order that like may be contemplated by like. <span id="v10">(10)</span> Since what shall we say? Must we not say that these animals which are terrestrial or aquatic live in air and spirit? What? Are not pestilential afflictions accustomed to exist when the air is tainted or corrupted, as if that were the cause of all such assuming vitality? Again, when the air is free from all taint and innocent, such as it is especially wont to be when the north wind prevails, does not the imbibing of a purer air tend to a more vigorous and more lasting duration of life? <span id="v11">(11)</span> It is then natural that that medium by which all other animals, whether aquatic of terrestrial, are vivified should itself be empty and destitute of souls? On the contrary, even if all other animals were barren, the air by itself would be bound to be productive of life, having received from the great Creator the seeds of vitality by his especial favour.

III. <span id="v12">(12)</span> Some souls, therefore, have descended into bodies, and others have not thought worthy to approach any one of the portions of the earth; and these, when hallowed and surrounded by the ministrations of the father, the Creator has been accustomed to employ, as hand-maidens and servants in the administration of mortal affairs. <span id="v13">(13)</span> And they having descended into the body as into a river, at one time are carried away and swallowed up by the voracity of a most violent whirlpool; and, at another time, striving with all their power to resist its impetuosity, they at first swim on the top of it, and afterwards fly back to the place from which they started. <span id="v14">(14)</span> These, then, are the souls of those who have been taught some kind of sublime philosophy, meditating, from beginning to end, on dying as to the life of the body, in order to obtain an inheritance of the incorporeal and imperishable life, which is to be enjoyed in the presence of the uncreate and everlasting God. <span id="v15">(15)</span> But those, which are swallowed up in the whirlpool, are the souls of those other men who have disregarded wisdom, giving themselves up to the pursuit of unstable things regulated by fortune alone, not one of which is referred to the most excellent portion of us, the soul or the mind; but all rather to the dead corpse connected with us, that is to the body, or to things which are even more lifeless than that, such as glory, and money, and offices, and honours, and all other things which, by those who do not keep their eyes fixed on what is really beautiful, are fashioned and endowed with apparent vitality by the deceit of vain opinion.

IV. <span id="v16">(16)</span> If, therefore, you consider that souls, and demons, and angels are things differing indeed in name, but not identical in reality, you will then be able to discard that most heavy burden, superstition. But as men in general speak of good and evil demons, and in like manner of good and evil souls, so also do they speak of angels, looking upon some as worthy of a good appellation, and calling them ambassadors of man to God, and of God to man, and sacred and holy on account of this blameless and most excellent office; others, again, you will not err if you look upon as unholy and unworthy of any address. <span id="v17">(17)</span> And the expression used by the writer of the psalm, in the following verse, testifies to the truth of my assertion, for he says, “He sent upon them the fury of His wrath, anger, and rage, and affliction, and he sent evil angels among Them.”[^3] These are the wicked who, assuming the name of angels, not being acquainted with the daughters of right reason, that is with the sciences and the virtues, but which pursue the mortal descendants of mortal men, that is the pleasures, which can confer no genuine beauty, which is perceived by the intellect alone, but only a bastard sort of elegance of form, by means of which the outward sense is beguiled; <span id="v18">(18)</span> and they do not all take all the daughters in marriage, but some of them have selected some of that innumerable company to be their wives; some choosing them by the sight, and others by the ear, others again being influenced by the sense of taste, or by the belly, and some even by the pleasures below the belly; many also have laid hold of those the abode of which is fixed at a great distance, putting in action various desires among one another. For, of necessity, the choices of all the various pleasures are various, since different pleasures are established in different places.

V. <span id="v19">(19)</span> And, in all such matters, it is impossible for the spirit of God to remain and to pass all its time, as the law-giver himself shows. “For,” says Moses, “the Lord said, My spirit shall not remain among men for ever, because they are Flesh.”[^4] <span id="v20">(20)</span> For, at times, it does remain; but it does not remain for ever and ever among the greater part of us; for who is so destitute of reason or so lifeless as never, either voluntarily or involuntarily, to conceive a notion of the all good God. For, very often, even over the most polluted and accursed beings, there hovers a sudden appearance of the good, but they are unable to take firm hold of it and to keep it among them; <span id="v21">(21)</span> for, almost immediately, it quits its former place and departs, rejecting those inhabitants who come over to it, and who live in defiance of law and justice, to whom it never would have come if it had not been for the sake of convicting those who choose what is disgraceful instead of what is good. <span id="v22">(22)</span> But the spirit of God is spoken of in one manner as being air flowing upon the earth, bringing a third element in addition to water. In reference to which, Moses says, in his account of the creation of the world, “The spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters.”[^5] Since the air, as it is very light, is raised and borne aloft, having water, as it were, for its foundation; and, in another manner, unalloyed knowledge is said to be so, which every wise man naturally partakes of. <span id="v23">(23)</span> And Moses shows us this, when speaking of the creator and maker of the holy work of the creation, in these words: “And God summoned Bezaleel, and filled him with his Holy Spirit, and with wisdom, and understanding, and knowledge, to be able to devise every Work.”[^6] So that, what the spirit of God is, is very definitively described in these words.

VI. <span id="v24">(24)</span> Such also is the spirit of Moses, which came upon the seventy elders, for the sake of making them differ from, and be superior to the rest of the Israelites, who could not possibly be elders in real truth, unless they had partaken of that allwise spirit. For it is said, “I will take of my spirit which is upon thee, and I will pour it upon the seventy Elders.”[^7] <span id="v25">(25)</span> But think not that thus this taking away, could be by means of cutting off or separation; but it is here, as is the case in an operation effected by fire, which can light ten thousand torches, without itself being diminished the least atom, or ceasing to remain as it was before. Something like this also is the nature of knowledge. For though it has made all its pupils, and all who have become acquainted with it, learned, still it is in no degree diminished itself, but very often it even becomes improved, just as, they say, that fountains sometimes are by being drained dry; for, it is said, that they sometimes become sweeter by such a process. <span id="v26">(26)</span> For continual association with others, engendering diligence and practice, gradually works out entire perfection. If, then, the individual spirit of Moses, or of any other creature, was about to be distributed to so great a multitude of pupils, then, if it were divided into such a number of small portions, it would be diminished. <span id="v27">(27)</span> But now, the spirit which is upon him is the wise, the divine, the indivisible, the undistributable, the good spirit, the spirit which is everywhere diffused, so as to fill the universe, which, while it benefits others, it not injured by having a participation in it given to another, and if added to something else, either as to its understanding, or its knowledge, or its wisdom.

VII. <span id="v28">(28)</span> On which account, it is possible that the spirit of God may remain in the soul, but that it should remain for ever is impossible, as we have said. And why need we wonder? since there is no other thing whatever, the possession of which, is stable and lasting; but mortal affairs are continually wavering in the scale, and inclining first to one side, and then to the other, and liable at different times to different changes. <span id="v29">(29)</span> And the greatest cause of our ignorance is the flesh, and our inseparable connection with the flesh. And this, Moses represents God as admitting, where he says that, “Because they are flesh,” the spirit of God cannot abide in them. And yet marriage and the rearing of children, and the furnishing of necessary things, and ingloriousness conjoined with a want of money and business, both private and public, and a countless number of other things cause wisdom to waste away, before it begins to flourish vigorously. <span id="v30">(30)</span> But there is nothing which is so great a hindrance to its growth as the fleshly nature. For that, as if it were the principal and most solid foundation of folly and ignorance, is laid down firmly, and then each of the aforenamed evils is built up upon it. <span id="v31">(31)</span> For those souls which are devoid of flesh and of the body, remaining undisturbed in the theatre of the universe, occupied in seeing and hearing divine things, of which an insatiable desire has seized them, enjoy a pleasure to which no one offers any interruption. But those which bear the heavy burden of the flesh, being weighed down and oppressed by it, are unable to look upwards to the revolutions of the heaven, but being dragged downwards, have their necks forcibly pressed to the ground like so many quadrupeds.

VIII. <span id="v32">(32)</span> In reference to which fact, the lawgiver having determined to put an end to all illegal and illegitimate associations and unions, begins his denunciations in the following manner: “Man shall not come near to any one who is akin to his own flesh, to uncover his nakedness: I am the Lord.”[^8] How could any one more forcibly exhort man to despise the flesh and what is akin to the flesh than in this way? <span id="v33">(33)</span> And indeed he does not only exhort us to abandon such things, but he shows positively that he who is really a man will never come of his own accord to those pleasures which are dear to and connected with the body, but will always be meditating to alienate himself from them entirely. <span id="v34">(34)</span> For the saying, “Man, man,” not once but twice, is a sign that what is here meant is not the man composed of body and soul, but him only who is possessed of virtue. For such an one is really a true man, whom some one of the ancient philosophers having lighted a lantern at midday, went in search of, and told those who asked him that he was seeking a man. And as for the prohibition against every man coming near to any one who is akin to his own flesh, this is induced by necessary reasons. For there are some things which we should admit, such for instance as those useful things, by the employment of which we may be able to live in freedom from disease and in good health; and there are other things which should be rejected, by which, when the appetites become inflamed, they burn up all goodness in one vast conflagration. <span id="v35">(35)</span> Let not then our appetites rush eagerly in pursuit of all the things that are pleasant to the flesh, for the pleasures are often untameable, when like dogs they fawn upon us, and all of a sudden, change and bite us, inflicting incurable sounds. So that by cleaving to frugality, which is a friend to virtue, in preference to the pleasures akin to the body, we shall defeat the numerous and infinite multitude of irreconcilable enemies. And if any occasion should seek to compel us to take more than what is moderate or sufficient, let us not yield; for the scripture saith, “He shall come near to him to uncover his nakedness.”

IX. <span id="v36">(36)</span> And what is meant by this, it is worth while to explain. It has often happened, that some who have not been themselves providers of wealth, have nevertheless had unlimited abundance. And others, who have not been eager in the pursuit of glory have been thought worthy of public praises and honours. Others again, who have not expected to acquire even a little strength, have arrived at the greatest vigour and activity. <span id="v37">(37)</span> Now, let all these men learn not to cleave in their minds to any one of these qualities; that is to say, not to admire them and grasp at them in an immoderate degree, looking upon them all, that is to say on riches, on glory, and on bodily strength, not only not as intrinsically good, but as the greatest of evils. For to misers, the pursuit of money is appropriate, and the pursuit of glory is so to ambitious men, and the acquisition of bodily strength is so to men fond of athletic and of gymnastic exercises. For that which is the better part of them, namely, the soul, they have abandoned as a slave to those things which are inferior to themselves, namely, to inanimate things. <span id="v38">(38)</span> But as many as are masters of themselves show that all that brilliant prosperity, which is an object of so much contention, is in subordination to the mind, which is the principal part of them, receiving it when it comes, so as to make a good use of it, but not pursuing it if it keeps aloof, as being able to be happy even without it. <span id="v39">(39)</span> But he who pursues it eagerly and follows upon its track, fills philosophy with base opinions; on which account he is said to uncover its nakedness, for how can there be any concealment or ignorance of the reproaches to which those men are justly exposed, who profess indeed to be wise men, but who make a traffic of wisdom, and bargain for the sale of it, as they say men do in the market, who put up their wares for sale, sometimes for a slight gain, sometimes for sweet and caressing speeches, and sometimes for insecure hopes, founded on no sure ground, and sometimes even for promises which are in no respect better than dreams.

X. <span id="v40">(40)</span> And the sentence which follows, “I am the Lord,” is uttered with great beauty and with most excessive propriety, “for,” says the Lord, “oppose, my good man, the good of the flesh to that of the soul, and of the whole man;” therefore the pleasure of the flesh is irrational, but the pleasure of the soul and of the whole man is the mind of the universe, namely God; <span id="v41">(41)</span> and the comparison is an admirable one, and one difficult to be instituted, so as for any one to be deceived by the close similitude, unless any one will say that living things are in reality the same as lifeless things, rational things the same as irrational things; well adapted the same as those ill adapted; odd numbers identical with even ones; light with darkness, and day with night; and in short every thing that is contrary the same as its contrary. <span id="v42">(42)</span> And yet even although these things have some kind of union and connection together by reason of their being created, still God is not in any respect like the very best of created beings, inasmuch as these have been born, and are liable to suffering; but he is uncreated, and always acting not suffering. <span id="v43">(43)</span> Now it is well not to desert the ranks of God, in which it follows inevitably that all who are arrayed must be most excellent, and it would be shameful to quit those ranks, to fly to unmanly and effeminate pleasure, which injures its friends and benefits its enemies, for its nature is a very singular one; for all those to whom it chooses to give a share of its special advantages, it at once chastises and injures; and those whom it thinks fit to deprive of its good things, it benefits in the greatest possible degree, for it injures them when it gives, but it benefits them when it takes away. <span id="v44">(44)</span> If therefore, O my soul, any one of the temptations of pleasure invites you, turn yourself away, and directing your views towards another point, look at the genuine beauty of virtue, and having surveyed it, remain, until a desire for it has sunk into you, and draws you to it, like a magnet, and immediately leads you and attaches you to that which has become the object of your desire.

XI. <span id="v45">(45)</span> And the expression, “I am the Lord,” must be listened to, not only as if it were equivalent to, “I am the perfect, and incorruptible, and true good,” with which if any one is surrounded he will reject all that is imperfect, and corruptible, and attached to the flesh; but also as equivalent to, “I am the ruler, and the king, and the master.” <span id="v46">(46)</span> And it is not safe for subjects to do wrong in the presence of their rulers, nor for slaves to err before their masters; for when the punishers are near, those whose nature is not quick at submitting to admonitions are held in restraint and order by fear; <span id="v47">(47)</span> for God, having filled everything with himself, is near at hand, so that he is looking over everything and standing by, we being filled with a great and holy reverence, or if not with that, at all events, having a prudent fear of the might of his authority, and of the fearful nature of his punishment, which cannot be avoided, whenever he determines to exert his punishing power, shall desist from doing wrong. In order that the divine spirit of wisdom may not be inclined to quit our neighbourhood and depart, but that it may remain a very long time with us, as it did also with the wise Moses; <span id="v48">(48)</span> for Moses is a being of the most tranquil habits, either standing still or sitting still, and not at all disposed by nature to subject himself to turns and changes; for the scripture says, “Moses and the ark did not Move,”[^9] inasmuch as the wise man cannot depart from virtue, or inasmuch as virtue is not liable to move, nor is the virtuous man inclined to changes, but each of these things is established on the sure foundation of right reason. <span id="v49">(49)</span> And again, the scripture saith in another passage, “But stand thou here with Me.”[^10] For this is an oracle of God, which was given to the prophet, and his station was to be one of unmoved tranquillity by God, who always stands immovably; for it is indispensable, that all things which are placed by the side of him must be kept straight by such an undeviating rule. <span id="v50">(50)</span> On this account it is, as it seems to me, that excessive pride, named Jethro, marvelling at his unvarying and always equal choice of what was wise, a choice which always looked at the same things in the same way, was perplexed, and put a question to him in this form, “Why dost thou sit by Thyself?”[^11] <span id="v51">(51)</span> For any one who considers the continual war raging among men in the middle of peace, and existing, not merely among nations, and countries, and cities, but also among private houses, or I might rather say, between every individual man and the inexpressible and heavy storms which agitate the souls of men, which, by their evident impetuosity, throw into confusion all the affairs of life, may very naturally wonder, if in such a storm, any one can enjoy tranquillity, and can feel a calm in such a billowy state of the stormy sea. <span id="v52">(52)</span> You see that even the high priest, that is to say, reason, who might at all times remain and reside in the holy dwelling of God, has not free permission to approach them at all times, but only once in each year; for whatever is associated with reason by utterance is not firm, because it is of a twofold nature. But the safest conduct is to contemplate the living God by the soul alone, without utterance of any voice, because he exists according to the indivisible unit.

XII. <span id="v53">(53)</span> As, therefore, among men in general, that is to say, among those who propose to themselves many objects in life, the divine spirit does not remain, even though it may abide among them for a very short time, but it remains among one species of men alone, namely, among those who, having put off all the things of creation, and the inmost veil and covering of false opinion, come to God in their unconcealed and naked minds. <span id="v54">(54)</span> Thus also Moses, having fixed his tent outside of the tabernacle and outside of all the corporeal army, [^12] that is to say, having established his mind so that it should not move, begins to worship God, and having entered into the darkness, that invisible country, remains there, performing the most sacred mysteries; and he becomes, not merely an initiated man, but also an hierophant of mysteries and a teacher of divine things, which he will explain to those whose ears are purified; <span id="v55">(55)</span> therefore the divine spirit is always standing by him, conducting him in every right way: but from other men, as I have said before, it very soon separates itself, and completes their life in the number of a hundred and twenty years. For God says, “their days shall be an hundred and twenty Years;”[^13] <span id="v56">(56)</span> but Moses, when he had arrived at that number of years, departed from mortal life to another. How, then, can it be natural for men who are guilty to live an equal length of time with the all-wise prophet? for the present, it will be sufficient to say this, that things which bear the same name are not in all cases alike, but very often they are distinct in their whole genus; and also that which is bad may have equal numbers and times with what is good, since they are represented as twofold, but still they have their respective powers, distinct from one another, and as remote and different as possible. <span id="v57">(57)</span> And we shall hereafter institute a more exact discussion of this period of a hundred and twenty years, which we will however postpone, till we come to an examination of the whole life of the prophet, when we have become fit to be initiated in it, but at present we will discuss what comes next in order.

XIII. <span id="v58">(58)</span> “And there were giants on the earth in those Days.”[^14] Perhaps some one may here think, that the lawgiver is speaking enigmatically and alluding to the fables handed down by the poets about giants, though he is a man as far removed as possible from any invention of fables, and one who thinks fit only to walk in the paths of truth itself; <span id="v59">(59)</span> in consequence of which principle, he has banished from the constitution, which he has established, those celebrated and beautiful arts of statuary and painting, because they, falsely imitating the nature of the truth, contrive deceits and snares, in order, through the medium of the eyes, to beguile the souls which are liable to be easily won over. <span id="v60">(60)</span> Therefore he utters no fable whatever respecting the giants; but he wishes to set this fact before your eyes, that some men are born of the earth, and some are born of heaven, and some are born of God: those are born of the earth, who are hunters after the pleasures of the body, devoting themselves to the enjoyment and fruition of them, and being eager to provide themselves with all things that tend to each of them. Those again are born of heaven who are men of skill and science and devoted to learning; for the heavenly portion of us is our mind, and the mind of every one of those persons who are born of heaven studies the encyclical branches of education and every other art of every description, sharpening, and exercising, and practising itself, and rendering itself acute in all those matters which are the objects of intellect. <span id="v61">(61)</span> Lastly, those who are born of God are priests and prophets, who have not thought fit to mix themselves up in the constitutions of this world, and to become cosmopolites, but who having raised themselves above all the objects of the mere outward senses, have departed and fixed their views on that world which is perceptible only by the intellect, and have settled there, being inscribed in the state of incorruptible incorporeal ideas.

XIV. <span id="v62">(62)</span> Accordingly, Abraham, as long as he was abiding in the land of the Chaldaeans, that is to say, in opinion, before he received his new name, and while he was still called Abram, was a man born of heaven, investigating the sublime nature of things on high, and all that took place in these regions, and the causes of them, and studying everything of that kind in the true spirit of philosophy; on which account he received an appellation corresponding to the pursuits to which he devoted himself: for the name Abram, being interpreted, signifies the sublime father, and is a name very fitting for the paternal mind, which in every direction contemplates sublime and heavenly things: for the mind is the father of our composite being, reaching as high as the sky and even farther. <span id="v63">(63)</span> But when he became improved, and was about to have his name changed, he then became a man born of God, according to the oracle which was delivered to him, “I am thy God, take care that thou art approved before me, and be thou Blameless.”[^15] <span id="v64">(64)</span> But if the God of the world, being the only God, is also by especial favour the peculiar God of this individual man, then of necessity the man must also be a man of God; for the name Abraham, being interpreted, signifies, “the elect father of sound,” the reason of the good man: for he is chosen out of all, and purified, and the father of the voice by which we speak; and being such a character as this, he is assigned to the one only God, whose minister he becomes, and so makes the path of his whole life straight, using in real truth the royal road, the road of the only king who governs all things, turning aside and deviating neither to the left hand nor to the right.

XV. <span id="v65">(65)</span> But the sons of earth removing their minds from contemplation, and becoming deserters so as to fly to the lifeless and immovable nature of the flesh, “for they two became one Flesh,”[^16] as the lawgiver says, adulterated the excellent coinage, and abandoned the better rank which had been allotted to them as their own, and deserted to the worse rank, which was contrary to their original nature, Nimrod being the first to set the example of this desertion; <span id="v66">(66)</span> for the lawgiver says, “that this man began to be a giant upon the Earth:”[^17] and the name Nimrod, being interpreted, means, desertion; for it was not enough for the thoroughly miserable soul to stand on neither side, but having gone over to its enemies, it took up arms against its friends, and resisted them, and made open war upon them; in reference to which fact it is that, Moses calls the seat of Nimrod's kingdom Babylon, and the interpretation of the word Babylon is “change;” a thing nearly akin to desertion, the name, too, being akin to the name, and the one action to the other; for the first step of every deserter is a change and alteration of mind, <span id="v67">(67)</span> and it would be consistent in the truth to say that, according to the most holy Moses, the bad man, as being one destitute of a home and of a city, without any settled habitation, and a fugitive, is naturally a deserter also; but the good man is the firmest of allies. Having said thus much at present, and dwelt sufficiently on the subject of the giants, we will now proceed to what comes next in our subject, which is this.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/The_Works_Philo_of_Alexandria/On_the_Posterity_of_Cain_and_His_Exile">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">On the Posterity of Cain and His Exile</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/The_Works_Philo_of_Alexandria">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/The_Works_Philo_of_Alexandria/On_the_Unchangableness_of_God">
          <span class="pr-2">On the Unchangableness of God</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^1]: Genesis 6:1.

[^2]: Genesis 6:2.

[^3]: Psalms 77:49.

[^4]: Genesis 6:3.

[^5]: Genesis 1:2.

[^6]: Exodus 31:1.

[^7]: Numbers 11:17.

[^8]: Leviticus 18:6.

[^9]: Numbers 14:44.

[^10]: Deuteronomy 5:31.

[^11]: Exodus 18:14.

[^12]: Exodus 33:7.

[^13]: Deuteronomy 24:7.

[^14]: Genesis 6:4.

[^15]: Genesis 17:1.

[^16]: Genesis 2:24.

[^17]: Genesis 10:29 is the passage supposed to be alluded to; but as translated in the Bible it only says “He was a mighty hunter before the Lord.”