---
title: "Workbook II — Science in The Urantia Book — Part I. Astronomy"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: astronomy, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1959 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science#index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science/2">Part II. Geology</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>


## SECTION 1. OVER-ALL PICTURE OF THE MASTER UNIVERSE

### I. **Space**

#### A. Description of total space.

1. Space is a bestowal of Paradise.
	> “Space is neither a subabsolute condition within, nor the presence of, the Unqualified Absolute, neither is it a function of the Ultimate. It is a bestowal of Paradise, and the space of the grand universe and that of all outer regions is believed to be actually pervaded by the ancestral space potency of the Unqualified Absolute. From near approach to peripheral Paradise, this pervaded space extends horizontally outward through the fourth space level and beyond the periphery of the master universe, but how far beyond we do not know.” <a id="s34_542"></a>[UB 11:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_4)
2. Paradise is the nucleus of quiescent zones separating pervaded and unpervaded space.
	> “Paradise is the actually motionless nucleus of the relatively quiescent zones existing between pervaded and unpervaded space. Geographically these zones appear to be a relative extension of Paradise, but there probably is some motion in them. We know very little about them, but we observe that these zones of lessened space motion separate pervaded and unpervaded space. Similar zones once existed between the levels of pervaded space, but these are now less quiescent.” <a id="s36_476"></a>[UB 11:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_2)

	> “Space does not exist on any of the surfaces of Paradise. If one ‘looked’ directly up from the upper surface of Paradise, one would ‘see’ nothing but unpervaded space going out or coming in, just now coming in. Space does not touch Paradise; only the quiescent _midspace zones_ come in contact with the central Isle.” <a id="s38_321"></a>[UB 11:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_1)

3. Cross section of total space—pervaded and unpervaded.
	> “The vertical cross section of total space would slightly resemble a Maltese cross, with the horizontal arms representing pervaded (universe) space and the vertical arms representing unpervaded (reservoir) space. The areas between the four arms would separate them somewhat as the midspace zones separate pervaded and unpervaded space. These quiescent midspace zones grow larger and larger at greater and greater distances from Paradise and eventually encompass the borders of all space and completely incapsulate both the space reservoirs and the entire horizontal extension of pervaded space.” <a id="s41_599"></a>[UB 11:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_3)

	> “If you imagine a finite, but inconceivably large, V-shaped plane situated at right angles to both the upper and lower surfaces of Paradise, with its point nearly tangent to peripheral Paradise, and then visualize this plane in elliptical revolution about Paradise, its revolution would roughly outline the volume of pervaded space.” <a id="s43_337"></a>[UB 11:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_5)

#### B. Space respiration.

1. Vertical extensions of unpervaded space contract as unpervaded space is transmitted into pervaded space and the horizontal extensions of pervaded space expand, and the converse.
	> “We do not know the actual mechanism of space respiration; we merely observe that all space alternately contracts and expands. This respiration affects both the horizontal extension of pervaded space and the vertical extensions of unpervaded space which exist in the vast space reservoirs above and below Paradise. In attempting to imagine the volume outlines of these space reservoirs, you might think of an hourglass.” <a id="s48_424"></a>[UB 11:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p6_1)

	> “As the universes of the horizontal extension of pervaded space expand, the reservoirs of the vertical extension of unpervaded space contract and vice versa. There is a confluence of pervaded and unpervaded space just underneath nether Paradise. Both types of space there flow through the transmuting regulation channels, where changes are wrought making pervadable space nonpervadable and vice versa in the contraction and expansion cycles of the cosmos.” <a id="s50_460"></a>[UB 11:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p6_2)
2. Description of unpervaded space—unpervaded by those forces, energies, powers, and presences known to exist in pervaded space.
	> “‘Unpervaded’ space means: unpervaded by those forces, energies, powers, and presences known to exist in pervaded space. We do not know whether vertical (reservoir) space is destined always to function as the equipoise of horizontal (universe) space; we do not know whether there is a creative intent concerning unpervaded space; we really know very little about the space reservoirs, merely that they exist, and that they seem to counterbalance the space-expansion-contraction cycles of the universe of universes.” <a id="s52_519"></a>[UB 11:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p6_3)
3. Cycles of space respiration—approximately 2 billion years.
	> “The cycles of space respiration extend in each phase for a little more than one billion Urantia years. During one phase the universes expand; during the next they contract. Pervaded space is now approaching the mid-point of the expanding phase, while unpervaded space nears the mid-point of the contracting phase, and we are informed that the outermost limits of both space extensions are, theoretically, now approximately equidistant from Paradise. The unpervaded-space reservoirs now extend vertically above upper Paradise and below nether Paradise just as far as the pervaded space of the universe extends horizontally outward from peripheral Paradise to and even beyond the fourth outer space level.” <a id="s54_709"></a>[UB 11:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p6_4)

	> “For a billion years of Urantia time the space reservoirs contract while the master universe and the force activities of all horizontal space expand. It thus requires a little over two billion Urantia years to complete the entire expansion-contraction cycle.” <a id="s56_263"></a>[UB 11:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p6_5)
4. Errors and distortions of observations and calculations are due to space respiration.
	> “The present relationship of your sun and its associated planets, while disclosing many relative and absolute motions in space, tends to convey the impression to astronomic observers that you are comparatively stationary in space, and that the surrounding starry clusters and streams are engaged in outward flight at ever-increasing velocities as your calculations proceed outward in space. But such is not the case. You fail to recognize the present outward and uniform expansion of the physical creations of all pervaded space. Your own local creation (Nebadon) participates in this movement of universal outward expansion. The entire seven superuniverses participate in the two-billion-year cycles of space respiration along with the outer regions of the master universe.” <a id="s58_779"></a>[UB 12:4.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_12)
	- Errors are also due to angles of observation and other time-space distortions.
		> “Although your spectroscopic estimations of astronomic velocities are fairly reliable when applied to the starry realms belonging to your superuniverse and its associate superuniverses, such reckonings with reference to the realms of outer space are wholly unreliable. Spectral lines are displaced from the normal towards the violet by an approaching star; likewise these lines are displaced towards the red by a receding star. Many influences interpose to make it appear that the recessional velocity of the external universes increases at the rate of more than one hundred miles a second for every million light-years increase in distance. By this method of reckoning, subsequent to the perfection of more powerful telescopes, it will appear that these far-distant systems are in flight from this part of the universe at the unbelievable rate of more than thirty thousand miles a second. But this apparent speed of recession is not real; it results from numerous factors of error embracing angles of observation and other time-space distortions.” <a id="s60_1053"></a>[UB 12:4.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_14)
	- Greatest distortions are due to opposite direction of revolution of the seven superuniverses and the first outer space level.
		> “But the greatest of all such distortions arises because the vast universes of outer space in the realms next to the domains of the seven superuniverses, seem to be revolving in a direction opposite to that of the grand universe. That is, these myriads of nebulae and their accompanying suns and spheres are at the present time revolving clockwise about the central creation. The seven superuniverses revolve about Paradise in a counterclockwise direction. It appears that the second outer universe of galaxies, like the seven superuniverses, revolves counterclockwise about Paradise. And the astronomic observers of Uversa think they detect evidence of revolutionary movements in a third outer belt of far-distant space which are beginning to exhibit directional tendencies of a clockwise nature.” <a id="s62_803"></a>[UB 12:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_15)
5. Work done in space respiration is space work, not power-energy work.
	> “When the universes expand and contract, the material masses in pervaded space alternately move against and with the pull of Paradise gravity. The work that is done in moving the material energy mass of creation is _space_ work but not _power-energy_ work.” <a id="s64_261"></a>[UB 12:4.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_13)

### II. **Paradise-Havona System**

#### A. Paradise.

1. General description.<a id="s70_23"></a>[UB 11:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p0_1)
	- a. Paradise, at the center of the universe of universes, is the most gigantic body in the master universe, a worthy capital of the universe of universes.
	- b. Paradise is the:
		1. Eternal center of the universe of universes.
		2. Abiding place of the Universal Father, Eternal Son, Infinite Spirit, and their divine co-ordinates and associates.
		3. Most gigantic organized body of cosmic reality in all the master universe.
	- c. The glory and spiritual splendor of the divine abode are impossible of mortal comprehension.
	- d. Paradise is from eternity; there are neither records nor traditions respecting the origin of this nuclear Isle of Light and Life.
2. Its shape and dimensions—elliptical, flat.
	> “In form Paradise differs from the inhabited space bodies: it is not spherical. It is definitely ellipsoid, being one sixth longer in the north-south diameter than in the east-west diameter. The central Isle is essentially flat, and the distance from the upper surface to the nether surface is one tenth that of the east-west diameter.” <a id="s79_340"></a>[UB 11:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_2)
3. Its composition—stationary, unique; composed of absolutum.
	> “The eternal Isle is composed of a single form of materialization—stationary systems of reality. This literal substance of Paradise is a homogeneous organization of space potency not to be found elsewhere in all the wide universe of universes. It has received many names in different universes, and the Melchizedeks of Nebadon long since named it _absolutum_. This Paradise source material is neither dead nor alive; it is the original nonspiritual expression of the First Source and Center; it is _Paradise_, and Paradise is without duplicate.” <a id="s81_549"></a>[UB 11:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_9)
4. Its relation to space, time, motion, and distance.
	> “It appears to us that the First Source and Center has concentrated all absolute potential for cosmic reality in Paradise as a part of his technique of self-liberation from infinity limitations, as a means of making possible subinfinite, even time-space, creation. But it does not follow that Paradise is time-space limited just because the universe of universes discloses these qualities. Paradise exists without time and has no location in space.” <a id="s83_453"></a>[UB 11:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_10)

	> “Roughly: space seemingly originates just below nether Paradise; time just above upper Paradise. Time, as you understand it, is not a feature of Paradise existence, though the citizens of the central Isle are fully conscious of nontime sequence of events. Motion is not inherent on Paradise; it is volitional. But the concept of distance, even absolute distance, has very much meaning as it may be applied to relative locations on Paradise. Paradise is nonspatial; hence its areas are absolute and therefore serviceable in many ways beyond the concept of mortal mind.” <a id="s85_572"></a>[UB 11:2.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_11)
5. Its geographical divisions.
	- a. Upper Paradise.<a id="s87_21"></a>[UB 11:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p3_1)
		1. Central area—Deity presence.
		2. Most Holy Sphere—immediately surrounding Deity presence— for worship, trinitization, high spiritual attainment.
		3. Outer region—Holy Area—seven concentric zones—residential region
	- b. Peripheral Paradise.<a id="s91_26"></a>[UB 11:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p4_1)
		1. Landing and dispatching fields.
		2. Force-focal headquarters of Seven Master Spirits.
		3. Historic and prophetic exhibits of Creator Sons.
	- c. Nether Paradise.<a id="s95_22"></a>[UB 11:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_1)
		1. Central unknown and unrevealed Zone of Infinity.
		2. Unnamed area—immediately surrounding Zone of Infinity.
		3. Outer margin consisting of three concentric elliptical zones—concerned with space potency and force-energy.
			- a. Inner zone—functions as a gigantic heart whose pulsations direct and modify force- energies.
			- b. Mid-zone—pulsating control mechanism of midspace or quiet zones.
				—related to nonpervaded-space mechanism of the master universe.
			- c. Outer zone—central focalization of the space presence of the Unqualified Absolute.
				—central circuit point of emanations which proceed spaceward
				in synchrony with space respiration.
				—source and destiny of all force-energy.

6. Space conditions and motions surrounding Paradise.
	> “From the periphery of Paradise to the inner borders of the seven superuniverses there are the following seven space conditions and motions:
	> “1. The quiescent midspace zones impinging on Paradise.
	> “2. The clockwise processional of the three Paradise and the seven Havona circuits.
	> “3. The semiquiet space zone separating the Havona circuits from the dark gravity bodies of the central universe.
	> “4. The inner, counterclockwise-moving belt of the dark gravity bodies.
	> “5. The second unique space zone dividing the two space paths of the dark gravity bodies.
	> “6. The outer belt of dark gravity bodies, revolving clockwise around Paradise.
	> “7. A third space zone—a semiquiet zone—separating the outer belt of dark gravity bodies from the innermost circuits of the seven superuniverses.” <a id="s115_150"></a>[UB 14:1.1-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p1_1)

#### C. Havona.

1. Havona—eternal central universe, consisting of one billion worlds.
	> “_Havona_, the central universe, is not a time creation; it is an eternal existence. This never-beginning, never-ending universe consists of one billion spheres of sublime perfection and is surrounded by the enormous dark gravity bodies. At the center of Havona is the stationary and absolutely stabilized Isle of Paradise, surrounded by its twenty-one satellites. Owing to the enormous encircling masses of the dark gravity bodies about the fringe of the central universe, the mass content of this central creation is far in excess of the total known mass of all seven sectors of the grand universe.” <a id="s120_605"></a>[UB 12:1.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_10)
2. Arrangement—seven concentric circuits not superimposed.
	> “The billion worlds of Havona are arranged in seven concentric circuits immediately surrounding the three circuits of Paradise satellites. There are upwards of thirty-five million worlds in the innermost Havona circuit and over two hundred and forty-five million in the outermost, with proportionate numbers intervening. Each circuit differs, but all are perfectly balanced and exquisitely organized, and each is pervaded by a specialized representation of the Infinite Spirit, one of the Seven Spirits of the Circuits. In addition to other functions this impersonal Spirit co-ordinates the conduct of celestial affairs throughout each circuit.
	> 
	> “The Havona planetary circuits are not superimposed; their worlds follow each other in an orderly linear procession. The central universe whirls around the stationary Isle of Paradise in one vast plane, consisting of ten concentric stabilized units—the three circuits of Paradise spheres and the seven circuits of Havona worlds. Physically regarded, the Havona and the Paradise circuits are all one and the same system; their separation is in recognition of functional and administrative segregation.” <a id="s124_505"></a>[UB 14:1.9-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p1_9)
3. Time on Havona—the Paradise-Havona standard day: one day equals one thousand years of Urantia time.
	> “Time is not reckoned on Paradise; the sequence of successive events is inherent in the concept of those who are indigenous to the central Isle. But time is germane to the Havona circuits and to numerous beings of both celestial and terrestrial origin sojourning thereon. Each Havona world has its own local time, determined by its circuit. All worlds in a given circuit have the same length of year since they uniformly swing around Paradise, and the length of these planetary years decreases from the outermost to the innermost circuit.” <a id="s126_543"></a>[UB 14:1.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p1_11)

	> “Besides Havona-circuit time, there is the Paradise-Havona standard day and other time designations which are determined on, and are sent out from, the seven Paradise satellites of the Infinite Spirit. The Paradise-Havona standard day is based on the length of time required for the planetary abodes of the first or inner Havona circuit to complete one revolution around the Isle of Paradise; and though their velocity is enormous, owing to their situation between the dark gravity bodies and gigantic Paradise, it requires almost one thousand years for these spheres to complete their circuit. You have unwittingly read the truth when your eyes rested on the statement ‘A day is as a thousand years with God, as but a watch in the night.’ One Paradise-Havona day is just seven minutes, three and one-eighth seconds less than one thousand years of the present Urantia leap-year calendar.
	> 
	> “This Paradise-Havona day is the standard time measurement for the seven superuniverses, although each maintains its own internal time standards.” <a id="s130_150"></a>[UB 14:1.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p1_12)

#### D. Dark gravity bodies.

1. Nature and form—unlike other space bodies.
	> “On the outskirts of this vast central universe, far out beyond the seventh belt of Havona worlds, there swirl an unbelievable number of enormous dark gravity bodies. These multitudinous dark masses are quite unlike other space bodies in many particulars; even in form they are very different. These dark gravity bodies neither reflect nor absorb light; they are nonreactive to physical-energy light, and they so completely encircle and enshroud Havona as to hide it from the view of even near-by inhabited universes of time and space.
	> 
	> “The great belt of dark gravity bodies is divided into two equal elliptical circuits by a unique space intrusion. The inner belt revolves counterclockwise; the outer revolves clockwise. These alternate directions of motion, coupled with the extraordinary mass of the dark bodies, so effectively equalize the lines of Havona gravity as to render the central universe a physically balanced and perfectly stabilized creation.
	> 
	> “The inner procession of dark gravity bodies is tubular in arrangement, consisting of three circular groupings. A cross section of this circuit would exhibit three concentric circles of about equal density. The outer circuit of dark gravity bodies is arranged perpendicularly, being ten thousand times higher than the inner circuit. The up-and-down diameter of the outer circuit is fifty thousand times that of the transverse diameter.
	> 
	> “The intervening space which exists between these two circuits of gravity bodies is _unique_ in that nothing like it is to be found elsewhere in all the wide universe. This zone is characterized by enormous wave movements of an up-and-down nature and is permeated by tremendous energy activities of an unknown order.
	> 
	> “In our opinion, nothing like the dark gravity bodies of the central universe will characterize the future evolution of the outer space levels; we regard these alternate processions of stupendous gravity-balancing bodies as unique in the master universe.” <a id="s143_259"></a>[UB 14:1.14-18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p1_14)

### III. **The Seven Superuniverses**

The grand universe embraces the central creation and the seven superuniverses, having a potential of seven trillion inhabited worlds.

> “_The Grand Universe_ is the present organized and inhabited creation. It consists of the seven superuniverses, with an aggregate evolutionary potential of around seven trillion inhabited planets, not to mention the eternal spheres of the central creation. But this tentative estimate takes no account of architectural administrative spheres, neither does it include the outlying groups of unorganized universes. The present ragged edge of the grand universe, its uneven and unfinished periphery, together with the tremendously unsettled condition of the whole astronomical plot, suggests to our star students that even the seven superuniverses are, as yet, uncompleted. As we move from within, from the divine center outward in any one direction, we do, eventually, come to the outer limits of the organized and inhabited creation; we come to the outer limits of the grand universe. And it is near this outer border, in a far-off corner of such a magnificent creation, that your local universe has its eventful existence.” <a id="s149_1026"></a>[UB 12:1.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_13)

#### A. Composition of the seven superuniverses.

> “_The Seven Superuniverses_ are not primary physical organizations; nowhere do their boundaries divide a nebular family, neither do they cross a local universe, a prime creative unit. Each superuniverse is simply a geographic space clustering of approximately one seventh of the organized and partially inhabited post-Havona creation, and each is about equal in the number of local universes embraced and in the space encompassed. _Nebadon_, your local universe, is one of the newer creations in _Orvonton_, the seventh superuniverse.” <a id="s153_538"></a>[UB 12:1.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_12)

#### B. Total superuniverse motion.

1. Counterclockwise elliptical course around the central universe.
	> “Within the limited range of the records, observations, and memories of the generations of a million or a billion of your short years, to all practical intents and purposes, Urantia and the universe to which it belongs are experiencing the adventure of one long and uncharted plunge into new space; but according to the records of Uversa, in accordance with older observations, in harmony with the more extensive experience and calculations of our order, and as a result of conclusions based on these and other findings, we know that the universes are engaged in an orderly, well-understood, and perfectly controlled processional, swinging in majestic grandeur around the First Great Source and Center and his residential universe.” <a id="s158_736"></a>[UB 15:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p1_1)

	> “We have long since discovered that the seven superuniverses traverse a great ellipse, a gigantic and elongated circle. Your solar system and other worlds of time are not plunging headlong, without chart and compass, into unmapped space. The local universe to which your system belongs is pursuing a definite and well-understood counterclockwise course around the vast swing that encircles the central universe. This cosmic path is well charted and is just as thoroughly known to the superuniverse star observers as the orbits of the planets constituting your solar system are known to Urantia astronomers.” <a id="s160_611"></a>[UB 15:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p1_2)
2. The order of the superuniverse processional around Paradise.
	> “In this age and as direction is regarded on Urantia, superuniverse number one swings almost due north, approximately opposite, in an easterly direction, to the Paradise residence of the Great Sources and Centers and the central universe of Havona. This position, with the corresponding one to the west, represents the nearest physical approach of the spheres of time to the eternal Isle. Superuniverse number two is in the north, preparing for the westward swing, while number three now holds the northernmost segment of the great space path, having already turned into the bend leading to the southerly plunge. Number four is on the comparatively straightaway southerly flight, the advance regions now approaching opposition to the Great Centers. Number five has about left its position opposite the Center of Centers while continuing on the direct southerly course just preceding the eastward swing; number six occupies most of the southern curve, the segment from which your superuniverse has nearly passed.” <a id="s162_1016"></a>[UB 15:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p1_4)
3. Position of Urantia and location of our solar system in the superuniverse swing around Paradise.
	> “Your local universe of Nebadon belongs to Orvonton, the seventh superuniverse, which swings on between superuniverses one and six, having not long since (as we reckon time) turned the southeastern bend of the superuniverse space level. Today, the solar system to which Urantia belongs is a few billion years past the swing around the southern curvature so that you are just now advancing beyond the southeastern bend and are moving swiftly through the long and comparatively straightaway northern path. For untold ages Orvonton will pursue this almost direct northerly course.
	> 
	> “Urantia belongs to a system which is well out towards the border-land of your local universe; and your local universe is at present traversing the periphery of Orvonton. Beyond you there are still others, but you are far removed in space from those physical systems which swing around the great circle in comparative proximity to the Great Source and Center.” <a id="s166_364"></a>[UB 15:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p1_5)

#### C. Description of headquarters worlds.

1. Location and lighting.
	> “While each superuniverse government presides near the center of the evolutionary universes of its space segment, it occupies a world made to order and is peopled by accredited personalities. These headquarters worlds are architectural spheres, space bodies specifically constructed for their special purpose. While sharing the light of near-by suns, these spheres are independently lighted and heated. Each has a sun which gives forth light without heat, like the satellites of Paradise, while each is energy currents near the surface of the sphere. These headquarters worlds belong to one of the greater systems situated near the astronomical center of their respective superuniverses.” <a id="s171_692"></a>[UB 15:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_1)
2. Their grandeur.
	> “The headquarters worlds of the seven superuniverses partake of the nature and grandeur of Paradise, their central pattern of perfection. In reality, all headquarters worlds are paradisiacal. They are indeed heavenly abodes, and they increase in material size, morontia beauty, and spirit glory from Jerusem to the central Isle. And all the satellites of these headquarters worlds are also architectural spheres.
	> 
	> “The various headquarters worlds are provided with every phase of material and spiritual creation. All kinds of material, morontial, and spiritual beings are at home on these rendezvous worlds of the universes. As mortal creatures ascend the universe, passing from the material to the spiritual realms, they never lose their appreciation for, and enjoyment of, their former levels of existence.” <a id="s175_399"></a>[UB 15:7.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_3)

#### D. Approximate organization of the superuniverses.

> 1. Each superuniverse contains ten major sectors.
> 2. Each major sector contains one hundred minor sectors.
> 3. Each minor sector contains one hundred local universes.
> 4. Each local universe contains one hundred constellations.
> 5. Each constellation contains one hundred systems.
> 6. Each system contains one thousand inhabited or inhabitable worlds. <a id="s184_72"></a>[UB 15:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p2_1)

### IV. **The Master Universe—Outer Space**

#### A. General description of space levels.

1. A zone of quiet, four hundred thousand light-years in width, separates the seven superuniverses from a gigantic outer belt of unbelievable energy action.
	> “The relatively quiet zone between the space levels, such as the one separating the seven superuniverses from the first outer space level, are enormous elliptical regions of quiescent space activities. These zones separate the vast galaxies which race around Paradise in orderly procession. You may visualize the first outer space level, where untold universes are now in process of formation, as a vast procession of galaxies swinging zones of quiescence and bounded on the inner and outer margins by relatively quiet space zones.
	> 
	> “A space level thus functions as an elliptical region of motion surrounded on all sides by relative motionlessness. Such relationships of motion and quiescence constitute a curved space path of lessened resistance to motion which is universally followed by cosmic force and emergent energy as they circle forever around the Isle of Paradise.
	> 
	> “This alternate zoning of the master universe, in association with the alternate clockwise and counterclockwise flow of the galaxies, is a factor in the stabilization of physical gravity designed to prevent the accentuation of gravity pressure to the point of disruptive and dispersive activities. Such an arrangement exerts antigravity influence and acts as a brake upon otherwise dangerous velocities.” <a id="s195_408"></a>[UB 11:7.7-9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_7)
2. The mighty transactions of this vast realm of outer space constitute the domains of the Unqualified Absolute.
	> “When Urantia astronomers peer through their increasingly powerful telescopes into the mysterious stretches of outer space and there behold the amazing evolution of almost countless physical universes, they should realize that they are gazing upon the mighty outworking of the unsearchable plans of the Architects of the Master Universe. True, we do possess evidences which are suggestive of the presence of certain Paradise personality influences here and there throughout the vast energy manifestations now characteristic of these outer regions, but from the larger view-point the space regions extending beyond the outer borders of the seven superuniverses are generally recognized as constituting the domains of the Unqualified Absolute.” <a id="s197_746"></a>[UB 12:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_1)
3. Millions of universes are revealed by our telescopes.
	> “Although the unaided human eye can see only two or three nebulae outside the borders of the superuniverse of Orvonton, your telescopes literally reveal millions upon millions of these physical universes in process of formation. Most of the starry realms visually exposed to the search of your present-day telescopes are in Orvonton, but with photographic technique the larger telescopes penetrate far beyond the borders of the grand universe into the domains of outer space, where untold universes are in process of organization. And there are yet other millions of universes beyond the range of your present instruments.” <a id="s199_627"></a>[UB 12:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_2)

	> “In the not-distant future, new telescopes will reveal to the wondering gaze of Urantian astronomers no less than 375 million new galaxies in the remote stretches of outer space. At the same time these more powerful telescopes will disclose that many island universes formerly believed to be in outer space are really a part of the galactic system of Orvonton. The seven superuniverses are still growing; the periphery of each is gradually expanding; new nebulae are constantly being stabilized and organized; and some of the nebulae which Urantian astronomers regard as extragalactic are actually on the fringe of Orvonton and are traveling along with us.” <a id="s201_661"></a>[UB 12:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_3)

#### B. First outer space level.

> “_The Outer Space Levels_. Far out in space, at an enormous distance from the seven inhabited superuniverses, there are assembling vast and unbelievably stupendous circuits of force and materializing energies. Between the energy circuits of the seven superuniverses and this gigantic outer belt of force activity, there is a space zone of comparative quiet, which varies in width but averages about four hundred thousand light-years. These space zones are free from star dust—cosmic fog. Our students of these phenomena are in doubt as to the exact status of the space-forces existing in this zone of relative quiet which encircles the seven superuniverses. But about one-half million light-years beyond the periphery of the present grand universe we observe the beginnings of a zone of an unbelievable energy action which increases in volume and intensity for over twenty-five million light-years. These tremendous wheels of energizing forces are situated in the first outer space level, a continuous belt of cosmic activity encircling the whole of the known, organized, and inhabited creation.” <a id="s205_1099"></a>[UB 12:1.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_14)

#### C. Second outer space level.

1. Far beyond the first outer space level is a zone of still greater activity.
	> “Still greater activities are taking place beyond these regions, for the Uversa physicists have detected early evidence of force manifestations more than fifty million light-years beyond the outermost ranges of the phenomena in the first outer space level. These activities undoubtedly presage the organization of the material creations of the second outer space level of the master universe.” <a id="s210_397"></a>[UB 12:1.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_15)

#### D. Direction of revolution of space levels.

> “But the greatest of all such distortions arises because the vast universes of outer space in the realms next to the domains of the seven superuniverses, seem to be revolving in a direction opposite to that of the grand universe. That is, these myriads of nebulae and their accompanying suns and spheres are at the present time revolving clockwise about the central creation. The seven superuniverses revolve about Paradise in a counterclockwise direction. It appears that the second outer universe of galaxies, like the seven superuniverses, revolves counterclockwise about Paradise. And the astronomic observers of Uversa think they detect evidence of revolutionary movements in a third outer belt of far-distant space which are beginning to exhibit directional tendencies of a clockwise nature.” <a id="s214_801"></a>[UB 12:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_15)

#### E. Relative quantity of material in the grand universe and in the outer space zones.

1. Gravity researchers have found that about five per cent of the active functioning of the Paradise absolute-gravity grasp is used by the central and superuniverses. Ninety-five per cent is engaged in controlling material systems beyond the borders of the present organized universes. <a id="s218_286"></a>[UB 12:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_8)
2. Uversa physicists calculate that the energy and matter of outer space regions already equals many times the total of all seven superuniverses.
	> “The Uversa star students observe that the grand universe is surrounded by the ancestors of a series of starry and planetary clusters which completely encircle the present inhabited creation as concentric rings of outer universes upon universes. The physicists of Uversa calculate that the energy and matter of these outer and uncharted regions already equal many times the total material mass and energy charge embraced in all seven superuniverses. We are informed that the metamorphosis of cosmic force in these outer space levels is a function of the Paradise force organizers. We also know that these forces are ancestral to those physical energies which at present activate the grand universe. The Orvonton power directors, however, have nothing to do with these far-distant realms, neither are the energy movements therein discernibly connected with the power circuits of the organized and inhabited creations.” <a id="s220_921"></a>[UB 12:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_4)

#### F. Sources of information concerning outer space levels.

1. Outer space domain is beyond the jurisdiction of the superuniverse governments.
	> “We know very little of the significance of these tremendous phenomena of outer space. A greater creation of the future is in process of formation. We can observe its immensity, we can discern its extent and sense its majestic dimensions, but otherwise we know little more about these realms than do the astronomers of Urantia. As far as we know, no material beings on the order of humans, no angels or other spirit creatures, exist in this outer ring of nebulae, suns, and planets. This distant domain is beyond the jurisdiction and administration of the superuniverse governments.” <a id="s225_587"></a>[UB 12:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_5)
2. At the present time practically the entire spirit gravity of the Eternal Son is observable as functioning in the grand universe. <a id="s226_132"></a>[UB 12:3.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_9)
3. Eighty-five per cent of the mind-gravity response to the intellectual drawing of the Conjoint Actor takes origin in the existing grand universe, indicating that intelligent force organizers are at present directing universe evolution in the space levels beyond the present outer limits of the grand universe. <a id="s227_312"></a>[UB 12:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_10)
4. Solitary Messengers.
	- a. Solitary Messengers volunteer as explorers of the cosmos.
		> “When the reserve corps of the Solitary Messengers is over-recruited, there issues from one of the Seven Supreme Power Directors a call for exploration volunteers; and there is never a lack of volunteers, for they delight to be dispatched as free and untrammeled explorers, to experience the thrill of finding the organizing nucleuses of new worlds and universes.” <a id="s230_369"></a>[UB 23:2.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/23#p2_19)
	- b. Solitary Messengers are experts in discovering materializing energy centers and planets adapted for habitation.
		> “They go forth to investigate the clues furnished by the space contemplators of the realms. Undoubtedly the Paradise Deities know of the existence of these undiscovered energy systems of space, but they never divulge such information. If the Solitary Messengers did not explore and chart these newly organizing energy centers, such phenomena would long remain unnoticed even by the intelligences of adjacent realms. Solitary Messengers, as a class, are highly sensitive to gravity; accordingly they can sometimes detect the probable presence of very small dark planets, the very worlds which are best adapted to life experiments.” <a id="s232_635"></a>[UB 23:2.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/23#p2_20)
	- c. They patrol the master universe and much of our knowledge of outer space comes from their explorations.
		> “These messenger-explorers of undirected assignment patrol the master universe. They are constantly out on exploring expeditions to the uncharted regions of all outer space. Very much of the information which we possess of transactions in the realms of outer space, we owe to the explorations of the Solitary Messengers as they often work and study with the celestial astronomers.” <a id="s234_386"></a>[UB 23:2.21](/en/The_Urantia_Book/23#p2_21)
	- d. Solitary Messengers function as emergency lines of communication.
		> “The Solitary Messengers are able to function as emergency lines of communication throughout remote space regions, realms not embraced within the established circuits of the grand universe. It develops that one messenger, when so functioning, can transmit a message or send an impulse through space to a fellow messenger about one hundred light-years away as Urantia astronomers estimate stellar distances.” <a id="s236_412"></a>[UB 23:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/23#p3_5)

#### G. Architects of the Master Universe.

The Master Architects are in essence the living blueprints of the seven levels of the master universe. The numbers of Architects concerned with each level may be an indication of the ultimate physical size of each level. <a id="s240_221"></a>[UB 31:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p9_1)

1. One functions on the Paradise level.
2. Three are concerned with the Havona level.
3. Seven function on the superuniverse level.
4. Seventy deal with plans for the first outer space level.
5. 490 are concerned with the second outer space level.
6. 3,430 are occupied with plans for the tertiary space level.
7. 24,010 are related to the fourth outer space level.

#### H. The summation of all our knowledge points to the existence of a well-nigh limitless, but, nonetheless, finite universe.

> “And all this confirms our belief in a circular, somewhat limited, but orderly and far-flung universe of universes. If this were not true, then evidence of energy depletion at some point would sooner or later appear. All laws, organizations, administration, and the testimony of universe explorers—everything points to the existence of an infinite God but, as yet, a finite universe, a circularity of endless existence, well-nigh limitless but, nevertheless, finite in contrast with infinity.” <a id="s252_496"></a>[UB 42:1.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p1_9)

## SECTION 2. ORVONTON - THE SEVENTH SUPERUNIVERSE

### I. **General Aspects of Superuniverses**

#### A. Relation of the superuniverses to the Paradise Deities.

> “As far as the Universal Father is concerned—as a Father—the universes are virtually nonexistent; he deals with personalities; he is the Father of personalities. As far as the Eternal Son and the Infinite Spirit are concerned—as creator partners—the universes are localized and individual under the joint rule of the Creator Sons and the Creative Spirits. As far as the Paradise Trinity is concerned, outside Havona there are just seven inhabited universes, the seven superuniverses which hold jurisdiction over the circle of the first post-Havona space level. The Seven Master Spirits radiate their influence out from the central Isle, thus constituting the vast creation one gigantic wheel, the hub being the eternal Isle of Paradise, the seven spokes the radiations of the Seven Master Spirits, the rim the outer regions of the grand universe.” <a id="s260_850"></a>[UB 15:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p0_1)

#### B. Superuniverse organization and government.

> “Early in the materialization of the universal creation the sevenfold scheme of the superuniverse organization and government was formulated. The first post-Havona creation was divided into seven stupendous segments, and the headquarters worlds of these superuniverse governments were designed and constructed. The present scheme of administration has existed from near eternity, and the rulers of these seven superuniverses are rightly called Ancients of Days.” <a id="s264_465"></a>[UB 15:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p0_2)

### II. **Organization of Orvonton**

#### A. “_The Superuniverse_. 

Ten major sectors (about 1,000,000,000,000 inhabitable planets) constitute a superuniverse. Each superuniverse is provided with an enormous and glorious headquarters world and is ruled by three Ancients of Days.” <a id="s270_213"></a>[UB 15:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p2_8)

> “The Satania system of inhabited worlds is far removed from Uversa and that great sun cluster which functions as the physical or astronomic center of the seventh superuniverse. From Jerusem, the headquarters of Satania, it is over two hundred thousand light-years to the physical center of the superuniverse of Orvonton, far, far away in the dense diameter of the Milky Way. Satania is on the periphery of the local universe, and Nebadon is now well out towards the edge of Orvonton. From the outermost system of inhabited worlds to the center of the superuniverse is a trifle less than two hundred and fifty thousand light-years.” <a id="s272_634"></a>[UB 32:2.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_11)

#### B. The Milky Way - the central nucleus.

1. Most of the starry realms visible to the naked eye—the Milky Way—belong to the superuniverse of Orvonton.
	> “Practically all of the starry realms visible to the naked eye on Urantia belong to the seventh section of the grand universe, the superuniverse of Orvonton. The vast Milky Way starry system represents the central nucleus of Orvonton, being largely beyond the borders of your local universe. This great aggregation of suns, dark islands of space, double stars, globular clusters, star clouds, spiral and other nebulae, together with myriads of individual planets, forms a watchlike, elongated-circular grouping of about one seventh of the inhabited evolutionary universes.
	> “From the astronomical position of Urantia, as you look through the cross section of near-by systems to the great Milky Way, you observe that the spheres of Orvonton are traveling in a vast elongated plane, the breadth being far greater than the thickness and the length far greater than the breadth.” <a id="s278_305"></a>[UB 15:3.1-2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p3_1)
2. When the angle of observation is right, the central universe is in the line of the main body of the Milky Way.
	> “Observation of the so-called Milky Way discloses the comparative increase in Orvonton stellar density when the heavens are viewed in one direction, while on either side the density diminishes; the number of stars and other spheres decreases away from the chief plane of our material superuniverse. When the angle of observation is propitious, gazing through the main body of this realm of maximum density, you are looking toward the residential universe and the center of all things.” <a id="s280_489"></a>[UB 15:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p3_3)

#### C. Uversa - the headquarters of Orvonton.

1. “The personal abodes of each trio of the Ancients of Days are located at the point of spiritual polarity on their headquarters sphere. Such a sphere is divided into seventy administrative sectors and has seventy divisional capitals in which the Ancients of Days reside from time to time.” <a id="s284_292"></a>[UB 18:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p3_6)
2. Uversa is surrounded by seven clusters of seven worlds, universities of advanced special training. When completed, the seven superuniverses will contain slightly less than five hundred billion architectural worlds.
	> “_Uversa_, the headquarters of Orvonton, your superuniverse, is immediately surrounded by the seven higher universities of advanced spiritual training for ascending will creatures. Each of these seven clusters of wonder spheres consists of seventy specialized worlds containing thousands upon thousands of replete institutions and organizations devoted to universe training and spirit culture wherein the pilgrims of time are re-educated and re-examined preparatory to their long flight to Havona. The arriving pilgrims of time are always received on these associated worlds, but the departing graduates are always dispatched for Havona direct from the shores of Uversa.
	> 
	> “Uversa is the spiritual and administrative headquarters for approximately one trillion inhabited or inhabitable worlds. The glory, grandeur, and perfection of the Orvonton capital surpass any of the wonders of the time-space creations.
	> 
	> “If all the projected local universes and their component parts were established, there would be slightly less than five hundred billion architectural worlds in the seven superuniverses.” <a id="s290_191"></a>[UB 15:7.10-12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_10)

#### D. Standard superuniverse time.

1. The standard day is equal to almost 30 days of Urantia time; the year equals one hundred standard days.
	> “Time is standardized on the headquarters of the superuniverses. The standard day of the superuniverse of Orvonton is equal to almost thirty days of Urantia time, and the Orvonton year equals one hundred standard days. This Uversa year is standard in the seventh superuniverse, and it is twenty-two minutes short of three thousand days of Urantia time, about eight and one fifth of your years.” <a id="s295_398"></a>[UB 15:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_2)

#### E. The major sectors.

1. “_The Major Sector_. One hundred minor sectors (about 100,000,000,000 inhabitable worlds) make one major sector. Each major sector is provided with a superb headquarters and is presided over by three Perfections of Days, Supreme Trinity Personalities.” <a id="s299_256"></a>[UB 15:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p2_7)
2. Eight of the major sectors of Orvonton have been astronomically identified.
	> “Of the ten major divisions of Orvonton, eight have been roughly identified by Urantian astronomers. The other two are difficult of separate recognition because you are obliged to view these phenomena from the inside. If you could look upon the superuniverse of Orvonton from a position far-distant in space, you would immediately recognize the ten major sectors of the seventh galaxy.” <a id="s301_390"></a>[UB 15:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p3_4)
	> “...Better methods of space measurement and improved telescopic technique will sometime more fully disclose the ten grand divisions of the superuniverse of Orvonton; you will at least recognize eight of these immense sectors as enormous and fairly symmetrical star clusters.” <a id="s302_279"></a>[UB 41:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_10)
3. “_Umajor the fifth_, the headquarters of your major sector, Splandon, is surrounded by the seventy spheres of the advancing intellectual training of the superuniverse.” <a id="s303_172"></a>[UB 15:7.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_9)
	> “A _major sector_ comprises about one tenth of a superuniverse and consists of one hundred minor sectors, ten thousand local universes, about one hundred billion inhabitable worlds. These major sectors are administered by three Perfections of Days, Supreme Trinity Personalities.” <a id="s304_284"></a>[UB 15:13.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p13_1)

#### F. The minor sectors.

1. “_The Minor Sector_. One hundred local universes (about 1,000,000,000 inhabitable planets) constitute a minor sector of the superuniverse government; it has a wonderful headquarters world, wherefrom its rulers, the Recents of Days, administer the affairs of the minor sector. There are three Recents of Days, Supreme Trinity Personalities, on each minor sector headquarters.” <a id="s308_379"></a>[UB 15:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p2_6)
2. “_Uminor the third_, the headquarters of your minor sector, Ensa, is surrounded by the seven spheres of the higher physical studies of the ascendant life.” <a id="s309_159"></a>[UB 15:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_8)
3. The rotational center of Ensa is the star cloud of Sagittarius.
	> “The rotational center of your minor sector is situated far away in the enormous and dense star cloud of Sagittarius, around which your local universe and its associated creations all move, and from opposite sides of the vast Sagittarius subgalactic system you may observe two great streams of star clouds emerging in stupendous stellar coils.” <a id="s311_348"></a>[UB 15:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p3_5)
4. Minor sector government.
	> “The _minor sector_ governments are presided over by three Recents of Days. Their administration is concerned mainly with the physical control, unification, stabilization, and routine co-ordination of the administration of the component local universes. Each minor sector embraces as many as one hundred local universes, ten thousand constellations, one million systems, or about one billion inhabitable worlds.
	> 
	> “Minor sector headquarters worlds are the grand rendezvous of the Master Physical Controllers. These headquarters worlds are surrounded by the seven instruction spheres which constitute the entrance schools of the superuniverse and are the centers of training for physical and administrative knowledge concerning the universe of universes.” <a id="s315_344"></a>[UB 15:13.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p13_4)

#### G. The local universes.

1. “_The Local Universe_. One hundred constellations (about 10,000,000 inhabitable planets) constitute a local universe. Each local universe has a magnificent architectural headquarters world and is ruled by one of the co-ordinate Creator Sons of God of the order of Michael. Each universe is blessed by the presence of a Union of Days, a representative of the Paradise Trinity.” <a id="s319_380"></a>[UB 15:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p2_5)

2. “_Salvington_, the capital of Nebadon, your local universe, is surrounded by ten university clusters of forty-nine spheres each. Hereon is man spiritualized following his constellationsocialization.” <a id="s321_203"></a>[UB 15:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_7)

#### H. The constellations.

1. “_The Constellation_. One hundred systems (about 100,000 inhabitable planets) make up a constellation. Each constellation has an architectural headquarters sphere and is presided over by three Vorondadek Sons, the Most Highs. Each constellation also has a Faithful of Days in observation, an ambassador of the Paradise Trinity.” <a id="s325_332"></a>[UB 15:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p2_4)

2. “_Edentia_, the headquarters of your constellation of Norlatiadek, has its seventy satellites of socializing culture and training, on which ascenders sojourn upon the completion of the Jerusem regime of personality mobilization, unification, and realization.” <a id="s327_263"></a>[UB 15:7.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_6)

#### I. The systems.

1. “_The System_. The basic unit of the supergovernment consists of about one thousand inhabited or inhabitable worlds. Blazing suns, cold worlds, planets too near the hot suns, and other spheres not suitable for creature habitation are not included in this group. These one thousand worlds adapted to support life are called a system, but in the younger systems only a comparatively small number of these worlds may be inhabited. Each inhabited planet is presided over by a Planetary Prince, and each local system has an architectural sphere as its head quarters and is ruled by a System Sovereign.” <a id="s331_601"></a>[UB 15:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p2_3)

2. “Satania has a headquarters world called Jerusem, and it is system number twenty-four in the constellation of Norlatiadek. Your constellation, Norlatiadek, consists of one hundred local systems and has a headquarters world called Edentia. Norlatiadek is number seventy in the universe of Nebadon. The local universe of Nebadon consists of one hundred constellations and has a capital known as Salvington. The universe of Nebadon is number eighty-four in the minor sector of Ensa.” <a id="s333_484"></a>[UB 15:14.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p14_6)

3. “_Jerusem_, the headquarters of your local system of Satania, has its seven worlds of transition culture, each of which is encircled by seven satellites, among which are the seven mansion worlds of morontia detention, man’s first post-mortal residence. As the term heaven has been used on Urantia, it has sometimes meant these seven mansion worlds, the first mansion world being denominated the first heaven, and so on to the seventh.” <a id="s335_439"></a>[UB 15:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_5)

#### J. Description of the seven different astronomic revolutions which confuse astronomers.

> “The Sagittarius sector and all other sectors and divisions of Orvonton are in rotation around Uversa, and some of the confusion of Urantian star observers arises out of the illusions and relative distortions produced by the following multiple revolutionary movements:
> “1. The revolution of Urantia around its sun.
> “2. The circuit of your solar system about the nucleus of the former Andronover nebula.
> “3. The rotation of the Andronover stellar family and the associated clusters about the composite rotation-gravity center of the star cloud of Nebadon.
> “4. The swing of the local star cloud of Nebadon and its associated creations around the Sagittarius center of their minor sector.
> “5. The rotation of the one hundred minor sectors, including Sagittarius, about their major sector.
> “6. The whirl of the ten major sectors, the so-called star drifts, about the Uversa headquarters of Orvonton.
> “7. The movement of Orvonton and six associated superuniverses around Paradise and Havona, the counterclockwise processional of the superuniverse space level.
> “These multiple motions are of several orders: The space paths of your planet and your solar system are genetic, inherent in origin. The absolute counterclockwise motion of Orvonton is also genetic, inherent in the architectural plans of the master universe. But the intervening motions are of composite origin, being derived in part from the constitutive segmentation of matter-energy into the superuniverses and in part produced by the intelligent and purposeful action of the Paradise force organizers.” <a id="s347_509"></a>[UB 15:3.7-15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p3_7)

## SECTION 3. LOCAL UNIVERSES

### I. **Creator Sons** - **Makers and Rulers of Local Universes**

#### A. Local universes are the creations of the unique Paradise Creator Sons.

> “The Creator Sons are the makers and rulers of the local universes of time and space. These universe creators and sovereigns are of dual origin, embodying the characteristics of God the Father and God the Son. But each Creator Son is different from every other; each is unique in nature as well as in personality; each is the ‘only-begotten Son’ of the perfect deity ideal of his origin.” <a id="s355_391"></a>[UB 21:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p0_1)

#### B. Creator Sons undergo long courses of training before undertaking the work of universe organization.

> “The Paradise Sons of the primary order are the designers, creators, builders, and administrators of their respective domains, the local universes of time and space, the basic creative units of the seven evolutionary superuniverses. A Creator Son is permitted to choose the space site of his future cosmic activity, but before he may begin even the physical organization of his universe, he must spend a long period of observation devoted to the study of the efforts of his older brothers in various creations located in the superuniverse of his projected action. And prior to all this, the Michael Son will have completed his long and unique experience of Paradise observation and Havona training.” <a id="s359_702"></a>[UB 21:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_1)

#### C. In time, the Creator Son, in union with the Creative Daughter of the Infinite Spirit, begins the creation of numerous universe children.

> “When such a perfect and divine Son has taken possession of the space site of his chosen universe; when the initial problems of universe materialization and of gross equilibrium have been resolved; when he has formed an effective and co-operative working union with the complemental Daughter of the Infinite Spirit—then do this Universe Son and this Universe Spirit initiate that liaison which is designed to give origin to the innumerable hosts of their local universe children. In connection with this event the Creative Spirit focalization of the Paradise Infinite Spirit becomes changed in nature, taking on the personal qualities of the Mother Spirit of a local universe.” <a id="s363_680"></a>[UB 21:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_9)

### II. **Evolution of Local Universes**

1. Local Universes
	> “A local universe is the handiwork of a Creator Son of the Paradise order of Michael. It comprises one hundred constellations, each embracing one hundred systems of inhabited worlds. Each system will eventually contain approximately one thousand inhabited spheres.” <a id="s368_269"></a>[UB 32:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p0_1)

	> “The preuniverse manipulations of space-force and the primordial energies are the work of the Paradise Master Force Organizers; but in the superuniverse domains, when emergent energy becomes responsive to local or linear gravity, they retire in favor of the power directors of the superuniverse concerned.
	> 
	> “These power directors function alone in the prematerial and post-force phases of a local universe creation. There is no opportunity for a Creator Son to begin universe organization until the power directors have effected the mobilization of the space-energies sufficiently to provide a material foundation—literal suns and material spheres—for the emerging universe.
	> 
	> “The local universes are all approximately of the same energy potential, though they differ greatly in physical dimensions and may vary in visible-matter content from time to time. The power charge and potential-matter endowment of a local universe are determined by the manipulations of the power directors and their predecessors as well as by the Creator Son’s activities and by the endowment of the inherent physical control possessed by his creative associate.” <a id="s374_469"></a>[UB 32:1.1-3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p1_1)
2. Creator Sons
	> Creator Sons materialize visible matter from pre-existent energy. The first act of physical creation to be completed is the organization of the headquarters world and its 490 satellites. This is immediately followed by the creation of the constellation headquarters worlds. In Nebadon this required almost a million years. <a id="s376_326"></a>[UB 32:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_1)

### III. **Evolution of Nebadon**

#### A. A local universe 

A local universe is not composed of a single astronomical system but of diverse nebular ancestry that has enough commonness of motion to be adjusted into a contiguous unit.

> “The characteristic space phenomenon which sets off each local creation from all others is the presence of the Creative Spirit. All Nebadon is certainly pervaded by the space presence of the Divine Minister of Salvington, and such presence just as certainly terminates at the outer borders of our local universe. That which is pervaded by our local universe Mother Spirit _is_ Nebadon; that which extends beyond her space presence is outside Nebadon, being the extra-Nebadon space regions of the superuniverse of Orvonton—other local universes.” <a id="s384_548"></a>[UB 41:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p0_1)

> “One or more—even many—such nebulae may be encompassed within the domain of a single local universe even as Nebadon was physically assembled out of the stellar and planetary progeny of Andronover and other nebulae. The spheres of Nebadon are of diverse nebular ancestry, but they all had a certain minimum commonness of space motion which was so adjusted by the intelligent efforts of the power directors as to produce our present aggregation of space bodies, which travel along together as a contiguous unit over the orbits of the superuniverse.
> 
> “Such is the constitution of the local star cloud of Nebadon, which today swings in an increasingly settled orbit about the Sagittarius center of that minor sector of Orvonton to which our local creation belongs.” <a id="s388_216"></a>[UB 41:0.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p0_4)

#### B. Salvington

> “Salvington, the headquarters of Nebadon, is situated at the exact energy-mass center of the local universe. But your local universe is not a single astronomic system, though a large system does exist at its physical center.” <a id="s392_228"></a>[UB 32:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_4)

#### C. Development of Nebadon.

1. The beginnings of the Andronover nebula.

	> “_987,000,000,000_ years ago associate force organizer and then acting inspector number 811,307 of the Orvonton series, traveling out from Uversa, reported to the Ancients of Days that space conditions were favorable for the initiation of materialization phenomena in a certain sector of the, then, easterly segment of Orvonton.
	> 
	> “_900,000,000,000_ years ago the Uversa archives testify, there was recorded a permit issued by the Uversa Council of Equilibrium to the superuniverse government authorizing the dispatch of a force organizer and staff to the region previously designated by inspector number 811,307. The Orvonton authorities commissioned the original discoverer of this potential universe to execute the mandate of the Ancients of Days calling for the organization of a new material creation.” <a id="s400_480"></a>[UB 57:1.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p1_3)
2. The force organizers initiate the Andronover nebula.
	> “_875,000,000,000_ years ago the enormous Andronover nebula number 876,926 was duly initiated. Only the presence of the force organizer and the liaison staff was required to inaugurate the energy whirl which eventually grew into this vast cyclone of space. Subsequent to the initiation of such nebular revolutions, the living force organizers simply withdraw at right angles to the plane of the revolutionary disk, and from that time forward, the inherent qualities of energy insure the progressive and orderly evolution of such a new physical system.” <a id="s402_556"></a>[UB 57:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p1_6)
3. Andronover was well established 800,000,000,000 years ago.
	> “_800,000,000,000_ years ago the Andronover creation was well established as one of the magnificent primary nebulae of Orvonton. As the astronomers of near-by universes looked out upon this phenomenon of space, they saw very little to attract their attention. Gravity estimates made in adjacent creations indicated that space materializations were taking place in the Andronover regions, but that was all.” <a id="s404_410"></a>[UB 57:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p2_2)
4. 600,000,000,000 years ago Andronover attained its height of energy mobilization and mass.
	> “_600,000,000,000_ years ago the height of the Andronover energy-mobilization period was attained; the nebula had acquired its maximum of mass. At this time it was a gigantic circular gas cloud in shape somewhat like a flattened spheroid. This was the early period of differential mass formation and varying revolutionary velocity. Gravity and other influences were about to begin their work of converting space gases into organized matter.” <a id="s406_445"></a>[UB 57:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p2_4)
5. The nebula becomes spiral and vast systems of solid matter appear in the gaseous cloud.
	> “About the time of the attainment of the maximum of mass, the gravity control of the gaseous content commenced to weaken, and there ensued the stage of gas escapement, the gas streaming forth as two gigantic and distinct arms, which took origin on opposite sides of the mother mass. The rapid revolutions of this enormous central core soon imparted a spiral appearance to these two projecting gas streams. The cooling and subsequent condensation of portions of these protruding arms eventually produced their knotted appearance. These denser portions were vast systems and subsystems of physical matter whirling through space in the midst of the gaseous cloud of the nebula while being held securely within the gravity grasp of the mother wheel.<a id="s408_748"></a>[UB 57:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p3_3)
6. Next, comes the era of increased gas escapement and the critical centrifugal stage preceding sun formation.
	> “But the nebula had begun to contract, and the increase in the rate of revolution further lessened gravity control; and erelong, the outer gaseous regions began actually to escape from the immediate embrace of the nebular nucleus, passing out into space on circuits of irregular outline, returning to the nuclear regions to complete their circuits, and so on. But this was only a temporary stage of nebular progression. The ever-increasing rate of whirling was soon to throw enormous suns off into space on independent circuits.
	> “And this is what happened in Andronover ages upon ages ago. The energy wheel grew and grew until it attained its maximum of expansion, and then, when contraction set in, it whirled on faster and faster until, eventually, the critical centrifugal stage was reached and the great breakup began.” <a id="s411_298"></a>[UB 57:3.4-5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p3_4)
7. The first Andronover sun was born 500,000,000,000 years ago and started out on its adventure in the cosmos.
	> “_500,000,000,000_ years ago the first Andronover sun was born. This blazing streak broke away from the mother gravity grasp and tore out into space on an independent adventure in the cosmos of creation. Its orbit was determined by its path of escape. Such young suns quickly become spherical and start out on their long and eventful careers as the stars of space. Excepting terminal nebular nucleuses, the vast majority of Orvonton suns have had an analogous birth. These escaping suns pass through varied periods of evolution and subsequent universe service.” <a id="s413_565"></a>[UB 57:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p3_6)
8. Andronover next entered the recaptive period of its history.
	> “_400,000,000,000_ years ago began the recaptive period of the Andronover nebula. Many of the near-by and smaller suns were recaptured as a result of the gradual enlargement and further condensation of the mother nucleus. Very soon there was inaugurated the terminal phase of nebular condensation, the period which always precedes the final segregation of these immense space aggregations of energy and matter.” <a id="s415_415"></a>[UB 57:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p3_7)
9. Soon after this era Michael began the creation of the universe of Nebadon. The architectural worlds were finished about five billion years ago.
	> “It was scarcely a million years subsequent to this epoch that Michael of Nebadon, a Creator Son of Paradise, selected this disintegrating nebula as the site of his adventure in universe building. Almost immediately the architectural worlds of Salvington and the one hundred constellation headquarters groups of planets were begun. It required almost one million years to complete these clusters of specially created worlds. The local system headquarters planets were constructed over a period extending from that time to about five billion years ago.” <a id="s417_556"></a>[UB 57:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p3_8)
10. 300,000,000,000 years ago Andronover was temporarily stabilized and Michael’s staff arrived on Salvington.
	> “_300,000,000,000_ years ago the Andronover solar circuits were well established, and the nebular system was passing through a transient period of relative physical stability. About this time the staff of Michael arrived on Salvington, and the Uversa government of Orvonton extended physical recognition to the local universe of Nebadon.” <a id="s419_342"></a>[UB 57:3.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p3_9)
11. 100,000,000,000 years ago the height of tension was reached—heat was winning over gravity—and the stage was set for final sun dispersion.
	> “_100,000,000,000_ years ago the nebular apex of condensation tension was reached; the point of maximum heat tension was attained. This critical stage of gravity-heat contention sometimes lasts for ages, but sooner or later, heat wins the struggle with gravity, and the spectacular period of sun dispersion begins. And this marks the end of the secondary career of a space nebula.” <a id="s421_385"></a>[UB 57:3.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p3_12)
12. Completion of the first period of sun losses—the tertiary cycle of the nebula.
	> “_75,000,000,000_ years ago this nebula had attained the height of its sun-family stage. This was the apex of the first period of sun losses. The majority of these suns have since possessed themselves of extensive systems of planets, satellites, dark islands, comets, meteors, and cosmic dust clouds.
	> 
	> “_50,000,000,000_ years ago this period of sun dispersion was completed; the nebula was fast finishing its tertiary cycle of existence, during which it gave origin to 876,926 sun systems.” <a id="s425_192"></a>[UB 57:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p4_2)
13. Completion of the tertiary cycle 25,000,000,000 years ago brought relative stabilization.
	> “_25,000,000,000_ years ago witnessed the completion of the tertiary cycle of nebular life and brought about the organization and relative stabilization of the far-flung starry systems derived from this parent nebula. But the process of physical contraction and increased heat production continued in the central mass of the nebular remnant.” <a id="s427_346"></a>[UB 57:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p4_4)
14. 8,000,000,000 years ago the terminal eruption began—the end of the nebula.
	> “_8,000,000,000_ years ago the terrific terminal eruption began. Only the outer systems are safe at the time of such a cosmic upheaval. And this was the beginning of the end of the nebula. This final sun disgorgement extended over a period of almost two billion years. 
	> 
	> “7,000,000,000 years ago witnessed the height of the Andronover terminal breakup. This was the period of the birth of the larger terminal suns and the apex of the local physical disturbances.” <a id="s431_196"></a>[UB 57:4.6-7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p4_6)
15. 6,000,000,000 years ago marked the birth of our sun—fifty-sixth from the last of Andronover’s second solar family.
	> “_6,000,000,000_ years ago marks the end of the terminal breakup and the birth of your sun, the fifty-sixth from the last of the Andronover second solar family. This final eruption of the nebular nucleus gave birth to 136,702 suns, most of them solitary orbs. The total number of suns and sun systems having origin in the Andronover nebula was 1,013,628. The number of the solar system sun is 1,013,572.” <a id="s433_408"></a>[UB 57:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p4_8)
16.  
	> “And now the great Andronover nebula is no more, but it lives on in the many suns and their planetary families which originated in this mother cloud of space. The final nuclear remnant of this magnificent nebula still burns with a reddish glow and continues to give forth moderate light and heat to its remnant planetary family of one hundred and sixty-five worlds, which now revolve about this venerable mother of two mighty generations of the monarchs of light.” <a id="s435_468"></a>[UB 57:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p4_9)
17.  
	> “The organization of planetary abodes is still progressing in Nebadon, for this universe is, indeed, a young cluster in the starry and planetary realms of Orvonton. At the last registry there were 3,840,101 inhabited planets in Nebadon, and Satania, the local system of your world, is fairly typical of other systems.” <a id="s437_322"></a>[UB 32:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_9)

## SECTION 4. SATANIA AND MONMATIA

### I. **General Description of Satania**

#### A. Satania is composed of many astronomical systems.

> “Satania itself is composed of over seven thousand astronomical groups, or physical systems, few of which had an origin similar to that of your solar system. The astronomic center of Satania is an enormous dark island of space which, with its attendant spheres, is situated not far from the headquarters of the system government.” <a id="s445_333"></a>[UB 41:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p2_2)

#### B. Satania contains 619 inhabited worlds located in over 500 physical systems.

> “Satania is not a uniform physical system, a single astronomic unit or organization. Its 619 inhabited worlds are located in over five hundred different physical systems. Only five have more than two inhabited worlds, and of these only one has four peopled planets, while there are forty-six having two inhabited worlds.” <a id="s449_324"></a>[UB 32:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_10)

#### C. More than 2000 suns serve Satania. Power Directors control the energy circuits.

> “There are upward of two thousand brilliant suns pouring forth light and energy in Satania, and your own sun is an average blazing orb. Of the thirty suns nearest yours, only three are brighter. The Universe Power Directors initiate the specialized currents of energy which play between the individual stars and their respective systems. These solar furnaces, together with the dark giants of space, serve the power centers and physical controllers as way stations for the effective concentrating and directionizing of the energy circuits of the material creations.” <a id="s453_569"></a>[UB 41:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_1)

### II. **Evolution of Our Solar System**

#### A. The origin of Monmatia.

1. The story of our pulsating sun and its disruptive response to the gravity pull of Angona.
	> “5,000,000,000 years ago your sun was a comparatively isolated blazing orb, having gathered to itself most of the near-by circulating matter of space, remnants of the recent upheaval which attended its own birth.
	> 
	> “Today, your sun has achieved relative stability, but its eleven and one-half year sunspot cycles betray that it was a variable star in its youth. In the early days of your sun the continued contraction and consequent gradual increase of temperature initiated tremendous convulsions on its surface. These titanic heaves required three and one-half days to complete a cycle of varying brightness. This variable state, this periodic pulsation, rendered your sun highly responsive to certain outside influences which were to be shortly encountered.
	> 
	> “Thus was the stage of local space set for the unique origin of _Monmatia_, that being the name of your sun’s planetary family, the solar system to which your world belongs. Less than one per cent of the planetary systems of Orvonton have had a similar origin.
	> 
	> “4,500,000,000 years ago the enormous Angona system began its approach to the neighborhood of this solitary sun. The center of this great system was a dark giant of space, solid, highly charged, and possessing tremendous gravity pull.” <a id="s466_239"></a>[UB 57:5.1-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p5_1)
2. First stages of the planets of our solar system.
	> “As Angona more closely approached the sun, at moments of maximum expansion during solar pulsations, streams of gaseous material were shot out into space as gigantic solar tongues. At first these flaming gas tongues would invariably fall back into the sun, but as Angona drew nearer and nearer, the gravity pull of the gigantic visitor became so great that these tongues of gas would break off at certain points, the roots falling back into the sun while the outer sections would become detached to form independent bodies of matter, solar meteorites, which immediately started to revolve about the sun in elliptical orbits of their own.” <a id="s468_642"></a>[UB 57:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p5_5)
3. Completion of the birth of the solar system.
	> “As the Angona system drew nearer, the solar extrusions grew larger and larger; more and more matter was drawn from the sun to become independent circulating bodies in surrounding space. This situation developed for about five hundred thousand years until Angona made its closest approach to the sun; whereupon the sun, in conjunction with one of its periodic internal convulsions, experienced a partial disruption; from opposite sides and simultaneously, enormous volumes of matter were disgorged. From the Angona side there was drawn out a vast column of solar gases, rather pointed at both ends and markedly bulging at the center, which became permanently detached from the immediate gravity control of the sun.
	> 
	> “This great column of solar gases which was thus separated from the sun subsequently evolved into the twelve planets of the solar system. The repercussional ejection of gas from the opposite side of the sun in tidal sympathy with the extrusion of this gigantic solar system ancestor, has since condensed into the meteors and space dust of the solar system, although much, very much, of this matter was subsequently recaptured by solar gravity as the Angona system receded into remote space.” <a id="s472_495"></a>[UB 57:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p5_6)
4. While drawing off the solar system, Angona did not secure any of the sun’s substance for itself.
	> “Although Angona succeeded in drawing away the ancestral material of the solar system planets and the enormous volume of matter now circulating about the sun as asteroids and meteors, it did not secure for itself any of this solar matter. The visiting system did not come quite close enough to actually steal any of the sun’s substance, but it did swing sufficiently close to draw off into the intervening space all of the material comprising the present-day solar system.” <a id="s474_477"></a>[UB 57:5.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p5_8)
5. Formation of the twelve planets of the solar system.
	> “The five inner and five outer planets soon formed in miniature from the cooling and condensing nucleuses in the less massive and tapering ends of the gigantic gravity bulge which Angona had succeeded in detaching from the sun, while Saturn and Jupiter were formed from the more massive and bulging central portions. The powerful gravity pull of Jupiter and Saturn early captured most of the material stolen from Angona as the retrograde motion of certain of their satellites bears witness.” <a id="s476_495"></a>[UB 57:5.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p5_9)
6. Origin and evolution of Jupiter and Saturn.
	> “Jupiter and Saturn, being derived from the very center of the enormous column of superheated solar gases, contained so much highly heated sun material that they shone with a brilliant light and emitted enormous volumes of heat; they were in reality secondary suns for a short period after their formation as separate space bodies. These two largest of the solar system planets have remained largely gaseous to this day, not even yet having cooled off to the point of complete condensation or solidification.” <a id="s478_513"></a>[UB 57:5.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p5_10)
7. Solidification and evolution of the ten minor planets.
	> “The gas-contraction nucleuses of the other ten planets soon reached the stage of solidification and so began to draw to themselves increasing quantities of the meteoric matter circulating in near-by space. The worlds of the solar system thus had a double origin: nucleuses of gas condensation later on augmented by the capture of enormous quantities of meteors. Indeed they still continue to capture meteors, but in greatly lessened numbers.” <a id="s480_447"></a>[UB 57:5.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p5_11)
8. The planets swing around the sun in the plane of the Angona extrusion.
	> “The planets do not swing around the sun in the equatorial plane of their solar mother, which they would do if they had been thrown off by solar revolution. Rather, they travel in the plane of the Angona solar extrusion, which existed at a considerable angle to the plane of the sun’s equator.” <a id="s482_298"></a>[UB 57:5.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p5_12)
9. The new solar system steals three of Angona’s outer tributaries.
	> “While Angona was unable to capture any of the solar mass, your sun did add to its metamorphosing planetary family some of the circulating space material of the visiting system. Due to the intense gravity field of Angona, its tributary planetary family pursued orbits of considerable distance from the dark giant; and shortly after the extrusion of the solar system ancestral mass and while Angona was yet in the vicinity of the sun, three of the major planets of the Angona system swung so near to the massive solar system ancestor that its gravitational pull, augmented by that of the sun, was sufficient to overbalance the gravity grasp of Angona and to permanently detach these three tributaries of the celestial wanderer.” <a id="s484_731"></a>[UB 57:5.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p5_13)
10. Retrograde motions in the solar system are derived from matter stolen from Angona.
	> “All of the solar system material derived from the sun was originally endowed with a homogeneous direction of orbital swing, and had it not been for the intrusion of these three foreign space bodies, all solar system material would still maintain the same direction of orbital movement. As it was, the impact of the three Angona tributaries injected new and foreign directional forces into the emerging solar system with the resultant appearance of _retrograde motion_. Retrograde motion in any astronomic system is always accidental and always appears as a result of the collisional impact of foreign space bodies. Such collisions may not always produce retrograde motion, but no retrograde ever appears except in a system containing masses which have diverse origins.” <a id="s486_774"></a>[UB 57:5.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p5_14)
11. The later evolution of the solar system.
	> “Subsequent to the birth of the solar system a period of diminishing solar disgorgement ensued. Decreasingly, for another five hundred thousand years, the sun continued to pour forth diminishing volumes of matter into surrounding space. But during these early times of erratic orbits, when the surrounding bodies made their nearest approach to the sun, the solar parent was able to recapture a large portion of this meteoric material.” <a id="s488_439"></a>[UB 57:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p6_1)
12. The influence of gravitation and tidal friction on planetary axial revolution.
	> “The planets nearest the sun were the first to have their revolutions slowed down by tidal friction. Such gravitational influences also contribute to the stabilization of planetary orbits while acting as a brake on the rate of planetary-axial revolution, causing a planet to revolve ever slower until axial revolution ceases, leaving one hemisphere of the planet always turned toward the sun or larger body, as is illustrated by the planet Mercury and by the moon, which always turns the same face toward Urantia.” <a id="s490_518"></a>[UB 57:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p6_2)
13. Tidal friction as concerns the earth and the moon and the possible future disruption of the moon.
	> “When the tidal frictions of the moon and the earth become equalized, the earth will always turn the same hemisphere toward the moon, and the day and month will be analogous—in length about forty-seven days. When such stability of orbits is attained, tidal frictions will go into reverse action, no longer driving the moon farther away from the earth but gradually drawing the satellite toward the planet. And then, in that far-distant future when the moon approaches to within about eleven thousand miles of the earth, the gravity action of the latter will cause the moon to disrupt, and this tidal-gravity explosion will shatter the moon into small particles, which may assemble about the world as rings of matter resembling those of Saturn or may be gradually drawn into the earth as meteors.” <a id="s492_800"></a>[UB 57:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p6_3)
14. Laws governing the disruption or collision of space bodies.
	> “If space bodies are similar in size and density, collisions may occur. But if two space bodies of similar density are relatively unequal in size, then, if the smaller progressively approaches the larger, the disruption of the smaller body will occur when the radius of its orbit becomes less then two and one-half times the radius of the larger body. Collisions among the giants of space are rare indeed, but these gravity-tidal explosions of lesser bodies are quite common.” <a id="s494_480"></a>[UB 57:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p6_4)
15. The completed organization of the Jupiter and Saturn systems.
	> “4,000,000,000 years ago witnessed the organization of the Jupiter and Saturn systems much as observed today except for their moons, which continued to increase in size for several billions of years. In fact, all of the planets and satellites of the solar system are still growing as the result of continued meteoric captures.” <a id="s496_331"></a>[UB 57:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p6_6)
16. Story of the further evolution and organization of the solar system.
	> “3,500,000,000 years ago the condensation nucleuses of the other ten planets were well formed, and the cores of most of the moons were intact, though some of the smaller satellites later united to make the present-day larger moons. This age may be regarded as the era of planetary assembly.
	> 
	> “3,000,000,000 years ago the solar system was functioning much as it does today. Its members continued to grow in size as space meteors continued to pour in upon the planets and their satellites at a prodigious rate.
	> 
	> “About this time your solar system was placed on the physical registry of Nebadon and given its name, Monmatia.
	> 
	> “2,500,000,000 years ago the planets had grown immensely in size. Urantia was a well-developed sphere about one tenth its present mass and was still growing rapidly by meteoric accretion.” <a id="s504_192"></a>[UB 57:6.7-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p6_7)
17. Description of the astronomic location of Urantia in the distorted Andronover nebula.
	> “The nucleus of the physical system to which your sun and its associated planets belong is the center of the onetime Andronover nebula. This former spiral nebula was slightly distorted by the gravity disruptions associated with the events which were attendant upon the birth of your solar system, and which were occasioned by the near approach of a large neighboring nebula. This near collision changed Andronover into a somewhat globular aggregation but did not wholly destroy the two-way procession of the suns and their associated physical groups. Your solar system now occupies a fairly central position in one of the arms of this distorted spiral, situated about halfway from the center out towards the edge of the star stream.” <a id="s506_737"></a>[UB 15:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p3_6)
18. The majority of solar systems had an origin different from ours.
	> “The majority of solar systems, however, had an origin entirely different from yours, and this is true even of those which were produced by gravity-tidal technique. But no matter what technique of world building obtains, gravity always produces the solar system type of creation; that is, a central sun or dark island with planets, satellites, subsatellites, and meteors.” <a id="s508_376"></a>[UB 41:10.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p10_2)

## SECTION 5. NEBULAE

### I. **Function of Force Organizers**

#### A. Transmutation of space potency into physical reality.

1. The force-charge of space and the ultimaton are not fully understood.
	> “While creation and universe organization remain forever under the control of the infinite Creators and their associates, the whole phenomenon proceeds in accordance with an ordained technique and in conformity to the gravity laws of force, energy, and matter. But there is something of mystery associated with the universal force-charge of space; we quite understand the organization of the material creations from the ultimatonic stage forward, but we do not fully comprehend the cosmic ancestry of the ultimatons. We are confident that these ancestral forces have a Paradise origin because they forever swing through pervaded space in the exact gigantic outlines of Paradise. Though nonresponsive to Paradise gravity, this force-charge of space, the ancestor of all materialization, does always respond to the presence of nether Paradise, being apparently circuited in and out of the nether Paradise center.” <a id="s517_915"></a>[UB 15:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_1)
2. Function of force organizers and power directors in the transmutation of space potency into physical reality.
	> “The Paradise force organizers transmute space potency into primordial force and evolve this prematerial potential into the primary and secondary energy manifestations of physical reality. When this energy attains gravity-responding levels, the power directors and their associates of the superuniverse regime appear upon the scene and begin their never-ending manipulations designed to establish the manifold power circuits and energy channels of the universes of time and space. Thus does physical matter appear in space, and so is the stage set for the inauguration of universe organization.” <a id="s519_599"></a>[UB 15:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_2)
3. The segmentation of energy has never been solved by Nebadon physicists due to the inaccessibility of the Paradise force organizers.
	> “This segmentation of energy is a phenomenon which has never been solved by the physicists of Nebadon. Their chief difficulty lies in the relative inaccessibility of the Paradise force organizers, for the living power directors, though they are competent to deal with space-energy, do not have the least conception of the origin of the energies they so skillfully and intelligently manipulate.” <a id="s521_398"></a>[UB 15:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_3)
4. Paradise force organizers are the originators of the ten varieties of nebulae to be observed throughout the master universe.
	> “Paradise force organizers are nebulae originators; they are able to initiate about their space presence the tremendous cyclones of force which, when once started, can never be stopped or limited until the all-pervading forces are mobilized for the eventual appearance of the ultimatonic units of universe matter. Thus are brought into being the spiral and other nebulae, the mother wheels of the direct-origin suns and their varied systems. In outer space there may be seen ten different forms of nebulae, phases of primary universe evolution, and these vast energy wheels had the same origin as did those in the seven superuniverses.” <a id="s523_640"></a>[UB 15:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_4)

### II. **Additional Facts about Nebulae**

<a id="s527_0"></a>[UB 15:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_5)
#### A. Nebulae vary in size, some of the larger ones giving origin to one hundred million suns.

> “Nebulae vary greatly in size and in the resulting number and aggregate mass of their stellar and planetary offspring. A sun-forming nebula just north of the borders of Orvonton, but within the superuniverse space level, has already given origin to approximately forty thousand suns, and the mother wheel is still throwing off suns, the majority of which are many times the size of yours. Some of the larger nebulae of outer space are giving origin to as many as one hundred million suns.” <a id="s530_492"></a>[UB 15:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_5)

#### B. Nebulae are not directly related to the administrative units of the superuniverses.

> “Nebulae are not directly related to any of the administrative units, such as minor sectors or local universes, although some local universes have been organized from the products of a single nebula. Each local universe embraces exactly one one-hundred-thousandth part of the total energy charge of a superuniverse irrespective of nebular relationship, for energy is not organized by nebulae—it is universally distributed.” <a id="s534_426"></a>[UB 15:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_6)

#### C. Not all spiral nebulae are engaged in sun making.

> “Not all spiral nebulae are engaged in sun making. Some have retained control of many of their segregated stellar offspring, and their spiral appearance is occasioned by the fact that their suns pass out of the nebular arm in close formation but return by diverse routes, thus making it easy to observe them at one point but more difficult to see them when widely scattered on their different returning routes farther out and away from the arm of the nebula. There are not many sun-forming nebulae active in Orvonton at the present time, though Andromeda, which is outside the inhabited superuniverse, is very active. This far-distant nebula is visible to the naked eye, and when you view it, pause to consider that the light you behold left those distant suns almost one million years ago.” <a id="s538_794"></a>[UB 15:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_7)

#### D. The Milky Way is composed of vast numbers of nebulae; some through rearrangement appear as clouds, like the Magellanic Cloud.

> “The Milky Way galaxy is composed of vast numbers of former spiral and other nebulae, and many still retain their original configuration. But as the result of internal catastrophes and external attraction, many have suffered such distortion and rearrangement as to cause these enormous aggregations to appear as gigantic luminous masses of blazing suns, like the Magellanic Cloud. The globular type of star clusters predominates near the outer margins of Orvonton.” <a id="s542_468"></a>[UB 15:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_8)

#### E. Many Orvonton star clouds are comparable to nebulae. Some, however, consist of gaseous materials only.

> “The vast star clouds of Orvonton should be regarded as individual aggregations of matter comparable to the separate nebulae observable in the space regions external to the Milky Way galaxy. Many of the so-called star clouds of space, however, consist of gaseous material only. The energy potential of these stellar gas clouds is unbelievably enormous, and some of it is taken up by near-by suns and redispatched in space as solar emanations.” <a id="s546_446"></a>[UB 15:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_9)

### III. **Hydrogen Clouds in Space Regions—Later Sources of Energy**

> “During the earlier times of universe materialization the space regions are interspersed with vast hydrogen clouds, just such astronomic dust clusters as now characterize many regions throughout remote space. Much of the organized matter which the blazing suns break down and disperse as radiant energy was originally built up in these early appearing hydrogen clouds of space. Under certain unusual conditions atom disruption also occurs at the nucleus of the larger hydrogen masses. And all of these phenomena of atom building and atom dissolution, as in the highly heated nebulae, are attended by the emergence of flood tides of short space rays of radiant energy. Accompanying these diverse radiations is a form of space-energy unknown on Urantia.” <a id="s550_755"></a>[UB 58:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p3_1)

## SECTION 6. THE ORIGIN OF SPACE BODIES

> “The bulk of the mass contained in the suns and planets of a superuniverse originates in the nebular wheels; very little of superuniverse mass is organized by the direct action of the power directors (as in the construction of architectural spheres), although a constantly varying quantity of matter originates in open space.
> 
> “As to origin, the majority of the suns, planets, and other spheres can be classified in one of the following ten groups:
> 
> “1. _Concentric Contraction Rings_. Not all nebulae are spiral. Many an immense nebula, instead of splitting into a double star system or evolving as a spiral, undergoes condensation by multiple-ring formation. For long periods such a nebula appears as an enormous central sun surrounded by numerous gigantic clouds of encircling, ring-appearing formations of matter.
> 
> “2. _The Whirled Stars_ embrace those suns which are thrown off the great mother wheels of highly heated gases. They are not thrown off as rings but in right- and left-handed processions. Whirled stars are also of origin in other-than-spiral nebulae.
> 
> “3. _Gravity-explosion Planets_. When a sun is born of a spiral or of a barred nebula, not infrequently it is thrown out a considerable distance. Such a sun is highly gaseous, and subsequently, after it has somewhat cooled and condensed, it may chance to swing near some enormous mass of matter, a gigantic sun or a dark island of space. Such an approach may not be near enough to result in collision but still near enough to allow the gravity pull of the greater body to start tidal convulsions in the lesser, thus initiating a series of tidal upheavals which occur simultaneously on opposite sides of the convulsed sun. At their height these explosive eruptions produce a series of varying-sized aggregations of matter which may be projected beyond the gravity-reclamation zone of the erupting sun, thus becoming stabilized in orbits of their own around one of the two bodies concerned in this episode. Later on the larger collections of matter unite and gradually draw the smaller bodies to themselves. In this way many of the solid planets of the lesser systems are brought into existence. Your own solar system had just such an origin.
> 
> “4. _Centrifugal Planetary Daughters_. Enormous suns, when in certain stages of development, and if their revolutionary rate greatly accelerates, begin to throw off large quantities of matter which may subsequently be assembled to form small worlds that continue to encircle the parent sun.
> 
> “5. _Gravity-deficiency Spheres_. There is a critical limit to the size of individual stars. When a sun reaches this limit, unless it slows down in revolutionary rate, it is doomed to split; sun fission occurs, and a new double star of this variety is born. Numerous small planets may be subsequently formed as a by-product of this gigantic disruption.
> 
> “6. _Contractural Stars_. In the smaller systems the largest outer planet sometimes draws to itself its neighboring worlds, while those planets near the sun begin their terminal plunge. With your solar system, such an end would mean that the four inner planets would be claimed by the sun, while the major planet, Jupiter, would be greatly enlarged by capturing the remaining worlds. Such an end of a solar system would result in the production of two adjacent but unequal suns, one type of double star formation. Such catastrophes are infrequent except out on the fringe of the superuniverse starry aggregations.
> 
> “7. _Cumulative Spheres_. From the vast quantity of matter circulating in space, small planets may slowly accumulate. They grow by meteoric accretion and by minor collisions. In certain sectors of space, conditions favor such forms of planetary birth. Many an inhabited world has had such an origin.
> 
> “Some of the dense dark islands are the direct result of the accretions of transmuting energy in space. Another group of these dark islands have come into being by the accumulation of enormous quantities of cold matter, mere fragments and meteors, circulating through space. Such aggregations of matter have never been hot and, except for density, are in composition very similar to Urantia.
> 
> “8. _Burned-out Suns_. Some of the dark islands of space are burned-out isolated suns, all available space-energy having been emitted. The organized units of matter approximate full condensation, virtual complete con- solidation; and it requires ages upon ages for such enormous masses of highly condensed matter to be recharged in the circuits of space and thus to be prepared for new cycles of universe function following a collision or some equally revivifying cosmic happening.
> 
> “9. _Collisional Spheres_. In those regions of thicker clustering, collisions are not uncommon. Such an astronomic readjustment is accompanied by tremendous energy changes and matter transmutations. Collisions involving dead suns are peculiarly influential in creating widespread energy fluctuations. Collisional debris often constitutes the material nucleuses for the subsequent formation of planetary bodies adapted to mortal habitation.
> 
> “10. _Architectural Worlds_. These are the worlds which are built according to plans and specifications for some special purpose, such as Salvington, the headquarters of your local universe, and Uversa, the seat of government of our superuniverse.
> 
> “There are numerous other techniques for evolving suns and segregating planets, but the foregoing procedures suggest the methods whereby the vast majority of stellar systems and planetary families are brought into existence. To undertake to describe all the various techniques involved in stellar metamorphosis and planetary evolution would require the narration of almost one hundred different modes of sun formation and planetary origin. As your star students scan the heavens, they will observe phenomena indicative of all these modes of stellar evolution, but they will seldom detect evidence of the formation of those small, nonluminous collections of matter which serve as inhabited planets, the most important of the vast material creations. <a id="s580_751"></a>[UB 15:5.1-14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p5_1)

## SECTION 7. THE SPHERES OF SPACE

> “Irrespective of origin, the various spheres of space are classifiable into the following major divisions:
> “1. The suns—the stars of space.
> “2. The dark islands of space.
> “3. Minor space bodies—comets, meteors, and planetesimals.
> “4. The planets, including the inhabited worlds.
> “5. Architectural spheres—worlds made to order.” <a id="s589_51"></a>[UB 15:6.1-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_1)

> “With the exception of the architectural spheres, all space bodies have had an evolutionary origin, evolutionary in the sense that they have not been brought into being by fiat of Deity, evolutionary in the sense that the creative acts of God have unfolded by a time-space technique through the operation of many of the created and eventuated intelligences of Deity.” <a id="s591_370"></a>[UB 15:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_7)

### I. **Suns**

#### A. Types of suns.

> “_The Suns_. These are the stars of space in all their various stages of existence. Some are solitary evolving space systems; others are double stars, contracting or disappearing planetary systems. The stars of space exist in no less than a thousand different states and stages. You are familiar with suns that emit light accompanied by heat; but there are also suns which shine without heat.” <a id="s597_396"></a>[UB 15:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_8)

#### B. Number of suns.

1. Orvonton is illuminated and warmed by more than ten trillion suns.
	> “The superuniverse of Orvonton is illuminated and warmed by more than ten trillion blazing suns. These suns are the stars of your observable astronomic system. More than two trillion are too distant and too small ever to be seen from Urantia. But in the master universe there are as many suns as there are glasses of water in the oceans of your world.” <a id="s602_356"></a>[UB 15:6.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_10)
2. There are over two thousand suns in Satania.
	> “There are upward of two thousand brilliant suns pouring forth light and energy in Satania, and your own sun is an average blazing orb. Of the thirty suns nearest yours, only three are brighter. The Universe Power Directors initiate the specialized currents of energy which play between the individual stars and their respective systems. These solar furnaces, together with the dark giants of space, serve the power centers and physical controllers as way stations for the effective concentrating and directionizing of the energy circuits of the material creations.” <a id="s604_570"></a>[UB 41:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_1)

#### C. Critical size.

> “When suns that are too large are thrown off a nebular mother wheel, they soon break up or form double stars. All suns are originally truly gaseous, though they may later transiently exist in a semiliquid state. When your sun attained this quasi-liquid state of supergas pressure, it was not sufficiently large to split equatorially, this being one type of double star formation.” <a id="s608_383"></a>[UB 41:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_3)

> “When less than one tenth the size of your sun, these fiery spheres rapidly contract, condense, and cool. When upwards of thirty times its size—rather thirty times the gross content of actual material—suns readily split into two separate bodies, either becoming the centers of new systems or else remaining in each other’s gravity grasp and revolving about a common center as one type of double star.” <a id="s610_404"></a>[UB 41:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_4)

> “The most recent of the major cosmic eruptions in Orvonton was the extraordinary double star explosion, the light of which reached Urantia in A.D. 1572. This conflagration was so intense that the explosion was clearly visible in broad daylight.” <a id="s612_248"></a>[UB 41:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_5)

#### D. Composition of suns.

1. The composition of all suns, dark islands, planets, satellites, and meteors is quite identical.
	> “The suns of Nebadon are not unlike those of other universes. The material composition of all suns, dark islands, planets, and satellites, even meteors, is quite identical. These suns have an average diameter of about one million miles, that of your own solar orb being slightly less. The largest star in the universe, the stellar cloud Antares, is four hundred and fifty times the diameter of your sun and is sixty million times its volume. But there is abundant space to accommodate all of these enormous suns. They have just as much comparative elbow room in space as one dozen oranges would have if they were circulating about throughout the interior of Urantia, and were the planet a hollow globe.” <a id="s617_707"></a>[UB 41:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_2)
2. Suns vary in state, mass, and density.
	> “Not all stars are solid, but many of the older ones are. Some of the reddish, faintly glimmering stars have acquired a density at the center of their enormous masses which would be expressed by saying that one cubic inch of such a star, if on Urantia, would weigh six thousand pounds. The enormous pressure, accompanied by loss of heat and circulating energy, has resulted in bringing the orbits of the basic material units closer and closer together until they now closely approach the status of electronic condensation. This process of cooling and contraction may continue to the limiting and critical explosion point of ultimatonic condensation.” <a id="s619_654"></a>[UB 41:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_6)

#### E. Relation of a sun’s age to light.

> “Most of the giant suns are relatively young; most of the dwarf stars are old, but not all. The collisional dwarfs may be very young and may glow with an intense white light, never having known an initial red stage of youthful shining. Both very young and very old suns usually shine with a reddish glow. The yellow tinge indicates moderate youth or approaching old age, but the brilliant white light signifies robust and extended adult life.” <a id="s623_446"></a>[UB 41:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_7)

#### F. Variable stars.

1. Pulsating suns.
	> “While all adolescent suns do not pass through a pulsating stage, at least not visibly, when looking out into space you may observe many of these younger stars whose gigantic respiratory heaves require from two to seven days to complete a cycle. Your own sun still carries a diminishing legacy of the mighty upswellings of its younger days, but the period has lengthened from the former three and one-half day pulsations to the present eleven and one-half year sunspot cycles.” <a id="s628_481"></a>[UB 41:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_8)
2. Pulsating suns may give rise to solar systems.
	> “Some of the variable stars, in or near the state of maximum pulsation, are in process of giving origin to subsidiary systems, many of which will eventually be much like your own sun and its revolving planets. Your sun was in just such a state of mighty pulsation when the massive Angona system swung into near approach, and the outer surface of the sun began to erupt veritable streams—continuous sheets—of matter. This kept up with ever-increasing violence until nearest apposition, when the limits of solar cohesion were reached and a vast pinnacle of matter, the ancestor of the solar system, was disgorged. In similar circumstances the closest approach of the attracting body sometimes draws off whole planets, even a quarter or third of a sun. These major extrusions form certain peculiar cloud-bound types of worlds, spheres much like Jupiter and Saturn.” <a id="s630_866"></a>[UB 41:10.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p10_1)
3. Other causes of variable stars.
	> “Stellar variables have numerous origins. In some double stars the tides caused by rapidly changing distances as the two bodies swing around their orbits also occasion periodic fluctuations of light. These gravity variations produce regular and recurrent flares, just as the capture of meteors by the accretion of energy-material at the surface would result in a comparatively sudden flash of light which would speedily recede to normal brightness for that sun. Sometimes a sun will capture a stream of meteors in a line of lessened gravity opposition, and occasionally collisions cause stellar flare-ups, but the majority of such phenomena are wholly due to internal fluctuations.
	> 
	> “In one group of variable stars the period of light fluctuation is directly dependent on luminosity, and knowledge of this fact enables astronomers to utilize such suns as universe lighthouses or accurate measuring points for the further exploration of distant star clusters. By this technique it is possible to measure stellar distances most precisely up to more than one million light-years.” <a id="s634_398"></a>[UB 41:3.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p3_9)

#### G. Density of suns.

1. Though gaseous, the specific gravity of our sun is one and one-half.
	> “The mass of your sun is slightly greater than the estimate of your physicists, who have reckoned it as about two octillion (2x1027) tons. It now exists about halfway between the most dense and the most diffuse stars, having about one and one-half times the density of water. But your sun is neither a liquid nor a solid—it is gaseous—and this is true notwithstanding the difficulty of explaining how gaseous matter can attain this and even much greater densities.” <a id="s639_469"></a>[UB 41:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p4_1)

2. Physical state and density—supergases.
	> “Gaseous, liquid, and solid states are matters of atomic-molecular relationships, but density is a relationship of space and mass. Density varies directly with the quantity of mass in space and inversely with the amount of space in mass, the space between the central cores of matter and the particles which whirl around these centers as well as the space within such material particles.” <a id="s642_392"></a>[UB 41:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p4_2)

	> “Cooling stars can be physically gaseous and tremendously dense at the same time. You are not familiar with the solar _supergases_, but these and other unusual forms of matter explain how even nonsolid suns can attain a density equal to iron—about the same as Urantia—and yet be in a highly heated gaseous state and continue to function as suns. The atoms in these dense supergases are exceptionally small; they contain few electrons. Such suns have also largely lost their free ultimatonic stores of energy.” <a id="s644_513"></a>[UB 41:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p4_3)
3. Comparative density of suns.
	> “One of your near-by suns, which started life with about the same mass as yours, has now contracted almost to the size of Urantia, having become sixty thousand times as dense as your sun. The weight of this hot-cold gaseous-solid is about one ton per cubic inch. And still this sun shines with a faint reddish glow, the senile glimmer of a dying monarch of light.” <a id="s646_368"></a>[UB 41:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p4_4)

	> “The massive sun of Veluntia, one of the largest in Orvonton, has a density only one one-thousandth that of Urantia’s atmosphere. Were it in composition similar to your atmosphere and not superheated, it would be such a vacuum that human beings would speedily suffocate if they were in or on it.” <a id="s648_300"></a>[UB 41:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p4_6)

	> “Another of the Orvonton giants now has a surface temperature a trifle under three thousand degrees. Its diameter is over three hundred million miles—ample room to accommodate your sun and the present orbit of the earth. And yet, for all this enormous size, over forty million times that of your sun, its mass is only about thirty times greater. These enormous suns have an extending fringe that reaches almost from one to the other.” <a id="s650_438"></a>[UB 41:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p4_7)

#### H. Solar energy.

1. Energy function of suns.
	- a. There are numerous techniques of sun formation and planetary origin.
		> “There are numerous other techniques for evolving suns and segregating planets, but the foregoing procedures suggest the methods whereby the vast majority of stellar systems and planetary families are brought into existence. To undertake to describe all the various techniques involved in stellar metamorphosis and planetary evolution would require the narration of almost one hundred different modes of sun formation and planetary origin. As your star students scan the heavens, they will observe phenomena indicative of all these modes of stellar evolution, but they will seldom detect evidence of the formation of those small, nonluminous collections of matter which serve as inhabited planets, the most important of the vast material creations.” <a id="s656_754"></a>[UB 15:5.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p5_14)
	- b. Some suns shine on forever—others are destined to burn out.
		> “Only those suns which function in the direct channels of the main streams of universe energy can shine on forever. Such solar furnaces blaze on indefinitely, being able to replenish their material losses by the intake of space-force and analogous circulating energy. But stars far removed from these chief channels of recharging are destined to undergo energy depletion—gradually cool off and eventually burn out.” <a id="s658_420"></a>[UB 41:7.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p7_14)
	- c. Sun rejuvenation.
		> “Such dead or dying suns can be rejuvenated by collisional impact or can be recharged by certain nonluminous energy islands of space or through gravity-robbery of near-by smaller suns or systems. The majority of dead suns will experience revivification by these or other evolutionary techniques. Those which are not thus eventually recharged are destined to undergo disruption by mass explosion when the gravity condensation attains the critical level of ultimatonic condensation of energy pressure. Such disappearing suns thus become energy of the rarest form, admirably adapted to energize other more favorably situated suns.” <a id="s660_633"></a>[UB 41:7.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p7_15)
2. Sun temperatures.
	> “The internal temperature of many of the suns, even your own, is much higher than is commonly believed. In the interior of a sun practically no whole atoms exist; they are all more or less shattered by the intensive X-ray bombardment which is indigenous to such high temperatures. Regardless of what material elements may appear in the outer layers of a sun, those in the interior are rendered very similar by the dissociative action of the disruptive X rays. X ray is the great leveler of atomic existence.
	> 
	> “The surface temperature of your sun is almost 6,000 degrees, but it rapidly increases as the interior is penetrated until it attains the unbelievable height of about 35,000,000 degrees in the central regions. (All of these temperatures refer to your Fahrenheit scale.)<a id="s664_272"></a>[UB 41:7.1-2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p7_1)

	> “There exists a regulating blanket of hot gases (sometimes millions of degrees in temperature) which envelops the suns, and which acts to stabilize heat loss and otherwise prevent hazardous fluctuations of heat dissipation. During the active life of a sun the internal temperature of 35,000,000 degrees remains about the same quite regardless of the progressive fall of the external temperature.” <a id="s666_400"></a>[UB 41:7.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p7_11)
3. Sources of solar energy.
	> “All of these phenomena are indicative of enormous energy expenditure, and the sources of solar energy, named in the order of their importance, are:
	> “1. Annihilation of atoms and, eventually, of electrons.
	> “2. Transmutation of elements, including the radioactive group of energies thus liberated.
	> “3. The accumulation and transmission of certain universal space-energies.
	> “4. Space matter and meteors which are incessantly diving into the blazing suns.
	> “5. Solar contraction; the cooling and consequent contraction of a sun yields energy and heat sometimes greater than that supplied by space matter.
	> “6. Gravity action at high temperatures transforms certain circuitized power into radiative energies.
	> “7. Recaptive light and other matter which are drawn back into the sun after having left it, together with other energies having extrasolar origin.” <a id="s675_152"></a>[UB 41:7.3-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p7_3)
4. 35 million degrees—the electronic boiling point
	> “You might try to visualize 35,000,000 degrees of heat, in association with certain gravity pressures, as the electronic boiling point. Under such pressure and at such temperature all atoms are degraded and broken up into their electronic and other ancestral components; even the electrons and other associations of ultimatons may be broken up, but the suns are not able to degrade the ultimatons.
	> 
	> “These solar temperatures operate to enormously speed up the ultimatons and the electrons, at least such of the latter as continue to maintain their existence under these conditions. You will realize what high temperature means by way of the acceleration of ultimatonic and electronic activities when you pause to consider that one drop of ordinary water contains over one billion trillions of atoms. This is the energy of more than one hundred horsepower exerted continuously for two years. The total heat now given out by the solar system sun each second is sufficient to boil all the water in all the oceans on Urantia in just one second of time.” <a id="s679_654"></a>[UB 41:7.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p7_12)

#### I. Sun stability.

1. Equilibrium between the pressures of gravity and heat determines the stability of a sun.
	> “Sun stability is wholly dependent on the equilibrium between gravity-heat contention—tremendous pressures counterbalanced by unimagined temperatures. The interior gas elasticity of the suns upholds the overlying layers of varied materials, and when gravity and heat are in equilibrium, the weight of the outer materials exactly equals the temperature pressure of the underlying and interior gases. In many of the younger stars continued gravity condensation produces ever-heightening internal temperatures, and as internal heat increases, the interior X-ray pressure of supergas winds becomes so great that, in connection with the centrifugal motion, a sun begins to throw its exterior layers off into space, thus redressing the imbalance between gravity and heat.” <a id="s684_770"></a>[UB 41:9.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p9_4)
2. Present and future state of our sun.
	> “Your own sun has long since attained relative equilibrium between its expansion and contraction cycles, those disturbances which produce the gigantic pulsations of many of the younger stars. Your sun is now passing out of its six billionth year. At the present time it is functioning through the period of greatest economy. It will shine on as of present efficiency for more than twenty-five billion years. It will probably experience a partially efficient period of decline as long as the combined periods of its youth and stabilized function.” <a id="s686_550"></a>[UB 41:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p9_5)
3. Sun depletion—the result of light escape and ultimatonic leakage.
	> “The larger suns maintain such a gravity control over their electrons that light escapes only with the aid of the powerful X rays. These helper rays penetrate all space and are concerned in the maintenance of the basic ultimatonic associations of energy. The great energy losses in the early days of a sun, subsequent to its attainment of maximum temperature—upwards of 35,000,000 degrees—are not so much due to light escape as to ultimatonic leakage. These ultimaton energies escape out into space, to engage in the adventure of electronic association and energy materialization, as a veritable energy blast during adolescent solar times.” <a id="s688_644"></a>[UB 41:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p9_1)

#### J. Sun collapse.

> “In large suns—small circular nebulae—when hydrogen is exhausted and gravity contraction ensues, if such a body is not sufficiently opaque to retain the internal pressure of support for the outer gas regions, then a sudden collapse occurs. The gravity-electric changes give origin to vast quantities of tiny particles devoid of electric potential, and such particles readily escape from the solar interior, thus bringing about the collapse of a gigantic sun within a few days. It was such an emigration of these ‘runaway particles’ that occasioned the collapse of the giant nova of the Andromeda nebula about fifty years ago. This vast stellar body collapsed in forty minutes of Urantia time.” <a id="s692_696"></a>[UB 41:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p8_3)

### II. **The Dark Islands of Space**

#### A. The dark islands of space—control functions.

> “_The Dark Islands of Space_. These are the dead suns and other large aggregations of matter devoid of light and heat. The dark islands are sometimes enormous in mass and exert a powerful influence in universe equilibrium and energy manipulation. The density of some of these large masses is well-nigh unbelievable. And this great concentration of mass enables these dark islands to function as powerful balance wheels, holding large neighboring systems in effective leash. They hold the gravity balance of power in many constellations; many physical systems which would otherwise speedily dive to destruction in near-by suns are held securely in the gravity grasp of these guardian dark islands. It is because of this function that we can locate them accurately. We have measured the gravity pull of the luminous bodies, and we can therefore calculate the exact size and location of the dark islands of space which so effectively function to hold a given system steady in its course.” <a id="s698_988"></a>[UB 15:6.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_11)

### III. **Minor Space Bodies**

#### A. Comets, meteors, and other bodies.

> “_Minor Space Bodies_. The meteors and other small particles of matter circulating and evolving in space constitute an enormous aggregate of energy and material substance.
> 
> “Many comets are unestablished wild offspring of the solar mother wheels, which are being gradually brought under control of the central governing sun. Comets also have numerous other origins. A comet’s tail points away from the attracting body or sun because of the electrical reaction of its highly expanded gases and because of the actual pressure of light and other energies emanating from the sun. This phenomenon constitutes one of the positive proofs of the reality of light and its associated energies; it demonstrates that light has weight. Light is a real substance, not simply waves of hypothetical ether.” <a id="s706_620"></a>[UB 15:6.12-13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_12)

### IV. **The Planets**

> “_The Planets_. These are the larger aggregations of matter which follow an orbit around a sun or some other space body; they range in size from planetesimals to enormous gaseous, liquid, or solid spheres. The cold worlds which have been built up by the assemblage of floating space material, when they happen to be in proper relation to a near-by sun, are the more ideal planets to harbor intelligent inhabitants. The dead suns are not, as a rule, suited to life; they are usually too far away from a living, blazing sun, and further, they are altogether too massive; gravity is tremendous at the surface.
> 
> “In your superuniverse not one cool planet in forty is habitable by beings of your order. And, of course, the superheated suns and the frigid outlying worlds are unfit to harbor higher life. In your solar system only three planets are at present suited to harbor life. Urantia, in size, density, and location, is in many respects ideal for human habitation.” <a id="s712_361"></a>[UB 15:6.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_14)

#### A. Basic universe life patterns are varied by local physical conditions.

> “The laws of physical-energy behavior are basically universal, but local influences have much to do with the physical conditions which prevail on individual planets and in local systems. An almost endless variety of creature life and other living manifestations characterizes the countless worlds of space. There are, however, certain points of similarity in a group of worlds associated in a given system, while there also is a universe pattern of intelligent life. There are physical relationships among those planetary systems which belong to the same physical circuit, and which closely follow each other in the endless swing around the circle of universes.” <a id="s716_665"></a>[UB 15:6.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_16)

#### B. Planets were made to be inhabited.

> “The myriads of planetary systems were all made to be eventually inhabited by many different types of intelligent creatures, beings who could know God, receive the divine affection, and love him in return. The universe of universes is the work of God and the dwelling place of his diverse creatures. ‘God created the heavens and formed the earth; he established the universe and created this world not in vain; he formed it to be inhabited.’” <a id="s720_445"></a>[UB 1:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p0_2)

#### C. Urantia—its number and location.

> “The grand universe number of your world, Urantia, is 5,342,482,337,666. That is the registry number on Uversa and on Paradise, your number in the catalogue of the inhabited worlds. I know the physical-sphere registry number, but it is of such an extraordinary size that it is of little practical significance to the mortal mind.” <a id="s724_333"></a>[UB 15:14.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p14_8)

> “Urantia is comparatively isolated on the outskirts of Satania, your solar system, with one exception, being the farthest removed from Jerusem, while Satania itself is next to the outermost system of Norlatiadek, and this constellation is now traversing the outer fringe of Nebadon. You were truly among the least of all creation until Michael’s bestowal elevated your planet to a position of honor and great universe interest. Sometimes the last is first, while truly the least becomes greatest.” <a id="s726_500"></a>[UB 41:10.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p10_5)

### V. **Architectural Spheres**

#### A. Headquarters worlds of superuniverses and other administrative units are architectural spheres.

> “While each superuniverse government presides near the center of the evolutionary universes of its space segment, it occupies a world made to order and is peopled by accredited personalities. These headquarters worlds are architectural spheres, space bodies specifically constructed for their special purpose. While sharing the light of nearby suns, these spheres are independently lighted and heated. Each has a sun which gives forth light without heat, like the satellites of Paradise, while each is supplied with heat by the circulation of certain energy currents near the surface of the sphere. These headquarters worlds belong to one of the greater systems situated near the astronomical center of their respective superuniverses.<a id="s732_737"></a>[UB 15:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_1)

> “The headquarters world of the seven superuniverses partake of the nature and grandeur of Paradise, their central pattern of perfection. In reality, all headquarters worlds are paradisiacal. They are indeed heavenly abodes, and they increase in material size, morontia beauty, and spirit glory from Jerusem to the central Isle. And all the satellites of these headquarters worlds are also architectural spheres.” <a id="s734_415"></a>[UB 15:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_3)

#### B. Summary of architectural worlds.

1. Superuniverse—491—capital surrounded by 7 clusters of 70 worlds each.
2. Major sector—71—capital surrounded by 70 spheres.
3. Minor sector—8—capital surrounded by 7 spheres.
4. Local universe—491—capital surrounded by 70 primary spheres in 10 groups, each surrounded by 6 tributary spheres.
5. Constellation—771—capital surrounded by 70 major spheres each with 10 satellites.
6. System—57—capital surrounded by 7 transition worlds each surrounded by 7 sub-satellites.

## CONCLUSION

> “The creation of energy and the bestowal of life are the prerogatives of the Universal Father and his associate Creator personalities. The river of energy and life is a continuous outpouring from the Deities, the universal and united stream of Paradise force going forth to all space. This divine energy pervades all creation. The force organizers initiate those changes and institute those modifications of space-force which eventuate in energy; the power directors transmute energy into matter; thus the material worlds are born. The Life Carriers initiate those processes in dead matter which we call life, material life. The Morontia Power Supervisors likewise perform throughout the transition realms between the material and the spiritual worlds. The higher spirit Creators inaugurate similar processes in divine forms of energy, and there ensue the higher spirit forms of intelligent life.<a id="s747_898"></a>[UB 42:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p1_5)

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science#index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science/2">Part II. Geology</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>