---
title: "Workbook II — Science in The Urantia Book — Part III. Physics and Chemistry"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: physics, chemistry, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1959 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science/2"><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Part II. Geology</span></a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science#index"><span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span></a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science/4"><span class="pr-2">Part IV. Biology</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span></a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

## SECTION 1. ORIGINS AND COSMIC CONTROL OF FORCES AND ENERGIES

### I. **Philosophical Basis for Time-space Creation**

#### A. Universe mechanisms.

1. Time and space are a conjoined mechanism whereby finite creatures exist in a universe controlled by the Infinite.

	> “Time and space are a conjoined mechanism of the master universe. They are the devices whereby finite creatures are enabled to co-exist in the cosmos with the Infinite. Finite creatures are effectively insulated from the absolute levels by time and space. But these insulating media, without which no mortal could exist, operate directly to limit the range of finite action. Without them no creature could act, but by them the acts of every creature are definitely limited.” <a id="s34_478"></a>[UB 118:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p9_1)

2. The mechanisms of higher minds somewhat limit the action of subordinate intelligences. There are limitations on man’s free will.

	> “Mechanisms produced by higher minds function to liberate their creative sources but to some degree unvaryingly limit the action of all subordinate intelligences. To the creatures of the universes this limitation becomes apparent as the mechanism of the universes. Man does not have unfettered free will; there are limits to his range of choice, but within the radius of this choice his will is relatively sovereign.” <a id="s38_421"></a>[UB 118:9.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p9_2)

3. Man does not perfectly control the mortal body as he will the self-created mechanism after fusion.

	> “The life mechanism of the mortal personality, the human body, is the product of supermortal creative design; therefore it can never be perfectly controlled by man himself. Only when ascending man, in liaison with the fused Adjuster, self-creates the mechanism for personality expression, will he achieve perfected control thereof.” <a id="s42_336"></a>[UB 118:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p9_3)

4. The grand universe is mechanism as well as organism—activated by Supreme Mind and co-ordinated by Supreme Spirit.

	> “The grand universe is mechanism as well as organism, mechanical and living—a living mechanism activated by a Supreme Mind, co-ordinating with a Supreme Spirit, and finding expression on maximum levels of power and personality unification as the Supreme Being. But to deny the mechanism of the finite creation is to deny fact and to disregard reality.” <a id="s46_356"></a>[UB 118:9.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p9_4)

5. Mechanisms are the product of Creator thought—their purpose is discovered in their origin—not in their function.

	> “Mechanisms are the products of mind, creative mind acting on and in cosmic potentials. Mechanisms are the fixed crystallizations of Creator thought, and they ever function true to the volitional concept that gave them origin. But the purposiveness of any mechanism is in its origin, not in its function.” <a id="s50_309"></a>[UB 118:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p9_5)

6. Universe mechanisms are the patterns of the expression of Deity. They exist in response to the will of the First Source and Center.

	> “These mechanisms should not be thought of as limiting the action of Deity; rather is it true that in these very mechanics Deity has achieved one phase of eternal expression. The basic universe mechanisms have come into existence in response to the absolute will of the First Source and Center, and they will therefore eternally function in perfect harmony with the plan of the Infinite; they are, indeed, the nonvolitional patterns of that very plan.” <a id="s54_456"></a>[UB 118:9.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p9_6)

7. On all universe levels, there exists some relationship between person and pattern. With the Supreme and the Ultimate this is a new relationship.

	> “We understand something of how the mechanism of Paradise is correlated with the personality of the Eternal Son; this is the function of the Conjoint Actor. And we have theories regarding the operations of the Universal Absolute with respect to the theoretical mechanisms of the Unqualified and the potential person of the Deity Absolute. But in the evolving Deities of Supreme and Ultimate we observe that certain impersonal phases are being actually united with their volitional counterparts, and thus there is evolving a new relationship between pattern and person.” <a id="s58_573"></a>[UB 118:9.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p9_7)

### II. **Source and Control of Universe Energies and Forces**

#### A. The First Source and Center.

1. “God, as the First Source and Center, is primal in relation to total reality—unqualifiedly.” <a id="s64_96"></a>[UB 0:3.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p3_9)

	> “_The First Source and Center_ is related to the universes as:
	> 
	> “1. The gravity forces of the material universes are convergent in the gravity center of nether Paradise.<a id="s68_108"></a>[UB 0:3.12-13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p3_13)

2. “As a physical controller in the material universe of universes, the First Source and Center functions in the patterns of the eternal Isle of Paradise, and through this absolute gravity center the eternal God exercises cosmic overcontrol of the physical level equally in the central universe and throughout the universe of universes.” <a id="s70_338"></a>[UB 1:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p2_10)

3. “Viewed as an unspiritual phenomenon, God is energy. This declaration of physical fact is predicated on the incomprehensible truth that the First Source and Center is the primal cause of the universal physical phenomena of all space. Prom this divine activity all physical energy and other material manifestations are derived.” <a id="s72_331"></a>[UB 3:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p2_3)

4. “God controls all power; he has made ‘a way for the lightning’; he has ordained the circuits of all energy. He has decreed the time and manner of the manifestation of all forms of energy-matter. And all these things are held forever in his everlasting grasp—in the gravitational control centering on nether Paradise. The light and energy of the eternal God thus swing on forever around his majestic circuit, the endless but orderly procession of the starry hosts composing the universe of universes. All creation circles eternally around the Paradise-Personality center of all things and beings.” <a id="s74_600"></a>[UB 3:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p2_4)

#### B. Nether Paradise.

1. Personalities do not sojourn on nether Paradise. All physical-energy and cosmic-force circuits take origin there. It consists of three concentric zones.

	> “Concerning nether Paradise, we know only that which is revealed; personalities do not sojourn there. It has nothing whatever to do with the affairs of spirit intelligences, nor does the Deity Absolute there function. We are informed that all physical-energy and cosmic-force circuits have their origin on nether Paradise, and that it is constituted as follows:
	> “1. Directly underneath the location of the Trinity, in the central portion of nether Paradise, is the unknown and unrevealed Zone of Infinity.
	> “2. This Zone is immediately surrounded by an unnamed area.
	> “3. Occupying the outer margins of the under surface is a region having mainly to do with space potency and force-energy. The activities of this vast elliptical force center are not identifiable with the known functions of any triunity, but the primordial force-charge of space appears to be focalized in this area. This center consists of three concentric elliptical zones: The innermost is the focal point of the force-energy activities of Paradise itself; the outermost may possibly be identified with the functions of the Unqualified Absolute, but we are not certain concerning the space functions of the mid-zone.” <a id="s83_623"></a>[UB 11:5.1-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_1)

2. Force-energy enters at the south of the inner pulsating zone and flows out at the north.

	> “_The inner zone_ of this force center seems to act as a gigantic heart whose pulsations direct currents to the outermost borders of physical space. It directs and modifies force-energies but hardly drives them. The reality pressure-presence of this primal force is definitely greater at the north end of the Paradise center than in the southern regions; this is a uniformly registered difference. The mother force of space seems to flow in at the south and out at the north through the operation of some unknown circulatory system which is concerned with the diffusion of this basic form of force-energy. From time to time there are also noted differences in the east-west pressures. The forces emanating from this zone are not responsive to observable physical gravity but are always obedient to Paradise gravity.” <a id="s87_820"></a>[UB 11:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_5)

3. The function of the three-way pulsating mid-zone is unknown. Many believe that it is the control mechanism of the midspace or quiet zones of the master universe, since it is somehow related to the functioning of unpervaded space.

	> “_The mid-zone_ of the force center immediately surrounds this area. This mid-zone appears to be static except that it expands and contracts through three cycles of activity. The least of these pulsations is in an east-west direction, the next in a north-south direction, while the greatest fluctuation is in every direction, a generalized expansion and contraction. The function of this mid-area has never been really identified, but it must have something to do with reciprocal adjustment between the inner and the outer zones of the force center. It is believed by many that the midzone is the control mechanism of the midspace or quiet zones which separate the successive space levels of the master universe, but no evidence or revelation confirms this. This inference is derived from the knowledge that this mid-area is in some manner related to the functioning of the nonpervaded-space mechanism of the master universe.” <a id="s91_930"></a>[UB 11:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_6)

4. The enormous outer zone is the center of emanations to the domains of all outer space. It is in some way responsive to the Trinity and is the central focalization of the space presence of the Unqualified Absolute.

	> “_The outer zone_ is the largest and most active of the three concentric and elliptical belts of unidentified space potential. This area is the site of unimagined activities, the central circuit point of emanations which proceed spaceward in every direction to the outermost borders of the seven superuniverses and on beyond to overspread the enormous and incomprehensible domains of all outer space. This space presence is entirely impersonal notwithstanding that in some undisclosed manner it seems to be indirectly responsive to the will and mandates of the infinite Deities when acting as the Trinity. This is believed to be the central focalization, the Paradise center, of the space presence of the Unqualified Absolute.” <a id="s95_731"></a>[UB 11:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_7)

5. The outer zone pulsates in cycles of one billion Urantia years—it is synchronized with the respiration of all pervaded space.

	> “All forms of force and all phases of energy seem to be encircuited; they circulate throughout the universes and return by definite routes. But with the emanations of the activated zone of the Unqualified Absolute there appears to be either an outgoing or an incoming—never both simultaneously. This outer zone pulsates in agelong cycles of gigantic proportions. For a little more than one billion Urantia years the space-force of this center is outgoing; then for a similar length of time it will be incoming. And the space-force manifestations of this center are universal; they extend throughout all pervadable space.” <a id="s99_625"></a>[UB 11:5.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_8)

6. Originally, all force came from nether Paradise, but many forms of energy and matter take origin in the womb of space.

	> “All physical force, energy, and matter are one. All force-energy originally proceeded from nether Paradise and will eventually return thereto following the completion of its space circuit. But the energies and material organizations of the universe of universes did not all come from nether Paradise in their present phenomenal states; space is the womb of several forms of matter and prematter.” <a id="s103_401"></a>[UB 11:5.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_9)

7. Space does not originate on nether Paradise. Neither do the pulsations of the outer zone give origin to space respiration.

	> “Though the outer zone of the Paradise force center is the source of space-energies, space does not originate there. Space is not force, energy, or power. Nor do the pulsations of this zone account for the respiration of space, but the incoming and outgoing phases of this zone are synchronized with the two-billion-year expansion-contraction cycles of space.” <a id="s107_364"></a>[UB 11:5.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_9)

#### C. Space.

1. Space is a bestowal of Paradise. It is pervaded by the ancestral space potency of the Unqualified Absolute.

	> “Space is neither a subabsolute condition within, nor the presence of, the Unqualified Absolute, neither is it a function of the Ultimate. It is a bestowal of Paradise, and the space of the grand universe and that of all outer regions is believed to be actually pervaded by the ancestral space potency of the Unqualified Absolute. From near approach to peripheral Paradise, this pervaded space extends horizontally outward through the fourth space level and beyond the periphery of the master universe, but how far beyond we do not know.” <a id="s113_542"></a>[UB 11:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_4)

2. The space levels are curved paths of lessened resistance to motion.

	> “A space level thus functions as an elliptical region of motion surrounded on all sides by relative motionlessness. Such relationships of motion and quiescence constitute a curved space path of lessened resistance to motion which is universally followed by cosmic force and emergent energy as they circle forever around the Isle of Paradise.” <a id="s117_346"></a>[UB 11:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_8)

3. Everything in space is in motion; only Paradise is stationary.

	> “All units of cosmic energy are in primary revolution, are engaged in the execution of their mission, while swinging around the universal orbit. The universes of space and their component systems and worlds are all revolving spheres, moving along the endless circuits of the master universe space levels. Absolutely nothing is stationary in all the master universe except the very center of Havona, the eternal Isle of Paradise, the center of gravity.” <a id="s121_456"></a>[UB 12:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_1)

4. While the Unqualified Absolute is functionally limited to space, his relation to motion is not clear.

	> “The Unqualified Absolute is functionally limited to space, but we are not so sure about the relation of this Absolute to motion. Is motion inherent therein? We do not know. We know that motion is not inherent in space; even the motions _of_ space are not innate. But we are not so sure about the relation of the Unqualified to motion. Who, or what, is really responsible for the gigantic activities of force-energy transmutations now in progress out beyond the borders of the present seven superuniverses?” <a id="s125_511"></a>[UB 12:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_2)

5. Three theories concerning the origin of motion in space. Concerning the origin of motion we have the following opinions:
	> “1. We think the Conjoint Actor initiates motion _in_ space.
	> “2. If the Conjoint Actor produces the motions _of_ space, we cannot prove it.
	> “3. The Universal Absolute does not originate initial motion but does equalize and control all of the tensions originated by motion.” <a id="s130_137"></a>[UB 12:4.3-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_3)

6. Relation of force organizers to the origin of nebulae.

	> “In outer space the force organizers are apparently responsible for the production of the gigantic universe wheels which are now in process of stellar evolution, but their ability so to function must have been made possible by some modification of the space presence of the Unqualified Absolute.” <a id="s134_300"></a>[UB 12:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_6)

7. Space is real and there are four classes of space motion.

	> “Space is, from the human viewpoint, nothing—negative; it exists only as related to something positive and nonspatial. Space is, however, real. It contains and conditions motion. It even moves. Space motions may be roughly classified as follows:
	> “1. Primary motion—space respiration, the motion of space itself.
	> “2. Secondary motion—the alternate directional swings of the successive space levels.
	> “3. Relative motions—relative in the sense that they are not evaluated with Paradise as a base point. Primary and secondary motions are absolute, motion in relation to unmoving Paradise.
	> “4. Compensatory or correlating movement designed to co-ordinate all other motions.” <a id="s142_88"></a>[UB 12:4.7-11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_7)

8. Space is neither infinite nor absolute.

	> “Space is not infinite, even though it takes origin from Paradise; not absolute, for it is pervaded by the Unqualified Absolute. We do not know the absolute limits of space, but we do know that the absolute of time is eternity.” <a id="s146_232"></a>[UB 12:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p5_2)

9. Space is absolutely ultimate. While material bodies exist in space, space also exists in material bodies.

	> “Space comes the nearest of all nonabsolute things to being absolute. Space is apparently absolutely ultimate. The real difficulty we have in understanding space on the material level is due to the fact that, while material bodies exist in space, space also exists in these same material bodies. While there is much about space that is absolute, that does not mean that space is absolute.

	> “It may help to an understanding of space relationships if you would conjecture that, relatively speaking, space is after all a property of all material bodies. Hence, when a body moves through space, it also takes all its properties with it, even the space which is in and of such a moving body.” <a id="s152_301"></a>[UB 118:3.5-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p3_5)

#### D. Gravity.

> “The Universal Controller is potentially present in the gravity circuits of the Isle of Paradise in all parts of the universe at all times and in the same degree, in accordance with the mass, in response to the physical demands for this presence, and because of the inherent nature of all creation which causes all things to adhere and consist in him.” <a id="s156_355"></a>[UB 3:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p1_7)

> “_The Isle of Paradise_—Paradise not otherwise qualified—is the Absolute of the material-gravity control of the First Source and Center.” <a id="s158_140"></a>[UB 0:4.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p4_12)

1. Gravity is the all-powerful grasp of the physical presence of Paradise.

	> “The inescapable pull of gravity effectively grips all the worlds of all the universes of all space. Gravity is the all-powerful grasp of the physical presence of Paradise. Gravity is the omnipotent strand on which are strung the gleaming stars, blazing suns, and whirling spheres which constitute the universal physical adornment of the eternal God, who is all things, fills all things, and in whom all things consist.” <a id="s162_424"></a>[UB 11:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_1)

2. All energy and matter is unerringly responsive to the gravity pull of Paradise.

	> “The center and focal point of absolute material gravity is the Isle of Paradise, complemented by the dark gravity bodies encircling Havona and equilibrated by the upper and nether space reservoirs. All known emanations of nether Paradise invariably and unerringly respond to the central gravity pull operating upon the endless circuits of the elliptical space levels of the master universe. Every known form of cosmic reality has the bend of the ages, the trend of the circle, the swing of the great ellipse.” <a id="s166_514"></a>[UB 11:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_2)

3. The relation of space to gravity.

	> “Space is nonresponsive to gravity, but it acts as an equilibrant on gravity. Without the space cushion, explosive action would jerk surrounding space bodies. Pervaded space also exerts an antigravity influence upon physical or linear gravity; space can actually neutralize such gravity action even though it cannot delay it. Absolute gravity is Paradise gravity. Local or linear gravity pertains to the electrical stage of energy or matter; it operates within the central, super-, and outer universes, wherever suitable materialization has taken place.” <a id="s170_558"></a>[UB 11:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_3)

4. Energy and matter disclose three forms of response to Paradise gravity.

	> “The numerous forms of cosmic force, physical energy, universe power, and various materializations disclose three general, though not perfectly clear-cut, stages of response to Paradise gravity:
	> “1. _Pregravity Stages (Force)._ This is the first step in the individuation of space potency into the pre-energy forms of cosmic force. This state is analogous to the concept of the primordial force-charge of space, sometimes called _pure energy_ or _segregata_.
	> “2. _Gravity Stages (Energy)_. This modification of the force-charge of space is produced by the action of the Paradise force organizers. It signalizes the appearance of energy systems responsive to the pull of Paradise gravity. This emergent energy is originally neutral but consequent upon further metamorphosis will exhibit the so-called negative and positive qualities. We designate these stages _ultimata_.
	> “3. _Postgravity Stages (Universe Power)_. In this stage, energy-matter discloses response to the control of linear gravity. In the central universe these physical systems are threefold organizations known as _triata_. They are the superpower mother systems of the creations of time and space. The physical systems of the superuniverses are mobilized by the Universe Power Directors and their associates. These material organizations are dual in constitution and are known as _gravita_. The dark gravity bodies encircling Havona are neither triata nor gravita, and their drawing power discloses both forms of physical gravity, linear and absolute.” <a id="s177_652"></a>[UB 11:8.4-7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_4)

5. Space potency is not subject to gravity. It emanates from Paradise and constitutes the space presence of the Unqualified Absolute.

	> “Space potency is not subject to the interactions of any form of gravitation. This primal endowment of Paradise is not an actual level of reality, but it is ancestral to all relative functional nonspirit realities—all manifestations of force-energy and the organization of power and matter. Space potency is a term difficult to define. It does not mean that which is ancestral to space; its meaning should convey the idea of the potencies and potentials existent within space. It may be roughly conceived to include all those absolute influences and potentials which emanate from Paradise and constitute the space presence of the Unqualified Absolute.” <a id="s181_656"></a>[UB 11:8.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_8)

6. Relation of the Unqualified Absolute to Paradise. Why gravity acts in the plane perpendicular to the mass.

	> “Paradise is the absolute source and the eternal focal point of all energy-matter in the universe of universes. The Unqualified Absolute is the revealer, regulator, and repository of that which has Paradise as its source and origin. The universal presence of the Unqualified Absolute seems to be equivalent to the concept of a potential infinity of gravity extension, an elastic tension of Paradise presence. This concept aids us in grasping the fact that everything is drawn inward towards Paradise. The illustration is crude but nonetheless helpful. It also explains why gravity always acts preferentially in the plane perpendicular to the mass, a phenomenon indicative of the differential dimensions of Paradise and the surrounding creations.” <a id="s185_750"></a>[UB 11:8.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_9)

7. The Universal Father can make use of all four absolute gravity circuits.

	> “All forms of force-energy—material, mindal, or spiritual—are alike subject to those grasps, those universal presences, which we call gravity. Personality also is responsive to gravity—to the Father’s exclusive circuit; but though this circuit is exclusive to the Father, he is not excluded from the other circuits; the Universal Father is infinite and acts over _all_ four absolute-gravity circuits in the master universe:
	> “1. The Personality Gravity of the Universal Father.
	> “2. The Spirit Gravity of the Eternal Son.
	> “3. The Mind Gravity of the Conjoint Actor.
	> “4. The Cosmic Gravity of the Isle of Paradise.
	> “These four circuits are not related to the nether Paradise force center; they are neither force, energy, nor power circuits. They are absolute _presence_ circuits and like God are independent of time and space.” <a id="s194_216"></a>[UB 12:3.1-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_1)

8. The present grand universe engages only five per cent of the total Paradise gravity action.

	> “Having formulated an estimate of the summation of the entire physical-gravity capacity of the grand universe, they have laboriously effected a comparison of this finding with the estimated total of absolute gravity presence now operative. These calculations indicate that the total gravity action on the grand universe is a very small part of the estimated gravity pull of Paradise, computed on the basis of the gravity response of basic physical units of universe matter. These investigators reach the amazing conclusion that the central universe and the surrounding seven superuniverses are at the present time making use of only about five per cent of the active functioning of the Paradise absolute-gravity grasp. In other words: At the present moment about ninety-five per cent of the active cosmic-gravity action of the Isle of Paradise, computed on this totality theory, is engaged in controlling material systems beyond the borders of the present organized universes. These calculations all refer to absolute gravity; linear gravity is an interactive phenomenon which can be computed only by knowing the actual Paradise gravity.” <a id="s198_1142"></a>[UB 12:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_8)

9. Nature and function of Gravity Messengers.

	> “Gravity Messengers hail from Divinington, and they are modified and personalized Adjusters, but no one of our Uversa group will undertake to explain the nature of one of these messengers. We know they are highly personal beings, divine, intelligent, and touchingly understanding, but we do not comprehend their timeless technique of traversing space. They seem to be competent to utilize any and all energies, circuits, and even gravity. Finaliters of the mortal corps cannot defy time and space, but they have associated with them and subject to their command all but infinite spirit personalities who can. We presume to call Gravity Messengers personalities, but in reality they are superspirit beings, unlimited and boundless personalities. They are of an entirely different order of personality as compared with Solitary Messengers.” <a id="s202_842"></a>[UB 31:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p3_2)

10. Definition of linear gravity.

	> “Linear-gravity response is a quantitative measure of nonspirit energy. All mass—organized energy—is subject to this grasp except as motion and mind act upon it. Linear gravity is the short-range cohesive force of the macrocosmos somewhat as the forces of intra-atomic cohesion are the short-range forces of the microcosmos. Physical materialized energy, organized as so-called matter, cannot traverse space without affecting linear-gravity response. Although such gravity response is directly proportional to mass, it is so modified by intervening space that the final result is no more than roughly approximated when expressed as inversely according to the square of the distance. Space eventually conquers linear gravitation because of the presence therein of the antigravity influences of numerous supermaterial forces which operate to neutralize gravity action and all responses thereto. <a id="s206_896"></a>[UB 42:11.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p11_5)

## SECTION 2. FORCE, ENERGY, POWER, MATTER

### I. **Physical Energy**

> “_Physical energy_ is a term denoting all phases and forms of phenomenal motion, action, and potential.
> “In discussing physical-energy manifestations, we generally use the terms cosmic force, emergent energy, and universe power. These are often employed as follows:
> “1. _Cosmic force_ embraces all energies deriving from the Unqualified Absolute but which are as yet unresponsive to Paradise gravity.
> “2. _Emergent energy_ embraces those energies which are responsive to Paradise gravity but are as yet unresponsive to local or linear gravity. This is the pre-electronic level of energy-matter.
> “3. _Universe power_ includes all forms of energy which, while still responding to Paradise gravity, are directly responsive to linear gravity. This is the electronic level of energy-matter and all subsequent evolutions thereof.” <a id="s216_232"></a>[UB 0:6.3-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p6_4)

#### A. The source of all physical energy.

1. “As a physical controller in the material universe of universes, the First Source and Center functions in the patterns of the eternal Isle of Paradise, and through this absolute gravity center the eternal God exercises cosmic overcontrol of the physical level equally in the central universe and throughout the universe of universes.” <a id="s220_338"></a>[UB 1:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p2_10)

2. “The foundation of the universe is material in the sense that energy is the basis of all existence, and pure energy is controlled by the Universal Father.” <a id="s222_159"></a>[UB 42:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p0_1)

	> “The manipulation of universe energy is ever in accordance with the personal will and the all-wise mandates of the Universal Father.” <a id="s224_137"></a>[UB 42:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p0_2)

3. All reality is Deity-derived. The ultimaton has Paradise as its nucleus.

	> “Matter—energy—for they are but diverse manifestations of the same cosmic reality, as a universe phenomenon is inherent in the Universal Father. ‘In him all things consist.’ Matter may appear to manifest inherent energy and to exhibit self-contained powers, but the lines of gravity involved in the energies concerned in all these physical phenomena are derived from, and are dependent on, Paradise. The ultimaton, the first measurable form of energy, has Paradise as its nucleus.” <a id="s228_485"></a>[UB 42:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p1_2)

4. All original force-energy proceeds from Paradise.

	> “The bestowal of cosmic force, the domain of cosmic gravity, is the function of the Isle of Paradise. All original force-energy proceeds from Paradise, and the matter for the making of untold universes now circulates throughout the master universe in the form of a supergravity presence which constitutes the force-charge of pervaded space.” <a id="s232_345"></a>[UB 12:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_2)

5. Physical energy is always obedient to universal law—only volitional mind deviates from the divine plan.

	> “Whatever the transformations of force in the outlying universes, having gone out from Paradise, it journeys on subject to the never-ending, ever-present, unfailing pull of the eternal Isle, obediently and inherently swinging on forever around the eternal space paths of the universes. Physical energy is the one reality which is true and steadfast in its obedience to universal law. Only in the realms of creature volition has there been deviation from the divine paths and the original plans. Power and energy are the universal evidences of the stability, constancy, and eternity of the central Isle of Paradise.” <a id="s236_619"></a>[UB 12:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_3)

6. Numerous unpredictable and unfathomable phenomena of primal force and mind may be due to activity of the Ultimate and the Absolutes.

	> “All phases of primordial force, nascent spirit, and other nonpersonal ultimates appear to react in accordance with certain relatively stable but unknown laws and are characterized by a latitude of performance and an elasticity of response which are often disconcerting when encountered in the phenomena of a circumscribed and isolated situation. What is the explanation of this unpredictable freedom of reaction disclosed by these emerging universe actualities? These unknown, unfathomable unpredictables—whether pertaining to the behavior of a primordial unit of force, the reaction of an unidentified level of mind, or the phenomenon of a vast preuniverse in the making in the domains of outer space—probably disclose the activities of the Ultimate and the presence-performances of the Absolutes, which antedate the function of all universe Creators.” <a id="s240_858"></a>[UB 12:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p6_6)

7. No future discovery will prove matter to be self-existent or natural laws to be operated apart from the technique of Paradise and the motivating purpose of the Universal Father.

	> “There is innate in matter and present in universal space a form of energy not known on Urantia. When this discovery is finally made, then will physicists feel that they have solved, almost at least, the mystery of matter. And so will they have approached one step nearer the Creator; so will they have mastered one more phase of the divine technique; but in no sense will they have found God, neither will they have established the existence of matter or the operation of natural laws apart from the cosmic technique of Paradise and the motivating purpose of the Universal Father.” <a id="s244_586"></a>[UB 42:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p1_3)

#### B. Physical-energy circuits.

1. There are two energy emanations from Paradise—the cosmic-energy work of the Master Spirits and the force functions of the Unqualified Absolute.

	> “We are unable to trace any personal connection between the cosmic-energy work of the Master Spirits and the force functions of the Unqualified Absolute. The energy manifestations under the jurisdiction of the Master Spirits are all directed from the periphery of Paradise; they do not appear to be in any direct manner associated with the force phenomena identified with the nether surface of Paradise.” <a id="s250_408"></a>[UB 16:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p4_4)

2. Energy is eternal, not infinite.

	> “Energy is eternal but not infinite; it ever responds to the all-embracing grasp of Infinity. Forever force and energy go on; having gone out from Paradise, they must return thereto, even if age upon age be required for the completion of the ordained circuit. That which is of Paradise Deity origin can have only a Paradise destination or a Deity destiny.” <a id="s254_360"></a>[UB 42:1.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p1_8)

#### C. Physical energies.

1. Force has a Deity origin and, regardless of endless transformation, it is indestructible.

	> “Force derived from self-existent Deity is in itself ever existent. Force-energy is imperishable, indestructible; these manifestations of the Infinite may be subject to unlimited transmutation, endless transformation, and eternal metamorphosis; but in no sense or degree, not even to the slightest imaginable extent, could they or ever shall they suffer extinction. But energy, though springing from the Infinite, is not infinitely manifest; there are outer limits to the presently conceived master universe.” <a id="s260_513"></a>[UB 42:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p1_7)

2. Classification and metamorphosis of cosmic force, emergent energy, and universe power.

	> “I will, however, endeavor to lessen conceptual confusion by suggesting the advisability of adopting the following classification for cosmic force, emergent energy, and universe power—physical energy:
	> “1. _Space potency_. This is the unquestioned free space presence of the Unqualified Absolute. The extension of this concept connotes the universe force-space potential inherent in the functional totality of the Unqualified Absolute, while the intension of this concept implies the totality of cosmic reality—universes—which emanated eternitywise from the never-beginning, never-ending, never-moving, never-changing Isle of Paradise.
	> “The phenomena indigenous to the nether side of Paradise probably embrace three zones of absolute force presence and performance: the fulcral zone of the Unqualified Absolute, the zone of the Isle of Paradise itself, and the intervening zone of certain unidentified equalizing and compensating agencies or functions. These triconcentric zones are the centrum of the Paradise cycle of cosmic reality.
	> “Space potency is a prereality; it is the domain of the Unqualified Absolute and is responsive only to the personal grasp of the Universal Father, notwithstanding that it is seemingly modifiable by the presence of the Primary Master Force Organizers.
	> “On Uversa, space potency is spoken of as <span style="font-variant: small-caps;">absoluta</span>.
	> “2. _Primordial force_. This represents the first basic change in space potency and may be one of the nether Paradise functions of the Unqualified Absolute. We know that the space presence going out from nether Paradise is modified in some manner from that which is incoming. But regardless of any such possible relationships, the openly recognized transmutation of space potency into primordial force is the primary differentiating function of the tension-presence of the living Paradise force organizers.
	> “Passive and potential force becomes active and primordial in response to the resistance afforded by the space presence of the Primary Eventuated Master Force Organizers. Force is now emerging from the exclusive domain of the Unqualified Absolute into the realms of multiple response—response to certain primal motions initiated by the God of Action and thereupon to certain compensating motions emanating from the Universal Absolute. Primordial force is seemingly reactive to transcendental causation in proportion to absoluteness.
	> “Primordial force is sometimes spoken of as _pure energy_; on Uversa we refer to it as <span style="font-variant: small-caps;">ségrégata</span>.
	> “3. _Emergent energies_. The passive presence of the primary force organizers is sufficient to transform space potency into primordial force, and it is upon such an activated space field that these same force organizers begin their initial and active operations. Primordial force is destined to pass through two distinct phases of transmutation in the realms of energy manifestation before appearing as universe power. These two levels of emerging energy are:
	> “a. _Puissant energy_. This is the powerful-directional, mass-movemented, mighty-tensioned, and forcible-reacting energy—gigantic energy systems set in motion by the activities of the primary force organizers. This primary or puissant energy is not at first definitely responsive to the Paradise-gravity pull though probably yielding an aggregate-mass or space-directional response to the collective group of absolute influences operative from the nether side of Paradise. When energy emerges to the level of initial response to the circular and absolute-gravity grasp of Paradise, the primary force organizers give way to the functioning of their secondary associates.
	> “b. _Gravity energy_. The now-appearing gravity-responding energy carries the potential of universe power and becomes the active ancestor of all universe matter. This secondary or gravity energy is the product of the energy elaboration resulting from the pressure-presence and the tension-trends set up by the Associate Transcendental Master Force Organizers. In response to the work of these force manipulators, space-energy rapidly passes from the puissant to the gravity stage, thus becoming directly responsive to the circular grasp of Paradise (absolute) gravity while disclosing a certain potential for sensitivity to the linear-gravity pull inherent in the soon appearing material mass of the electronic and the postelectronic stages of energy and matter. Upon the appearance of gravity response, the Associate Master Force Organizers may retire from the energy cyclones of space provided the Universe Power Directors are assignable to that field of action.
	> “We are quite uncertain regarding the exact causes of the early stages of force evolution, but we recognize the intelligent action of the Ultimate in both levels of emergent-energy manifestation. Puissant and gravity energies, when regarded collectively, are spoken of on Uversa as <span style="font-variant: small-caps;">ultimata</span>.
	> “4. _Universe power_. Space-force has been changed into space-energy and thence into the energy of gravity control. Thus has physical energy been ripened to that point where it can be directed into channels of power and made to serve the manifold purposes of the universe Creators. This work is carried on by the versatile directors, centers, and controllers of physical energy in the grand universe—the organized and inhabited creations. These Universe Power Directors assume the more or less complete control of twenty-one of the thirty phases of energy constituting the present energy system of the seven superuniverses. This domain of power-energy-matter is the realm of the intelligent activities of the Sevenfold, functioning under the time-space overcontrol of the Supreme.
	> “On Uversa we refer to the realm of universe power as <span style="font-variant: small-caps;">gravita</span>.
	> “5. _Havona energy_. In concept this narrative has been moving Paradiseward as transmuting space-force has been followed, level by level, to the working level of the energy-power of the universes of time and space. Continuing Paradiseward, there is next encountered a pre-existent phase of energy which is characteristic of the central universe. Here the evolutionary cycle seems to turn back upon itself; energy-power now seems to begin to swing back towards force, but force of a nature very unlike that of space potency and primordial force. Havona energy systems are not dual; they are triune. This is the existential energy domain of the Conjoint Actor, functioning in behalf of the Paradise Trinity.
	> “On Uversa these energies of Havona are known as <span style="font-variant: small-caps;">triata</span>."
	> “6. _Transcendental energy_. This energy system operates on and from the upper level of Paradise and only in connection with the absonite peoples. On Uversa it is denominated <span style="font-variant: small-caps;">tranosta</span>.
	> “7. _Monota_. Energy is close of kin to divinity when it is Paradise energy. We incline to the belief that monota is the living, nonspirit energy of Paradise—an eternity counterpart of the living, spirit energy of the Original Son—hence the nonspiritual energy system of the Universal Father.
	> “We cannot differentiate the _nature_ of Paradise spirit and Paradise monota; they are apparently alike. They have different names, but you can hardly be told very much about a reality whose spiritual and whose nonspiritual manifestations are distinguishable only by _name_.” <a id="s282_279"></a>[UB 42:2.2-20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p2_2)

#### D. Energy and matter transmutations.

1. The various forms of energy and matter are all one and the same thing.

	> “Light, heat, electricity, magnetism, chemism, energy, and matter are—in origin, nature, and destiny—one and the same thing, together with other material realities as yet undiscovered on Urantia.” <a id="s288_200"></a>[UB 42:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_1)

2. Energy and matter may undergo endless transformations but they swing ever true to the circle of eternity and are always responsive to their Infinite source.

	> “We do not fully comprehend the almost endless changes to which physical energy may be subject. In one universe it appears as light, in another as light plus heat, in another as forms of energy unknown on Urantia; in untold millions of years it may reappear as some form of restless, surging electrical energy or magnetic power; and still later on it may again appear in a subsequent universe as some form of variable matter, going through a series of metamorphoses, to be followed by its outward physical disappearance in some great cataclysm of the realms. And then, after countless ages and almost endless wandering through numberless universes, again may this same energy re-emerge and many times change its form and potential; and so do these transformations continue through successive ages and throughout countless realms. Thus matter sweeps on, undergoing the transmutations of time but swinging ever true to the circle of eternity; even if long prevented from returning to its source, it is ever responsive thereto, and it ever proceeds in the path ordained by the Infinite Personality who sent it forth.” <a id="s292_1118"></a>[UB 42:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_2)

3. Power centers and physical controllers are masters of energy before it attains the atomic level.

	> “The power centers and their associates are much concerned in the work of transmuting the ultimaton into the circuits and revolutions of the electron. These unique beings control and compound power by their skillful manipulation of the basic units of materialized energy, the ultimatons. They are masters of energy as it circulates in this primitive state. In liaison with the physical controllers they are able to effectively control and direct energy even after it has transmuted to the electrical level, the so-called electronic stage. But their range of action is enormously curtailed when electronically organized energy swings into the whirls of the atomic systems. Upon such materialization, these energies fall under the complete grasp of the drawing power of linear gravity.” <a id="s296_788"></a>[UB 42:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_3)

4. Power centers and physical controllers exert only a negative influence on gravity—their antigravity endowments.

	> “Gravity acts positively on the power lanes and energy channels of the power centers and the physical controllers, but these beings have only a negative relation to gravity—the exercise of their anti-gravity endowments.” <a id="s300_224"></a>[UB 42:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_4)

5. Throughout space, cold and other influences are organizing ultimatons into electrons.

	> “Throughout all space, cold and other influences are at work creatively organizing ultimatons into electrons. Heat is the measurement of electronic activity, while cold merely signifies absence of heat—comparative energy rest—the status of the universal force-charge of space provided neither emergent energy nor organized matter were present and responding to gravity.” <a id="s304_374"></a>[UB 42:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_5)

6. Energy activities prevent absolute zero in interstellar space. Space is not empty. Nebadon’s most empty space contains one electron in each cubic inch.

	> “Gravity presence and action is what prevents the appearance of the theoretical absolute zero, for interstellar space does not have the temperature of absolute zero. Throughout all organized space there are gravity-responding energy currents, power circuits, and ultimatonic activities, as well as organizing electronic energies. Practically speaking, space is not empty. Even the atmosphere of Urantia thins out increasingly until at about three thousand miles it begins to shade off into the average space matter in this section of the universe. The most nearly empty space known in Nebadon would yield about one hundred ultimatons—the equivalent of one electron—in each cubic inch. Such scarcity of matter is regarded as practically empty space.” <a id="s308_753"></a>[UB 42:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_6)

7. Heat and cold are secondary only to gravity in the evolution of energy and matter.

	> “Temperature—heat and cold—is secondary only to gravity in the realms of energy and matter evolution. Ultimatons are humbly obedient to temperature extremes. Low temperatures favor certain forms of electronic construction and atomic assembly, while high temperatures facilitate all sorts of atomic breakup and material disintegration.” <a id="s312_339"></a>[UB 42:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_7)

8. Intense solar heat can largely overcome gravity, but cannot convert ultimatons into puissant energy.

	> “When subjected to the heat and pressure of certain internal solar states, all but the most primitive associations of matter may be broken up. Heat can thus largely overcome gravity stability. But no known solar heat or pressure can convert ultimatons back into puissant energy.” <a id="s316_283"></a>[UB 42:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_8)

9. Blazing suns transform matter into energy, but the influences of outer space convert energy into matter.

	> “The blazing suns can transform matter into various forms of energy, but the dark worlds and all outer space can slow down electronic and ultimatonic activity to the point of converting these energies into the matter of the realms. Certain electronic associations of a close nature, as well as many of the basic associations of nuclear matter, are formed in the exceedingly low temperatures of open space, being later augmented by association with larger accretions of materializing energy.” <a id="s320_495"></a>[UB 42:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_9)

10. Many influences, including force organizers and power directors are concerned in the transmutations of energy and matter.

	> “Throughout all of this never-ending metamorphosis of energy and matter we must reckon with the influence of gravity pressure and with the antigravity behavior of the ultimatonic energies under certain conditions of temperature, velocity, and revolution. Temperature, energy currents, distance, and the presence of the living force organizers and the power directors also have a bearing on all transmutation phenomena of energy and matter.” <a id="s324_444"></a>[UB 42:4.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_10)

11. Increase of mass in matter is equal to the increase of energy divided by the square of the velocity of light.

	> “The increase of mass in matter is equal to the increase of energy divided by the square of the velocity of light. In a dynamic sense the work which resting matter can perform is equal to the energy expended in bringing its parts together from Paradise minus the resistance of the forces overcome in transit and the attraction exerted by the parts of matter on one another.” <a id="s328_378"></a>[UB 42:4.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_11)

12. Multiple atomic weights indicate loss of radioactive energy.

	> “The existence of pre-electronic forms of matter is indicated by the two atomic weights of lead. The lead of original formation weighs slightly more than that produced through uranium disintegration by way of radium emanations; and this difference in atomic weight represents the actual loss of energy in the atomic breakup.” <a id="s332_329"></a>[UB 42:4.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_12)

13. Matter can absorb or release energy only in exact amounts—quanta.

	> “The relative integrity of matter is assured by the fact that energy can be absorbed or released only in those exact amounts which Urantia scientists have designated quanta. This wise provision in the material realms serves to maintain the universes as going concerns.” <a id="s336_273"></a>[UB 42:4.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_13)

14. Wavelike behavior of quanta is due to many factors. Such energy ripples are 860 times the diameters of the material particles concerned.

	> “The quantity of energy taken in or given out when electronic or other positions are shifted is always a ‘quantum’ or some multiple thereof, but the vibratory or wavelike behavior of such units of energy is wholly determined by the dimensions of the material structures concerned. Such wavelike energy ripples are 860 times the diameters of the ultimatons, electrons, atoms, or other units thus performing. The never-ending confusion attending the observation of the wave mechanics of quantum behavior is due to the superimposition of energy waves: Two crests can combine to make a double-height crest, while a crest and a trough may combine, thus producing mutual cancellation.” <a id="s340_683"></a>[UB 42:4.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p4_14)

#### E. Forms of energy.

> “In the superuniverse of Orvonton there are one hundred octaves of wave energy. Of these one hundred groups of energy manifestations, sixty-four are wholly or partially recognized on Urantia. The sun’s rays constitute four octaves in the superuniverse scale, the visible rays embracing a single octave, number forty-six in this series. The ultraviolet group comes next, while ten octaves up are the X rays, followed by the Y rays of radium. Thirty-two octaves above the visible light of the sun are the outer-space energy rays so frequently commingled with their associated highly energized minute particles of matter. Next downward from visible sunlight appear the infrared rays, and thirty octaves below are the radio transmission group.” <a id="s344_743"></a>[UB 42:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p5_1)

1. Wavelike energy may be classified in ten groups.

	> “Wavelike energy manifestations—from the standpoint of twentieth-century Urantia scientific enlightenment—may be classified into the following ten groups:
	> “1. _Infraultimatonic rays_—the borderland revolutions of ultimatons as they begin to assume definite form. This is the first stage of emergent energy in which wavelike phenomena can be detected and measured.
	> “2. _Ultimatonic rays_. The assembly of energy into the minute spheres of the ultimatons occasions vibrations in the content of space which are discernible and measurable. And long before physicists ever discover the ultimaton, they will undoubtedly detect the phenomena of these rays as they shower in upon Urantia. These short and powerful rays represent the initial activity of the ultimatons as they are slowed down to that point where they veer towards the electronic organization of matter. As the ultimatons aggregate into electrons, condensation occurs with a consequent storage of energy.
	> “3. _The short space rays_. These are the shortest of all purely electronic vibrations and represent the preatomic stage of this form of matter. These rays require extraordinarily high or low temperatures for their production. There are two sorts of these space rays: one attendant upon the birth of atoms and the other indicative of atomic disruption. They emanate in the largest quantities from the densest plane of the superuniverse, the Milky Way, which is also the densest plane of the outer universes.
	> “4. _The electronic stage_. This stage of energy is the basis of all materialization in the seven superuniverses. When electrons pass from higher to lower energy levels of orbital revolution, quanta are always given off. Orbital shifting of electrons results in the ejection or the absorption of very definite and uniform measurable particles of light-energy, while the individual electron always gives up a particle of light-energy when subjected to collision. Wavelike energy manifestations also attend upon the performances of the positive bodies and the other members of the electronic stage.
	> “5. _Gamma rays_—those emanations which characterize the spontaneous dissociation of atomic matter. The best illustration of this form of electronic activity is in the phenomena associated with radium disintegration.
	> “6. _The X-ray group_. The next step in the slowing down of the electron yields the various forms of solar X rays together with artificially generated X rays. The electronic charge creates an electric field; movement gives rise to an electric current; the current produces a magnetic field. When an electron is suddenly stopped, the resultant electromagnetic commotion produces the X ray; the X ray is _that_ disturbance. The solar X rays are identical with those which are mechanically generated for exploring the interior of the human body except that they are a trifle longer.
	> “7. _The ultraviolet_ or chemical rays of sunlight and the various mechanical productions.
	> “8. _The white light_—the whole visible light of the suns.
	> “9. _Infrared rays_—the slowing down of electronic activity still nearer the stage of appreciable heat.
	> “10. _Hertzian waves_—those energies utilized on Urantia for broadcasting.
	> “Of all these ten phases of wavelike energy activity, the human eye can react to just one octave, the whole light of ordinary sunlight.” <a id="s359_140"></a>[UB 42:5.2-13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p5_2)

2. The ether is not real. Light and other forms of energy proceed in direct lines and consist of definite energy particles. Wavelike phenomena result from the action of gravity and other intervening influences.

	> “The so-called ether is merely a collective name to designate a group of force and energy activities occurring in space. Ultimatons, electrons, and other mass aggregations of energy are uniform particles of matter, and in their transit through space they really proceed in direct lines. Light and all other forms of recognizable energy manifestations consist of a succession of definite energy particles which proceed in direct lines except as modified by gravity and other intervening forces. That these processions of energy particles appear as wave phenomena when subjected to certain observations is due to the resistance of the undifferentiated force blanket of all space, the hypothetical ether, and to the intergravity tension of the associated aggregations of matter. The spacing of the particle-intervals of matter, together with the initial velocity of the energy beams, establishes the undulatory appearance of many forms of energy-matter.
	> 
	> “The excitation of the content of space produces a wavelike reaction to the passage of rapidly moving particles of matter, just as the passage of a ship through water initiates waves of varying amplitude and interval.” <a id="s365_222"></a>[UB 42:5.14-15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p5_14)

3. Space is not empty—it is an ocean of outspread force-energy.

	> “Primordial-force behavior does give rise to phenomena which are in many ways analogous to your postulated ether. Space is not empty; the spheres of all space whirl and plunge on through a vast ocean of outspread force-energy; neither is the space content of an atom empty. Nevertheless there is no ether, and the very absence of this hypothetical ether enables the inhabited planet to escape falling into the sun and the encircling electron to resist falling into the nucleus.” <a id="s369_482"></a>[UB 42:5.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p5_16)

#### F. Energy control and regulation.

1. Superuniverse headquarters spheres—the energy regulators and directionizers of energy to the local universes.

	> “The headquarters spheres of the superuniverses are so constructed that they are able to function as efficient power-energy regulators for their various sectors, serving as focal points for the directionization of energy to their component local universes. They exert a powerful influence over the balance and through organized space.” <a id="s375_339"></a>[UB 15:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p8_1)

2. Additional regulative functions as performed by the superuniverse power centers and physical controllers.

	> “Further regulative functions are performed by the superuniverse power centers and physical controllers, living and semiliving intelligent entities constituted for this express purpose. These power centers and controllers are difficult of understanding; the lower orders are not volitional, they do not possess will, they do not choose, their functions are very intelligent but apparently automatic and inherent in their highly specialized organization. The power centers and physical controllers of the superuniverses assume direction and partial control of the thirty energy systems which comprise the gravita domain. The physical-energy circuits administered by the power centers of Uversa require a little over 968 million years to complete the encirclement of the superuniverse.” <a id="s379_788"></a>[UB 15:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p8_2)

3. Laws governing the relations of mass and energy.

	> “Evolving energy has substance; it has weight, although weight is always relative, depending on revolutionary velocity, mass, and antigravity. Mass in matter tends to retard velocity in energy; and the anywhere-present velocity of energy represents: the initial endowment of velocity, minus retardation by mass encountered in transit, plus the regulatory function of the living energy controllers of the superuniverse and the physical influence of nearby highly heated or heavily charged bodies.” <a id="s383_500"></a>[UB 15:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p8_3)

4. Plan for maintenance of equilibrium between matter and energy.

	> “The universal plan for the maintenance of equilibrium between matter and energy necessitates the everlasting making and unmaking of the lesser material units. The Universe Power Directors have the ability to condense and detain, or to expand and liberate, varying quantities of energy.” <a id="s387_291"></a>[UB 15:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p8_4)

5. Factors which prevent gravity from converting all energy into matter.

	> “Given a sufficient duration of retarding influence, gravity would eventually convert all energy into matter were it not for two factors: First, because of the antigravity influences of the energy controllers, and second, because organized matter tends to disintegrate under certain conditions found in very hot stars and under certain peculiar conditions in space near highly energized cold bodies of condensed matter.” <a id="s391_424"></a>[UB 15:8.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p8_5)

6. The never-ending struggle between energy and matter and the many influences contributing to the maintenance of balance.

	> “When mass becomes overaggregated and threatens to unbalance energy, to deplete the physical power circuits, the physical controllers intervene unless gravity’s own further tendency to overmaterialize energy is defeated by the occurrence of a collision among the dead giants of space, thus in an instant completely dissipating the cumulative collections of gravity. In these collisional episodes enormous masses of matter are suddenly converted into the rarest form of energy, and the struggle for universal equilibirum is begun anew. Eventually the larger physical systems become stabilized, become physically settled, and are swung into the balanced and established circuits of the superuniverses. Subsequent to this event no more collisions or other devastating catastrophes will occur in such established systems.” <a id="s395_822"></a>[UB 15:8.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p8_6)

7. The continuing struggle between plus energy and minus energy states.

	> “During the times of plus energy there are power disturbances and heat fluctuations accompanied by electrical manifestations. During times of minus energy there are increased tendencies for matter to aggregate, condense, and to get out of control in the more delicately balanced circuits, with resultant tidal or collisional adjustments which quickly restore the balance between circulating energy and more literally stabilized matter. To forecast and otherwise to understand such likely behavior of the blazing suns and the dark islands of space is one of the tasks of the celestial star observers.” <a id="s399_604"></a>[UB 15:8.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p8_7)

8. Difficulties encountered in proceeding outward from Paradise in predicting all physical phenomena because of the unfathomable effect of the Absolutes and the experiential Deities.

	> “We are able to recognize most of the laws governing universe equilibrium and to predict much pertaining to universe stability. Practically, our forecasts are reliable, but we are always confronted by certain forces which are not wholly amenable to the laws of energy control and matter behavior known to us. The predictability of all physical phenomena becomes increasingly difficult as we proceed outward in the universes from Paradise. As we pass beyond the borders of the personal administration of the Paradise Rulers, we are confronted with increasing inability to reckon in accordance with the standards established and the experience acquired in connection with observations having exclusively to do with the physical phenomena of the near-by astronomic systems. Even in the realms of the seven superuniverses we are living in the midst of force actions and energy reactions which pervade all our domains and extend in unified equilibrium on through all regions of outer space.
	> 
	> “The farther out we go, the more certainly we encounter those variational and unpredictable phenomena which are so unerringly characteristic of the unfathomable presence-performances of the Absolutes and the experiential Deities. And these phenomena must be indicative of some universal overcontrol of all things.” <a id="s405_318"></a>[UB 15:8.8-9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p8_8)

9. Power directors and force organizers—the secret of control and direction, preventing universes from running down.

	> “The superuniverse of Orvonton is apparently now running down; the outer universes seem to be winding up for unparalleled future activities; the central Havona universe is eternally stabilized. Gravity and absence of heat (cold) organize and hold matter together; heat and antigravity disrupt matter and dissipate energy. The living power directors and force organizers are the secret of the special control and intelligent direction of the endless metamorphoses of universe making, unmaking, and remaking. Nebulae may disperse, suns burn out, systems vanish, and planets perish, but the universes do not run down.” <a id="s409_619"></a>[UB 15:8.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p8_10)

### II. **Suns**

#### A. Solar radiation.

1. The ease with which light escapes from a sun indicates lack of density. Opacity would retain light and result in explosions.

	> “That the suns of space are not very dense is proved by the steady streams of escaping light-energies. Too great a density would retain light by opacity until the light-energy pressure reached the explosion point. There is a tremendous light or gas pressure within a sun to cause it to shoot forth such a stream of energy as to penetrate space for millions upon millions of miles to energize, light, and heat the distant planets. Fifteen feet of surface of the density of Urantia would effectually prevent the escape of all X rays and light-energies from a sun until the rising internal pressure of accumulating energies resulting from atomic dismemberment overcame gravity with a tremendous outward explosion.” <a id="s417_715"></a>[UB 41:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p5_1)

2. Light is explosive at high temperatures and under pressure. Sunlight would be economical at a million dollars a pound.

	> “Light, in the presence of the propulsive gases, is highly explosive when confined at high temperatures by opaque retaining walls. Light is real. As you value energy and power on your world, sunlight would be economical at a million dollars a pound.
	> 
	> “The interior of your sun is a vast X-ray generator. The suns are supported from within by the incessant bombardment of these mighty emanations.” <a id="s423_149"></a>[UB 41:5.2-3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p5_2)

3. It requires half a million years for an electron to escape from the center of a sun to enter upon its varied adventures in space.

	> “It requires more than one-half million years for an X-ray-stimulated electron to work its way from the very center of an average sun up to the solar surface, whence it starts out on its space adventure, maybe to warm an inhabited planet, to be captured by a meteor, to participate in the birth of an atom, to be attracted by a highly charged dark island of space, or to find its space flight terminated by a final plunge into the surface of a sun similar to the one of its origin.” <a id="s427_486"></a>[UB 41:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p5_4)

4. The energy required for an electron to escape from a sun is sufficient to carry it through vast distances of space.

	> “The X rays of a sun’s interior charge the highly heated and agitated electrons with sufficient energy to carry them out through space, past the hosts of detaining influences of intervening matter and, in spite of divergent gravity attractions, on to the distant spheres of the remote systems. The great energy of velocity required to escape the gravity clutch of a sun is sufficient to insure that the sunbeam will travel on with unabated velocity until it encounters considerable masses of matter; whereupon it is quickly transformed into heat with the liberation of other energies.” <a id="s431_589"></a>[UB 41:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p5_5)

5. Energy moves through space in a straight line except as modified by gravity and other influences.

	> “Energy, whether as light or in other forms, in its flight through space moves straight forward. The actual particles of material existence traverse space like a fusillade. They go in a straight and unbroken line or procession except as they are acted on by superior forces, and except as they ever obey the linear-gravity pull inherent in material mass and the circular-gravity presence of the Isle of Paradise.” <a id="s435_417"></a>[UB 41:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p5_6)

6. The wave behavior is due to the action of diverse coexistent influences.

	> “Solar energy may seem to be propelled in waves, but that is due to the action of coexistent and diverse influences. A given form of organized energy does not proceed in waves but in direct lines. The presence of a second or a third form of force-energy may cause the stream under observation to _appear_ to travel in wavy formation, just as, in a blinding rainstorm accompanied by a heavy wind, the water sometimes appears to fall in sheets or to descend in waves. The raindrops are coming down in a direct line of unbroken procession, but the action of the wind is such as to give the visible appearance of sheets of water and waves of raindrops.” <a id="s439_653"></a>[UB 41:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p5_7)

7. Wave behavior of light and its division into definite particles results from the action of many influences, some known, others unknown.

	> “The action of certain secondary and other undiscovered energies present in the space regions of your local universe is such that solar-light emanations appear to execute certain wavy phenomena as well as to be chopped up into infinitesimal portions of definite length and weight. And, practically considered, that is exactly what happens. You can hardly hope to arrive at a better understanding of the behavior of light until such a time as you acquire a clearer concept of the interaction and interrelationship of the various space-forces and solar energies operating in the space regions of Nebadon. Your present confusion is also due to your incomplete grasp of this problem as it involves the interassociated activities of the personal and nonpersonal control of the master universe—the presences, the performances, and the co-ordination of the Conjoint Actor and the Unqualified Absolute.” <a id="s443_899"></a>[UB 41:5.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p5_8)

8. Spectral analyses show only sun-surface compositions.

	> “It should be remembered that spectral analyses show only sun-surface compositions. For example: Solar spectra exhibit many iron lines, but iron is not the chief element in the sun. This phenomenon is almost wholly due to the present temperature of the sun’s surface, a little less than 6,000 degrees, this temperature being very favorable to the registry of the iron spectrum.” <a id="s447_382"></a>[UB 41:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p6_7)

#### B. Sources of solar energy.

1. There are seven sources of the enormous expenditure of solar energies.

	> “All of these phenomena are indicative of enormous energy expenditure, and the sources of solar energy, named in the order of their importance, are:
	> “1. Annihilation of atoms and, eventually, of electrons.
	> “2. Transmutation of elements, including the radioactive group of energies thus liberated.
	> “3. The accumulation and transmission of certain universal space-energies.
	> “4. Space matter and meteors which are incessantly diving into the blazing suns.
	> “5. Solar contraction; the cooling and consequent contraction of a sun yields energy and heat sometimes greater than that supplied by space matter.
	> “6. Gravity action at high temperatures transforms certain circuitized power into radiative energies.
	> “7. Recaptive light and other matter which are drawn back into the sun after having left it, together with other energies having extrasolar origin.” <a id="s460_152"></a>[UB 41:7.3-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p7_3)

2. Suns have a regulating gas blanket which stabilizes heat loss. The internal temperature remains at 35,000,000 degrees.

	> “There exists a regulating blanket of hot gases (sometimes millions of degrees in temperature) which envelops the suns, and which acts to stabilize heat loss and otherwise prevent hazardous fluctuations of heat dissipation. During the active life of a sun the internal temperature of 35,000,000 degrees remains about the same quite regardless of the progressive fall of the external temperature.” <a id="s464_400"></a>[UB 41:7.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p7_11)

3. Thirty-five million degrees is the electronic boiling point. While atoms are shattered, ultimatons are not broken up.

	> “You might try to visualize 35,000,000 degrees of heat, in association with certain gravity pressures, as the electronic boiling point. Under such pressure and at such temperature all atoms are degraded and broken up into their electronic and other ancestral components; even the electrons and other associations of ultimatons may be broken up, but the suns are not able to degrade the ultimatons.<a id="s468_400"></a>[UB 41:7.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p7_12)

#### C. Solar energies.

1. The largest amount of solar energy is derived from the hydrogen-carbon-helium reaction.

	> “In those suns which are encircuited in the space-energy channels, solar energy is liberated by various complex nuclear-reaction chains, the most common of which is the hydrogen-carbon-helium reaction. In this metamorphosis, carbon acts as an energy catalyst since it is in no way actually changed by this process of converting hydrogen into helium. Under certain conditions of high temperature the hydrogen penetrates the carbon nuclei. Since the carbon cannot hold more than four such protons, when this saturation state is attained, it begins to emit protons as fast as new ones arrive. In this reaction the ingoing hydrogen particles come forth as a helium atom.” <a id="s474_671"></a>[UB 41:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p8_1)

2. Exhaustion of hydrogen results in producing a highly condensed white dwarf star.

	> “Reduction of hydrogen content increases the luminosity of a sun. In the suns destined to burn out, the height of luminosity is attained at the point of hydrogen exhaustion. Subsequent to this point, brilliance is maintained by the resultant process of gravity contraction. Eventually, such a star will become a so-called white dwarf, a highly condensed sphere.” <a id="s478_366"></a>[UB 41:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p8_2)

3. Conditions which lead to the sudden collapse of a giant nova.

	> “In large suns—small circular nebulae—when hydrogen is exhausted and gravity contraction ensues, if such a body is not sufficiently opaque to retain the internal pressure of support for the outer gas regions, then a sudden collapse occurs. The gravity-electric changes give origin to vast quantities of tiny particles devoid of electric potential, and such particles readily escape from the solar interior, thus bringing about the collapse of a gigantic sun within a few days. It was such an emigration of these ‘runaway particles’ that occasioned the collapse of the giant nova of the Andromeda nebula about fifty years ago. This vast stellar body collapsed in forty minutes of Urantia time.” <a id="s482_697"></a>[UB 41:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p8_3)

4. Conditions leading to stabilization of solar behavior. Our sun radiates one hundred billion tons of matter annually.

	> “Your own solar center radiates almost one hundred billion tons of actual matter annually, while the giant suns lose matter at a prodigious rate during their earlier growth, the first billion years. A sun’s life becomes stable after the maximum of internal temperature is reached, and the subatomic energies begin to be released. And it is just at this critical point that the larger suns are given to convulsive pulsations.” <a id="s486_429"></a>[UB 41:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p9_3)

6. Our sun is now functioning through a period of great economy—will so continue for twenty-five billion years.

	> “Your own sun has long since attained relative equilibrium between its expansion and contraction cycles, those disturbances which produce the gigantic pulsations of many of the younger stars. Your sun is now passing out of its six billionth year. At the present time it is functioning through the period of greatest economy. It will shine on as of present efficiency for more than twenty-five billion years. It will probably experience a partially efficient period of decline as long as the combined periods of its youth and stabilized function.” <a id="s490_550"></a>[UB 41:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p9_5)

## SECTION 3. PHYSICAL-ENERGY CONTROLLERS AND REGULATORS

Little has been known of power directors, and their associates, but three groups are revealed.

> “Of all the universe personalities concerned in the regulation of interplanetary and interuniverse affairs, the power directors and their associates have been the least understood on Urantia. While your races have long known of the existence of angels and similar orders of celestial beings, little information concerning the controllers and regulators of the physical domain has ever been imparted. Even now I am permitted fully to disclose only the last of the following three groups of living beings having to do with force control and energy regulation in the master universe:
> “1. Primary Eventuated Master Force Organizers.
> “2. Associate Transcendental Master Force Organizers.
> “3. Universe Power Directors.” <a id="s499_33"></a>[UB 29:0.1-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p0_1)

### I. **Eventuated Transcendental Beings**

#### A. Force organizers.

1. Preuniverse manipulation of space-force is the work of Paradise Master Force Organizers.

	> “The preuniverse manipulations of space-force and the primordial energies are the work of the Paradise Master Force Organizers; but in the superuniverse domains, when emergent energy becomes responsive to local or linear gravity, they retire in favor of the power directors of the superuniverse concerned.” <a id="s507_310"></a>[UB 32:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p1_1)

2. Master Force Organizers mobilize the space energies which are later organized into inhabited universes.

	> “The Master Force Organizers go out into space and mobilize its energies to become gravity responsive to the Paradise pull of the Universal Father; and subsequently there come the Creator Sons, who organize these gravity-responding forces into inhabited universes and therein evolve intelligent creatures who receive unto themselves the spirit of the Paradise Father and subsequently ascend to the Father to become like him in all possible divinity attributes.” <a id="s511_465"></a>[UB 56:9.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/56#p9_12)

3. There is an unending expansion of Paradise creative forces throughout all space attended by the multiplication of varied intelligent beings.

	> “The ceaseless and expanding march of the Paradise creative forces through space seems to presage the ever-extending domain of the gravity grasp of the Universal Father and the never-ending multiplication of varied types of intelligent creatures who are able to love God and be loved by him, and who, by thus becoming God-knowing, may choose to be like him, may elect to attain Paradise and find God.” <a id="s515_405"></a>[UB 56:9.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/56#p9_13)

4. The two divisions of Paradise force organizers work under the supervision of the Architects of the Master Universe.

	> “The force organizers are resident on Paradise, but they function throughout the master universe, more particularly in the domains of unorganized space. These extraordinary beings are neither creators nor creatures, and they comprise two grand divisions of service:
	> “1. Primary Eventuated Master Force Organizers.
	> “2. Associate Transcendental Master Force Organizers.
	> “These two mighty orders of primordial-force manipulators work exclusively under the supervision of the Architects of the Master Universe, and at the present time they do not function extensively within the boundaries of the grand universe.” <a id="s522_245"></a>[UB 29:5.1-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p5_1)

5. Primary Master Force Organizers manipulate primordial space-force; they are nebulae creators. They transfer energy from the exclusive grasp of the Unqualified Absolute to the grasp of Paradise gravity.

	> “Primary Master Force Organizers are the manipulators of the primordial or basic space-forces of the Unqualified Absolute; they are nebulae creators. They are the living instigators of the energy cyclones of space and the early organizers and directionizers of these gigantic manifestations. These force organizers transmute _primordial force_ (pre-energy not responsive to direct Paradise gravity) into primary or _puissant energy_, energy transmuting from the exclusive grasp of the Unqualified Absolute to the gravity grasp of the Isle of Paradise. They are thereupon succeeded by the associate force organizers, who continue the process of energy transmutation from the primary through the secondary or _gravity-energy_ stage.” <a id="s526_735"></a>[UB 29:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p5_5)

### II. **Universe Power Directors**

#### A. Classification and general description.

1. Power directors function in four grand divisions.

	> “Though I deem it impossible to portray the individuality of the various groups of directors, centers, and controllers of universe power, I hope to be able to explain something about the domain of their activities. They are a unique group of living beings having to do with the intelligent regulation of energy throughout the grand universe. Including the supreme directors, they embrace the following major divisions:
	> “1. The Seven Supreme Power Directors.
	> “2. The Supreme Power Centers.
	> “3. The Master Physical Controllers.
	> “4. The Morontia Power Supervisors.” <a id="s538_40"></a>[UB 29:0.5-9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p0_5)

2. The Universe Power Directors direct the modified energies of nether Paradise into constructive channels.

	> “All energy is circuited in the Paradise cycle, but the Universe Power Directors _direct_ the force-energies of nether Paradise as they find them modified in the space functions of the central and superuniverses, converting and directing these energies into channels of useful and constructive application. There is a difference between Havona energy and the energies of the superuniverses.” <a id="s542_395"></a>[UB 29:2.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p2_14)

3. The power charge of a superuniverse consists of three phases of ten segregations each.

	> “The power charge of a superuniverse consists of three phases of energy of ten segregations each. This threefold energy charge spreads throughout the space of the grand universe; it is like a vast moving ocean of energy which engulfs and bathes the whole of each of the seven supercreations.” <a id="s546_296"></a>[UB 29:2.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p2_14)

4. Function of power directors during early phases of universe organization.

	> “These power directors function alone in the prematerial and post-force phases of a local universe creation. There is no opportunity for a Creator Son to begin universe organization until the power directors have effected the mobilization of the space-energies sufficiently to provide a material foundation—literal suns and material spheres—for the emerging universe.” <a id="s550_372"></a>[UB 32:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p1_2)

5. The power directors function somewhat as catalyzers—their work is something of a mystery.

	> “These power directors themselves are energy catalyzers; that is, they cause energy to segment, organize, or assemble in unit formation by their presence. And all this implies that there must be something inherent in energy which causes it thus to function in the presence of these power entities. The Nebadon Melchizedeks long since denominated the phenomenon of the transmutation of cosmic force into universe power as one of the seven ‘infinities of divinity.’ And that is as far as you will advance on this point during your local universe ascension.” <a id="s554_559"></a>[UB 42:2.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p2_22)

#### B. The Seven Supreme Power Directors.

1. Origin and function of Supreme Power Directors and their associates.

	> “The Supreme Power Directors and Centers have existed from the near times of eternity, and as far as we know, no more beings of these orders have been created. The Seven Supreme Directors were personalized by the Seven Master Spirits, and then they collaborated with their parents in the production of more than ten billion associates. Before the days of the power directors the energy circuits of space outside of the central universe were under the intelligent supervision of the Master Force Organizers of Paradise.” <a id="s560_523"></a>[UB 29:0.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p0_10)

2. Origin, nature, and function of the Seven Supreme Power Directors.

	> “The Seven Supreme Power Directors are the physical-energy regulators of the grand universe. Their creation by the Seven Master Spirits is the first recorded instance of the derivation of semimaterial progeny from true spirit ancestry. When the Seven Master Spirits create individually, they bring forth highly spiritual personalities on the angelic order; when they create collectively, they sometimes produce these high types of semimaterial beings. But even these quasi-physical beings would be invisible to the short-range vision of Urantia mortals.” <a id="s564_558"></a>[UB 29:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p1_1)

3. The Seven Supreme Power Directors, stationed on peripheral Paradise, regulate the power-energy of a superuniverse.

	> “The Seven Supreme Power Directors are stationed on peripheral Paradise, where their slowly circulating presences indicate the whereabouts of the force-focal headquarters of the Master Spirits. These power directors function singly in the power-energy regulation of the superuniverses but collectively in the administration of the central creation. They operate from Paradise but maintain themselves as effective power centers in all divisions of the grand universe.” <a id="s568_471"></a>[UB 29:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p1_3)

4. The Supreme Power Directors are the ancestors of power centers and physical controllers.

	> “These mighty beings are the physical ancestors of the vast host of the power centers and, through them, of the physical controllers scattered throughout the seven superuniverses. Such subordinate physical-control organisms are basically uniform, identical except for the differential toning of each superuniverse corps. In order to change in superuniverse service, they would merely have to return to Paradise for retoning. The physical creation is fundamentally uniform in administration.” <a id="s572_495"></a>[UB 29:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p1_4)

#### C. The Supreme Power Centers.

1. Nature, origin, and function of the Seven Supreme Power Centers.

	> “The Seven Supreme Power Directors are not able, individually, to reproduce themselves, but collectively, and in association with the Seven Master Spirits, they can and do reproduce—create—other beings like themselves. Such is the origin of the Supreme Power Centers of the grand universe, who function in the following seven groups:
	> “1. Supreme Center Supervisors.
	> “2. Havona Centers.
	> “3. Superuniverse Centers.
	> “4. Local Universe Centers.
	> “5. Constellation Centers.
	> “6. System Centers.
	> “7. Unclassified Centers.” <a id="s585_30"></a>[UB 29:2.1-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p2_1)

2. Power centers utilize material mechanisms in addition to their one million units of truly kaleidoscopic associative possibilities.

	> “The power centers utilize vast mechanisms and co-ordinations of a material order in liaison with the living mechanisms of the various segregated energy concentrations. Each individual power center is constituted in exactly one million units of functional control, and these energy-modifying units are not stationary as are the vital organs of man’s physical body; these ‘vital organs’ of power regulation are mobile and truly kaleidoscopic in associative possibilities.” <a id="s589_475"></a>[UB 29:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p3_7)

3. Power centers work with the physical energies of organized space, not with the forces in outer space.

	> “The power centers and their subordinate controllers are assigned to the working of all of the physical energies of organized space. They work with the three basic currents of ten energies each. That is the energy charge of organized space; and organized space is their domain. The Universe Power Directors have nothing whatever to do with those tremendous actions of force which are now taking place outside the present boundaries of the seven superuniverses.” <a id="s593_465"></a>[UB 29:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p3_10)

4. Power centers and controllers exert perfect control over seven of the ten forms of basic universe energy.

	> “The power centers and controllers exert perfect control over only seven of the ten forms of energy contained in each basic universe current; those forms which are partly or wholly exempt from their control must represent the unpredictable realms of energy manifestation dominated by the Unqualified Absolute. If they exert an influence upon the primordial forces of this Absolute, we are not cognizant of such functions, though there is some slight evidence which would warrant the opinion that certain of the physical controllers are sometimes automatically reactive to certain impulses of the Universal Absolute.
	> 
	> “These living power mechanisms are not consciously related to the master universe energy overcontrol of the Unqualified Absolute, but we surmise that their entire and almost perfect scheme of power direction is in some unknown manner subordinated to this supergravity presence. In any local energy situation the centers and controllers exert near-supremacy, but they are always conscious of the superenergy presence and the unrecognizable performance of the Unqualified Absolute.” <a id="s599_484"></a>[UB 29:3.11-12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p3_11)

5. The electronic forces of a superuniverse function in seven phases with varying response to linear gravity.

	> “The electronic organization of universe power functions in seven phases and discloses varying response to local or linear gravity. This sevenfold circuit proceeds from the superuniverse power centers and pervades each supercreation. Such specialized currents of time and space are definite and localized energy movements initiated and directed for specific purposes, much as the Gulf Stream functions as a circumscribed phenomenon in the midst of the Atlantic Ocean.” <a id="s603_472"></a>[UB 29:2.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p2_15)

6. One hundred Supreme Power Centers regulate the energy systems of a local universe. They are not concerned with local energy upheavals—such as sun spots.

	> “One hundred Supreme Power Centers of the fourth order are permanently assigned to our local universe. These beings receive the incoming lines of power from the third-order centers of Uversa and relay the down-stepped and modified circuits to the power centers of our constellations and systems. These power centers, in association, function to produce the living system of control and equalization which operates to maintain the balance and distribution of otherwise fluctuating and variable energies. Power centers are not, however, concerned with transient and local energy upheavals, such as sun spots and system electric disturbances; light and electricity are not the basic energies of space; they are secondary and subsidiary manifestations.” <a id="s607_753"></a>[UB 41:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p1_2)

7. One Supreme Power Center functions on a dark island of space at the astronomic center of the system of Satania.

	> “One Supreme Power Center of the sixth order is stationed at the exact gravity focus of each local system. In the system of Satania the assigned power center occupies a dark island of space located at the astronomic center of the system. Many of these dark islands are vast dynamos which mobilize and directionize certain space-energies, and these natural circumstances are effectively utilized by the Satania Power Center, whose living mass functions as a liaison with the higher centers, directing the streams of more materialized power to the Master Physical Controllers on the evolutionary planets of space.” <a id="s611_616"></a>[UB 41:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p1_5)

8. Power centers and physical controllers never play. They are thoroughly businesslike in all their reactions.

	> “Having no ascendant past to revert to in memory, power centers and physical controllers never play; they are thoroughly businesslike in all their actions. They are always on duty; there is no provision in the universal scheme for the interruption of the physical lines of energy; never for a fraction of a second can these beings relinquish their direct supervision of the energy circuits of time and space.” <a id="s615_413"></a>[UB 29:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p3_5)

#### D. Master Physical Controllers.

1. These mobile subordinates of the Supreme Power Centers are capable of individual metamorphosis that permits them to travel at unusual velocities.

	> “These beings are the mobile subordinates of the Supreme Power Centers. The physical controllers are endowed with capabilities of individuality metamorphosis of such a nature that they can engage in a remarkable variety of autotransport, being able to traverse local space at velocities approaching the flight of Solitary Messengers. But like all other space traversers they require the assistance of both their fellows and certain other types of beings in overcoming the action of gravity and the resistance of inertia in departing from a material sphere.” <a id="s621_561"></a>[UB 29:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_1)

2. There are seven groups of the Master Physical Controllers.

	> “The Master Physical Controllers are the direct offspring of the Supreme Power Centers, and their numbers include the following:
	> “1. Associate Power Directors.
	> “2. Mechanical Controllers.
	> “3. Energy Transformers.
	> “4. Energy Transmitters.
	> “5. Primary Associators.
	> “6. Secondary Dissociators.
	> “7. The Frandalanks and Chronoldeks.” <a id="s632_41"></a>[UB 29:4.4-11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_4)

3. Physical controllers are largely occupied with the adjustment of energies unknown on Urantia.

	> “The physical controllers are chiefly occupied in the adjustment of basic energies undiscovered on Urantia. These unknown energies are very essential to the interplanetary system of transport and to certain techniques of communication. When we lay lines of energy for the purpose of conveying sound equivalents or of extending vision, these undiscovered forms of energy are utilized by the living physical controllers and their associates. These same energies are also, on occasion, used by the midway creatures in their routine work.” <a id="s636_539"></a>[UB 29:4.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_14)

4. Problems in controlling the Urantia energy circuits.

	> “Urantia is in the lines of tremendous energies, a small planet in the circuit of enormous masses, and the local controllers sometimes employ enormous numbers of their order in an effort to equalize these lines of energy. They do fairly well with regard to the physical circuits of Satania but have trouble insulating against the powerful Norlatiadek currents.” <a id="s640_365"></a>[UB 41:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p2_8)

5. Associate Power Directors assign and dispatch all orders of the Master Physical Controllers.

	> “_Associate Power Directors_. These marvelously efficient beings are intrusted with the assignment and dispatch of all orders of the Master Physical Controllers in accordance with the ever-shifting needs of the constantly changing energy status of the realms. The vast reserves of the physical controllers are maintained on the headquarters worlds of the minor sectors, and from these concentration points they are periodically dispatched by the associate power directors to the headquarters of the universes, constellations, and systems, and to the individual planets. When thus assigned, the physical controllers are provisionally subject to the orders of the divine executioners of the conciliating commissions but are otherwise solely amenable to their associate directors and to the Supreme Power Centers.” <a id="s644_815"></a>[UB 29:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_15)

6. Function of the mechanical controllers in the regulation of interplanetary energy circuits.

	> “The mechanical controllers are competent to directionize the flow of energy and to facilitate its concentration into the specialized currents or circuits. These mighty beings have much to do with the segregation, directionization, and intensification of the physical energies and with the equalization of the pressures of the interplanetary circuits. They are expert in the manipulation of twenty-one of the thirty physical energies of space, constituting the power charge of a superuniverse. They are also able to accomplish much towards the management and control of six of the nine more subtle forms of physical energy. By placing these controllers in proper technical relationship to each other and to certain of the power centers, the associate power directors are enabled to effect unbelievable changes in power adjustment and energy control.” <a id="s648_854"></a>[UB 29:4.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_20)

7. Nature, origin, and function of the versatile energy transformers.

	> “_Energy Transformers_. The number of these beings in a superuniverse is unbelievable. There are almost one million in Satania alone, and the usual quota is one hundred for each inhabited world.
	> 
	> “The energy transformers are the conjoint creation of the Seven Supreme Power Directors and the Seven Central Supervisors. They are among the more personal orders of physical controllers, and except when an associate power director is present on an inhabited world, the transformers are in command. They are the planetary inspectors of all departing seraphic transports. All classes of celestial life can utilize the less personal orders of the physical controllers only by liaison with the more personal orders of the associate directors and the energy transformers.” <a id="s654_572"></a>[UB 29:4.22-23](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_22)

8. Function of energy transformers in storing and liberating energy, thus maintaining universal energy balance and power equilibrium.

	> “These transformers are powerful and effective living switches, being able to dispose themselves for or against a given power disposition or directionization. They are also skillful in their efforts to insulate the planets against the powerful energy streams passing between gigantic planetary and starry neighbors. Their energy-transmutive attributes render them most serviceable in the important task of maintaining universal energy balance, or power equilibrium. At one time they seem to consume or store energy; at other times they appear to exude or liberate energy. The transformers are able to increase or to diminish the ‘storage-battery’ potential of the living and dead energies of their respective realms. But they deal only with physical and semimaterial energies, they do not directly function in the domain of life, neither do they change the forms of living beings.” <a id="s658_885"></a>[UB 29:4.24](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_24)

9. The transformers, possibly the most remarkable and mysterious of semimaterial creatures, can and do change the physical form of the energies of space.

	> “In some respects the energy transformers are the most remarkable and mysterious of all semimaterial living creatures. They are in some unknown manner physically differentiated, and by varying their liaison relationships, they are able to exert a profound influence upon the energy which passes through their associated presences. The status of the physical realms seems to undergo a transformation under their skillful manipulation. _They can and do change the physical form of the energies of space_. With the aid of their fellow controllers they are actually able to change the form and potential of twenty-seven of the thirty physical energies of the superuniverse power charge. That three of these energies are beyond their control proves that they are not instrumentalities of the Unqualified Absolute.” <a id="s662_813"></a>[UB 29:4.25](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_25)

10. Function of energy transmitters.

	> These beings dispatch energy to inhabited worlds. They are living superconductors for more than half of the thirty forms of physical energy.
	> 
	> “Energy transmitters can function with regard to all forms of communicable perception; they can render a distant scene ‘visible’ as well as a distant sound ‘audible.’ They provide the emergency lines of communication in the local systems and on the individual planets. These services must be used by practically all creatures for purposes of communication outside of the regularly established circuits.” <a id="s668_407"></a>[UB 29:4.30](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_30)

11. Primary associators are energy custodians—they store energy. They hold it in a state unknown on Urantia.

	> “_Primary Associators_. These interesting and invaluable entities are masterly energy conservators and custodians. Somewhat as a plant stores solar light, so do these living organisms store energy during times of plus manifestations. They work on a gigantic scale, converting the energies of space into a physical state not known on Urantia. They are also able to carry forward these transformations to the point of producing some of the primitive units of material existence. These beings simply act by their presence. They are in no way exhausted or depleted by this function; they act like living catalytic agents.” <a id="s672_622"></a>[UB 29:4.32](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_32)

12. The associators manipulate all forms of energy and release energy in times of need.

	> “During seasons of minus manifestations they are empowered to release these accumulated energies. But your knowledge of energy and matter is not sufficiently advanced to make it possible to explain the technique of this phase of their work. They always labor in compliance with universal law, handling and manipulating atoms, electrons, and ultimatons much as you maneuver adjustable type to make the same alphabetical symbols tell vastly different stories.” <a id="s676_462"></a>[UB 29:4.33](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_33)

13. The secondary dissociators have enormous antigravity powers and can thus turn matter into energy.

	> “_Secondary Dissociators_. Compared with the primary associators, these beings of enormous antigravity endowment are the reverse workers. There is never any danger that the special or modified forms of physical energy on the local worlds or in the local systems will be exhausted, for these living organizations are endowed with the unique power of evolving limitless supplies of energy. They are chiefly concerned with the evolution of a form of energy which is hardly known on Urantia from a form of matter which is recognized still less. They are truly the alchemists of space and the wonder-workers of time. But in all the wonders they work, they never transgress the mandates of Cosmic Supremacy.” <a id="s680_706"></a>[UB 29:4.35](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_35)

14. Frandalanks and chronoldeks function as living gauges.

	> “_The Frandalanks_. These beings are the joint creation of all three orders of energy-control beings: the primary and secondary force organizers and the power directors. Frandalanks are the most numerous of all the Master Physical Controllers; the number functioning in Satania alone is beyond your numerical concept. They are stationed on all inhabited worlds and are always attached to the higher orders of physical controllers. They function interchangeably in the central and superuniverses and in the domains of outer space.
	> 
	> “The frandalanks are created in thirty divisions, one for each form of basic universe force, and they function exclusively as living and automatic presence, pressure, and velocity gauges. These living barometers are solely concerned with the automatic and unerring registration of the status of all forms of force-energy. They are to the physical universe what the vast reflectivity mechanism is to the minded universe. The frandalanks that register time in addition to quantitative and qualitative energy presence are called _chronoldeks_.” <a id="s686_545"></a>[UB 29:4.36-37](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_36)

#### E. Morontia Power Supervisors.

1. Function of Morontia Power Supervisors.

	> “These unique beings are exclusively concerned with the supervision of those activities which represent a working combination of spiritual and physical or semimaterial energies. They are exclusively devoted to the ministry of morontia progression. Not that they so much minister to mortals during the transition experience, but they rather make possible the transition environment for the progressing morontia creatures. They are the channels of morontia power which sustain and energize the morontia phases of the transition worlds.” <a id="s692_538"></a>[UB 48:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p2_1)

2. Morontia Power Supervisors can unite material and spiritual energies. They provide morontians with 570 morontia forms:

	> 8 in the local system.
	> 71 in the constellation.
	> “The Morontia Power Supervisors are able to effect a union of material and of spiritual energies, thereby organizing a morontia form of materialization which is receptive to the superimposition of a controlling spirit. When you traverse the morontia life of Nebadon, these same patient and skillful Morontia Power Supervisors will successively provide you with 570 morontia bodies, each one a phase of your progressive transformation. From the time of leaving the material worlds until you are constituted a first-stage spirit on Salvington, you will undergo just 570 separate and ascending morontia changes. Eight of these occur in the system, seventy-one in the constellation, and 491 during the sojourn on the spheres of Salvington.” <a id="s698_740"></a>[UB 48:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p1_5)

3. Summary of the types and functions of Morontia Power Supervisors.

	> These beings are the offspring of the local universe Mother Spirit.
	> 1. Circuit regulators transform physical and spiritual energies into materials that are woven into the bodies and life activities of ascending mortals.
	> 2. System co-ordinators effect the necessary changes in morontia bodies when ascenders advance from one morontia sphere to another.
	> 3. Planetary custodians grant material for and authorize changes in morontia form as ascenders proceed to succeeding spheres.
	> 4. Combined controllers deal with physical, spiritual, and morontia energies.
	> 5. Liaison stabilizers make possible the conversion of morontia energy into morontia material.
	> 6. Selective assorters re-key ascenders to keep them in progressive synchrony with the morontia life.
	> 7. Associate registrars keep records on morontia worlds. <a id="s709_60"></a>[UB 48:2.1-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p2_26)

#### F. Physical-energy manipulators.

1. Physical-energy manipulators are recruited or volunteer celestial artisans who are concerned with physical energy.

	> “The physical-energy manipulators serve for long periods with the power directors and are experts in the manipulation and control of many phases of physical energy. They are conversant with the three basic currents and the thirty subsidiary energy segregations of the superuniverses. These beings are of inestimable assistance to the Morontia Power Supervisors of the transition worlds. They are the persistent students of the cosmic projections of Paradise.” <a id="s715_463"></a>[UB 44:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/44#p5_2)

## SECTION 4. CHEMICAL PHENOMENA

### I. **Matter**

> “Matter in all universes, excepting in the central universe, is identical. Matter in its physical properties depends on the revolutionary rates of its component members, the number and size of the revolving members, their distance from the nuclear body or the space content of matter, as well as on the presence of certain forces as yet undiscovered on Urantia.” <a id="s721_365"></a>[UB 42:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p3_1)

#### A. General classification.

1. The ten grand divisions of matter.

	> “In the varied suns, planets, and space bodies there are ten grand divisions of matter:
	> “1. Ultimatonic matter—the prime physical units of material existence, the energy particles which go to make up electrons.
	> “2. Subelectronic matter—the explosive and repellent stage of the solar supergases.
	> “3. Electronic matter—the electrical stage of material differentiation—electrons, protons, and various other units entering into the varied constitution of the electronic groups.
	> “4. Subatomic matter—matter existing extensively in the interior of the hot suns.
	> “5. Shattered atoms—found in the cooling suns and throughout space.
	> “6. Ionized matter—individual atoms stripped of their outer (chemically active) electrons by electrical, thermal, or X-ray activities and by solvents.
	> “7. Atomic matter—the chemical stage of elemental organization, the component units of molecular or visible matter.
	> “8. The molecular stage of matter—matter as it exists on Urantia in a state of relatively stable materialization under ordinary conditions.
	> “9. Radioactive matter—the disorganizing tendency and activity of the heavier elements under conditions of moderate heat and diminished gravity pressure.
	> “10. Collapsed matter—the relatively stationary matter found in the interior of the cold or dead suns. This form of matter is not really stationary; there is still some ultimatonic even electronic activity, but these units are in very close proximity, and their rates of revolution are greatly diminished.
	> “The foregoing classification of matter pertains to its organization rather than to the forms of its appearance to created beings. Neither does it take into account the pre-emergent stages of energy nor the eternal materializations on Paradise and in the central universe.” <a id="s738_277"></a>[UB 42:3.2-13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p3_2)

#### B. Ultimatons, electrons, and atoms.

1. The space charge is homogeneous and undifferentiated, but matter consists of particles of definite weight.

	> “While the space charge of universal force is homogeneous and undifferentiated, the organization of evolved energy into matter entails the concentration of energy into discrete masses of definite dimensions and established weight—precise gravity reaction.” <a id="s744_260"></a>[UB 42:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p6_1)

2. Local or linear gravity becomes operative on the atomic form of matter.

	> “Local or linear gravity becomes fully operative with the appearance of the atomic organization of matter. Preatomic matter becomes slightly gravity responsive when activated by X ray and other similar energies, but no measurable linear-gravity pull is exerted on free, unattached, and uncharged electronic-energy particles or on unassociated ultimatons.” <a id="s748_359"></a>[UB 42:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p6_2)

3. Ultimatons respond only to Paradise gravity. Without assistance they cannot return to puissant energy, except in terminal sun disruptions.

	> “Ultimatons function by mutual attraction, responding only to the circular Paradise-gravity pull. Without linear-gravity response they are thus held in the universal space drift. Ultimatons are capable of accelerating revolutionary velocity to the point of partial antigravity behavior, but they cannot, independent of force organizers or power directors, attain the critical escape velocity of deindividuation, return to the puissant-energy stage. In nature, ultimatons escape the status of physical existence only when participating in the terminal disruption of a cooled-off and dying sun.” <a id="s752_597"></a>[UB 42:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p6_3)

4. The varieties of motion of ultimatons.

	> “The ultimatons, unknown on Urantia, slow down through many phases of physical activity before they attain the revolutionary-energy prerequisites to electronic organization. Ultimatons have three varieties of motion: mutual resistance to cosmic force, individual revolutions of antigravity potential, and the intraelectronic positions of the one hundred mutually interassociated ultimatons.” <a id="s756_395"></a>[UB 42:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p6_4)

5. There are never more than one hundred ultimatons in a typical electron.

	> “Mutual attraction holds one hundred ultimatons together in the constitution of the electron; and there are never more nor less than one hundred ultimatons in a typical electron. The loss of one or more ultimatons destroys typical electronic identity, thus bringing into existence one of the ten modified forms of the electron.” <a id="s760_332"></a>[UB 42:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p6_5)

6. Electron size and type are determined by ultimatonic behavior.

	> “Ultimatons do not describe orbits or whirl about in circuits within the electrons, but they do spread or cluster in accordance with their axial revolutionary velocities, thus determining the differential electronic dimensions. This same ultimatonic velocity of axial revolution also determines the negative or positive reactions of the several types of electronic units. The entire segregation and grouping of electronic matter, together with the electric differentiation of negative and positive bodies of energy-matter, result from these various functions of the component ultimatonic interassociation.” <a id="s764_610"></a>[UB 42:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p6_6)

7. Size of atoms and electrons.

	> “Each atom is a trifle over 1/100,000,000th of an inch in diameter, while an electron weighs a little less than 1/2,000th of the smallest atom, hydrogen. The positive proton, characteristic of the atomic nucleus, while it may be no larger than a negative electron, weighs from two to three thousand times more.” <a id="s768_315"></a>[UB 42:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p6_7)

8. Comparison of mass and volume of electrons and protons.

	> “If the mass of matter should be magnified until that of an electron equaled one tenth of an ounce, then were size to be proportionately magnified, the volume of such an electron would become as large as that of the earth. If the volume of a proton—eighteen hundred times as heavy as an electron—should be magnified to the size of the head of a pin, then, in comparison, a pin’s head would attain a diameter equal to that of the earth’s orbit around the sun.” <a id="s772_463"></a>[UB 42:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p6_8)

#### C. Atomic matter.

1. All matter is formed on the order of the solar system—central nucleus surrounded by whirling units.

	> “The formation of all matter is on the order of the solar system. There is at the center of every minute universe of energy a relatively stable, comparatively stationary, nuclear portion of material existence. This central unit is endowed with a threefold possibility of manifestation. Surrounding this energy center there whirl, in endless profusion but in fluctuating circuits, the energy units which are faintly comparable to the planets encircling the sun of some starry group like your own solar system.<a id="s778_511"></a>[UB 42:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p7_1)

2. In the atom the electrons revolve around the proton with the comparative room the planets have in revolving around the sun.

	> “Within the atom the electrons revolve about the central proton with about the same comparative room the planets have as they revolve about the sun in the space of the solar system. There is the same relative distance, in comparison with actual size, between the atomic nucleus and the inner electronic circuit as exists between the inner planet, Mercury, and your sun.” <a id="s782_374"></a>[UB 42:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p7_2)

3. Subatomic particle velocities are beyond human imagination.

	> “The electronic axial revolutions and their orbital velocities about the atomic nucleus are both beyond the human imagination, not to mention the velocities of their component ultimatons. The positive particles of radium fly off into space at the rate of ten thousand miles a second, while the negative particles attain a velocity approximating that of light.” <a id="s786_364"></a>[UB 42:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p7_3)

4. The universe is of decimal construction. There are just 100 types of the atom.

	> “The local universes are of decimal construction. There are just one hundred distinguishable atomic materializations of space-energy in a dual universe; that is the maximum possible organization of matter in Nebadon. These one hundred forms of matter consist of a regular series in which from one to one hundred electrons revolve around a central and relatively compact nucleus. It is this orderly and dependable association of various energies that constitutes matter.” <a id="s790_474"></a>[UB 42:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p7_4)

5. All of the one hundred elements are not always found on the surface of a planet.

	> “Not every world will show one hundred recognizable elements at the surface, but they are somewhere present, have been present, or are in process of evolution. Conditions surrounding the origin and subsequent evolution of a planet determine how many of the one hundred atomic types will be observable. The heavier atoms are not found on the surface of many worlds. Even on Urantia the known heavier elements manifest a tendency to fly to pieces, as is illustrated by radium behavior.” <a id="s794_488"></a>[UB 42:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p7_5)

6. Atomic stability is dependent on the neutrons; chemical activity on the electrons.

	> “Stability of the atom depends on the number of electrically inactive neutrons in the central body. Chemical behavior is wholly dependent on the activity of the freely revolving electrons.” <a id="s798_193"></a>[UB 42:7.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p7_6)

7. More than one hundred electrons in an atom induces disruption with energy dispersion.

	> “In Orvonton it has never been possible naturally to assemble over one hundred orbital electrons in one atomic system. When one hundred and one have been artificially introduced into the orbital field, the result has always been the instantaneous disruption of the central proton with the wild dispersion of the electrons and other liberated energies.” <a id="s802_356"></a>[UB 42:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p7_7)

8. Only outer electrons revolve in distinct orbits—the inner ones are more diffuse.

	> “While atoms may contain from one to one hundred orbital electrons, only the outer ten electrons of the larger atoms revolve about the central nucleus as distinct and discrete bodies, intactly and compactly swinging around on precise and definite orbits. The thirty electrons nearest the center are difficult of observation or detection as separate and organized bodies. This same comparative ratio of electronic behavior in relation to nuclear proximity obtains in all atoms regardless of the number of electrons embraced. The nearer the nucleus, the less there is of electronic individuality. The wavelike energy extension of an electron may so spread out as to occupy the whole of the lesser atomic orbits; especially is this true of the electrons nearest the atomic nucleus.” <a id="s806_783"></a>[UB 42:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p7_8)

9. Description of the four zones of atomic organization and behavior.

	> “The thirty innermost orbital electrons have individuality, but their energy systems tend to intermingle, extending from electron to electron and well-nigh from orbit to orbit. The next thirty electrons constitute the second family, or energy zone, and are of advancing individuality, bodies of matter exerting a more complete control over their attendant energy systems. The next thirty electrons, the third energy zone, are still more individualized and circulate in more distinct and definite orbits. The last ten electrons, present in only the ten heaviest elements, are possessed of the dignity of independence and are, therefore, able to escape more or less freely from the control of the mother nucleus. With a minimum variation in temperature and pressure, the members of this fourth and outermost group of electrons will escape from the grasp of the central nucleus, as is illustrated by the spontaneous disruption of uranium and kindred elements.” <a id="s810_961"></a>[UB 42:7.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p7_9)

10. The unpredictability of atomic behavior is due to many influences.

	> “The first twenty-seven atoms, those containing from one to twenty-seven orbital electrons, are more easy of comprehension than the rest. From twenty-eight upward we encounter more and more of the unpredictability of the supposed presence of the Unqualified Absolute. But some of this electronic unpredictability is due to differential ultimatonic axial revolutionary velocities and to the unexplained ‘huddling’ proclivity of ultimatons. Other influences—physical, electrical, magnetic, and gravitational—also operate to produce variable electronic behavior. Atoms therefore are similar to persons as to predictability. Statisticians may announce laws governing a large number of either atoms or persons but not for a single individual atom or person.” <a id="s814_757"></a>[UB 42:7.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p7_10)

#### D. Atomic cohesion.

1. Atoms are held together by gravity and an unknown force.

	> “While gravity is one of several factors concerned in holding together a tiny atomic energy system, there is also present in and among these basic physical units a powerful and unknown energy, the secret of their basic constitution and ultimate behavior, a force which remains to be discovered on Urantia. This universal influence permeates all the space embraced within this tiny energy organization.<a id="s820_404"></a>[UB 42:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p8_1)

2. Atomic interelectronic space is not empty. The unpredictability of the atom may be due to the space-force reaction of the Unqualified Absolute.

	> “The interelectronic space of an atom is not empty. Throughout an atom this interelectronic space is activated by wavelike manifestations which are perfectly synchronized with electronic velocity and ultimatonic revolutions. This force is not wholly dominated by your recognized laws of positive and negative attraction; its behavior is therefore sometimes unpredictable. This unnamed influence seems to be a space-force reaction of the Unqualified Absolute.” <a id="s824_463"></a>[UB 42:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p8_2)

3. Size and function of the mesotron.

	> “The charged protons and the uncharged neutrons of the nucleus of the atom are held together by the reciprocating function of the mesotron, a particle of matter 180 times as heavy as the electron. Without this arrangement the electric charge carried by the protons would be disruptive of the atomic nucleus.” <a id="s828_312"></a>[UB 42:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p8_3)

4. Technique of the mesotron in maintaining the integrity of the atomic nucleus.

	> “As atoms are constituted, neither electric nor gravitational forces could hold the nucleus together. The integrity of the nucleus is maintained by the reciprocal cohering function of the mesotron, which is able to hold charged and uncharged particles together because of superior force-mass power and by the further function of causing protons and neutrons constantly to change places. The mesotron causes the electric charge of the nuclear particles to be incessantly tossed back and forth between protons and neutrons. At one infinitesimal part of a second a given nuclear particle is a charged proton and the next an uncharged neutron. And these alternations of energy status are so unbelievably rapid that the electric charge is deprived of all opportunity to function as a disruptive influence. Thus does the mesotron function as an ‘energy-carrier’ particle which mightily contributes to the nuclear stability of the atom.” <a id="s832_934"></a>[UB 42:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p8_4)

5. Explanation of excess radiation in atomic disruption.

	> “The presence and function of the mesotron also explains another atomic riddle. When atoms perform radioactively, they emit far more energy than would be expected. This excess of radiation is derived from the breaking up of the mesotron ‘energy carrier,’ which thereby becomes a mere electron. The mesotronic disintegration is also accompanied by the emission of certain small uncharged particles.” <a id="s836_402"></a>[UB 42:8.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p8_5)

6. The mesotron does not explain all of the cohesive properties of the atomic nucleus. There is present an undiscovered force.

	> “The mesotron explains certain cohesive properties of the atomic nucleus, but it does not account for the cohesion of proton to proton nor for the adhesion of neutron to neutron. The paradoxical and powerful force of atomic cohesive integrity is a form of energy as yet undiscovered on Urantia.
	> 
	> “These mesotrons are found abundantly in the space rays which so incessantly impinge upon your planet.” <a id="s842_107"></a>[UB 42:8.6-7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p8_6)

#### E. Classification of elements.

1. Seven is characteristic of the spiritual world, but ten is basic to the material creation.

	> “The number seven is basic to the central universe and the spiritual system of inherent transmissions of character, but the number ten, the decimal system, is inherent in energy, matter, and the material creation. Nevertheless the atomic world does display a certain periodic characterization which recurs in groups of seven—a birthmark carried by this material world indicative of its far-distant spiritual origin.” <a id="s848_420"></a>[UB 42:9.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p9_2)

2. The sevenfold periodic system of chemistry indicates the sevenphase creative origin of the material realms. There are just seven colors in the spectrum.

	> “This sevenfold persistence of creative constitution is exhibited in the chemical domains as a recurrence of similar physical and chemical properties in segregated periods of seven when the basic elements are arranged in the order of their atomic weights. When the Urantia chemical elements are thus arranged in a row, any given quality or property tends to recur by sevens. This periodic change by sevens recurs diminishingly and with variations throughout the entire chemical table, being most markedly observable in the earlier or lighter atomic groupings. Starting from any one element, after noting some one property, such a quality will change for six consecutive elements, but on reaching the eighth, it tends to reappear, that is, the eighth chemically active element resembles the first, the ninth the second, and so on. Such a fact of the physical world unmistakably points to the sevenfold constitution of ancestral energy and is indicative of the fundamental reality of the sevenfold diversity of the creations of time and space. Man should also note that there are seven colors in the natural spectrum.” <a id="s852_1120"></a>[UB 42:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p9_3)

3. Spectral phenomena are modified by numerous shattered atoms wandering through space.

	> “In deciphering spectral phenomena, it should be remembered that space is not empty; that light, in traversing space, is sometimes slightly modified by the various forms of energy and matter which circulate in all organized space. Some of the lines indicating unknown matter which appear in the spectra of your sun are due to modifications of well-known elements which are floating throughout space in shattered form, the atomic casualties of the fierce encounters of the solar elemental battles. Space is pervaded by these wandering derelicts, especially sodium and calcium.” <a id="s856_580"></a>[UB 41:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p6_1)

#### F. Calcium.

1. The reason why calcium is so prevalent throughout the universes.

	> “Calcium is, in fact, the chief element of the matter-permeation of space throughout Orvonton. Our whole superuniverse is sprinkled with minutely pulverized stone. Stone is literally the basic building matter for the planets and spheres of space. The cosmic cloud, the great space blanket, consists for the most part of the modified atoms of calcium. The stone atom is one of the most prevalent and persistent of the elements. It not only endures solar ionization—splitting—but persists in an associative identity even after it has been battered by the destructive X rays and shattered by the high solar temperatures. Calcium possesses an individuality and a longevity excelling all of the more common forms of matter.” <a id="s862_723"></a>[UB 41:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p6_2)

2. Further discussion of the escape of the calcium atom from the solar photosphere.

	> “As your physicists have suspected, these mutilated remnants of solar calcium literally ride the light beams for varied distances and thus their widespread dissemination throughout space is tremendously facilitated. The sodium atom, under certain modifications, is also capable of light and energy locomotion. The calcium feat is all the more remarkable since this element has almost twice the mass of sodium. Local space-permeation by calcium is due to the fact that it escapes from the solar photosphere, in modified form, by literally riding the outgoing sunbeams. Of all the solar elements, calcium, notwithstanding its comparative bulk—containing as it does twenty revolving electrons—is the most successful in escaping from the solar interior to the realms of space. This explains why there is a calcium layer, a gaseous stone surface, on the sun six thousand miles thick; and this despite the fact that nineteen lighter elements and numerous heavier ones, are underneath.” <a id="s866_983"></a>[UB 41:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p6_3)

3. The technique of calcium escape from the sun—the loss of electron twenty and the agility of number nineteen.

	> “Calcium is an active and versatile element at solar temperatures. The stone atom has two agile and loosely attached electrons in the two outer electronic circuits, which are very close together. Early in the atomic struggle it loses its outer electron; whereupon it engages in a masterful act of juggling the nineteenth electron back and forth between the nineteenth and twentieth circuits of electronic revolution. By tossing this nineteenth electron back and forth between its own orbit and that of its lost companion more than twenty-five thousand times a second, a mutilated stone atom is able partially to defy gravity and thus successfully to ride the emerging streams of light and energy, the sunbeams, to liberty and adventure. This calcium atom moves outward by alternate jerks of forward propulsion, grasping and letting go the sunbeam about twenty-five thousand times each second. And this is why stone is the chief component of the worlds of space. Calcium is the most expert solar-prison escaper.” <a id="s870_1015"></a>[UB 41:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p6_4)

4. The phenomenal performances of electron nineteen of the calcium atom.

	> “The agility of this acrobatic calcium electron is indicated by the fact that, when tossed by the temperature-X-ray solar forces to the circle of the higher orbit, it only remains in that orbit for about one one-millionth of a second; but before the electric-gravity power of the atomic nucleus pulls it back into its old orbit, it is able to complete one million revolutions about the atomic center.” <a id="s874_405"></a>[UB 41:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p6_5)

5. The sun has lost much calcium—most of its present supply is now in the outer solar crust.

	> “Your sun has parted with an enormous quantity of its calcium, having lost tremendous amounts during the times of its convulsive eruptions in connection with the formation of the solar system. Much of the solar calcium is now in the outer crust of the sun.” <a id="s878_261"></a>[UB 41:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p6_6)

#### G. Other chemical phenomena.

1. Factors concerned in the origin of space rays.

During early times of universe materialization the space regions are interspersed with vast hydrogen clouds, which later through disruption produce a powerful short space ray. Several factors affect the origin of these rays including the shape of the orbits in matter and also the direction of electron spin.<a id="s884_308"></a>[UB 58:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p3_1)

2. The relation of hydrogen clouds and various space energies to the inheritance factors of living beings.

	> “The vast hydrogen clouds are veritable cosmic chemical laboratories, harboring all phases of evolving energy and metamorphosing matter. Great energy actions also occur in the marginal gases of the great binary stars which so frequently overlap and hence extensively commingle. But none of these tremendous and far-flung energy activities of space exerts the least influence upon the phenomena of organized life—the germ plasm of living things and beings. These energy conditions of space are germane to the essential environment of life establishment but they are not effective in the subsequent modification of the inheritance factors of the germ plasm as are some of the longer rays of radiant energy. The implanted life of the Life Carriers is fully resistant to all of this amazing flood of the short space rays of universe energy.” <a id="s888_841"></a>[UB 58:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p3_4)

3. There are over one million basic chemical formulas concerned in the organization and transmission of life.

	> “There are over one million fundamental or cosmic chemical formulas which constitute the parent patterns and the numerous basic functional variations of life manifestations. Satellite number one of the life-planning sphere is the realm of the universe physicists and electrochemists who serve as technical assistants to the Life Carriers in the work of capturing, organizing, and manipulating the essential units of energy which are employed in building up the material vehicles of life transmission, the so-called germ plasm.<a id="s892_529"></a>[UB 36:2.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p2_14)

4. In the blood stream of man there exists the possibility of over fifteen million chemical reactions.

	> “But many seemingly mysterious adjustments of living organisms are purely chemical, wholly physical. At any moment of time, in the blood stream of any human being there exists the possibility of upward of 15,000,000 chemical reactions between the hormone output of a dozen ductless glands.” <a id="s896_294"></a>[UB 65:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p6_6)

## SECTION 5. PHYSICAL ASPECTS OF THE GRAND UNIVERSE

### I. **The Central Universe**

#### A. Havona realities.

1. Havona energies are threefold and unlike the physical organization of the evolutionary universes.

	> “The physical realities of Havona represent an order of energy organization radically different from any prevailing in the evolutionary universes of space. Havona energies are threefold; superuniverse units of energy-matter contain a twofold energy charge, although one form of energy exists in negative and positive phases. The creation of the central universe is threefold (Trinity); the creation of a local universe (directly) is twofold, by a Creator Son and a Creative Spirit.” <a id="s906_486"></a>[UB 14:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p2_2)

2. Havona reality consists of one thousand elements, and seven forms of basic energies. Havoners respond to forty-nine special sensations.

	> “The material of Havona consists of the organization of exactly one thousand basic chemical elements and the balanced function of the seven forms of Havona energy. Each of these basic energies manifests seven phases of excitation, so that the Havona natives respond to forty-nine differing sensation stimuli. In other words, viewed from a purely physical stand point, the natives of the central universe possess forty-nine specialized forms of sensation. The morontia senses are seventy, and the higher spiritual orders of reaction response vary in different types of beings from seventy to two hundred and ten.” <a id="s910_616"></a>[UB 14:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p2_3)

3. The threefold energies of Havona are under perfect control. All cosmic realities are in perfect balance.

	> “All natural law is co-ordinated on a basis entirely different than in the dual-energy systems of the evolving creations. The entire central universe is organized in accordance with the threefold system of perfect and symmetrical control. Throughout the whole Paradise-Havona system there is maintained a perfect balance between all cosmic realities and all spiritual forces. Paradise, with an absolute grasp of material creation, perfectly regulates and maintains the physical energies of this central universe; the Eternal Son, as a part of his all-embracing spirit grasp, most perfectly sustains the spiritual status of all who indwell Havona. On Paradise nothing is experimental, and the Paradise-Havona system is a unit of creative perfection.” <a id="s914_753"></a>[UB 14:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p2_6)

### II. **The Superuniverses**

> “The physical systems of time and space are all evolutionary in origin.” <a id="s918_75"></a>[UB 32:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p3_2)

> “Except in the central universe, perfection is a progressive attainment.” <a id="s920_76"></a>[UB 32:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p3_3)

#### A. Architectural worlds of the superuniverses.

> “While each superuniverse government presides near the center of the evolutionary universes of its space segment, it occupies a world made to order and is peopled by accredited personalities. These headquarters worlds are architectural spheres, space bodies specifically constructed for their special purpose. While sharing the light of near-by suns, these spheres are independently lighted and heated. Each has a sun which gives forth light without heat, like the satellites of Paradise, while each is supplied with heat by the circulation of certain energy currents near the surface of the sphere. These headquarters worlds belong to one of the greater systems situated near the astronomical center of their respective superuniverses.” <a id="s924_740"></a>[UB 15:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_1)

#### B. Architectural worlds of the local universe.

> “Architectural spheres, such as Salvington, Edentia, and Jerusem, are lighted, heated, and energized by methods which make them quite independent of the suns of space. These spheres were constructed—made to order—by the power centers and physical controllers and were designed to exert a powerful influence over energy distribution. Basing their activities on such focal points of energy control, the power centers, by their living presences, directionize and channelize the physical energies of space.” <a id="s928_506"></a>[UB 41:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p1_3)

#### C. Edentia.

1. Topography.

	> “Edentia abounds in fascinating highlands, extensive elevations of physical matter crowned with morontia life and overspread with spiritual glory, but there are no rugged mountain ranges such as appear on Urantia. There are tens of thousands of sparkling lakes and thousands upon thousands of interconnecting streams, but there are no great oceans nor torrential rivers. Only the highlands are devoid of these surface streams.” <a id="s934_431"></a>[UB 43:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p1_1)

2. Water.

	> “The water of Edentia and similar architectural spheres is no different from the water of the evolutionary planets. The water systems of such spheres are both surface and subterranean, and the moisture is in constant circulation. Edentia can be circumnavigated via these various water routes, though the chief channel of transportation is the atmosphere. Spirit beings would naturally travel above the surface of the sphere, while the morontia and material beings make use of material and semimaterial means to negotiate atmospheric passage.” <a id="s938_546"></a>[UB 43:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p1_2)

3. Atmosphere.

	> “Edentia and its associated worlds have a true atmosphere, the usual three-gas mixture which is characteristic of such architectural creations, and which embodies the two elements of Urantian atmosphere plus that morontia gas suitable for the respiration of morontia creatures. But while this atmosphere is both material and morontial, there are no storms or hurricanes; neither is there summer nor winter. This absence of atmospheric disturbances and of seasonal variation makes it possible to embellish all outdoors on these especially created worlds.” <a id="s942_558"></a>[UB 43:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p1_1)

#### D. Satania.

1. Heating of headquarters worlds.

	> “The energy of Jerusem is superbly controlled and circulates about the sphere in the zone channels, which are directly fed from the energy charges of space and expertly administered by the Master Physical Controllers. The natural resistance to the passage of these energies through the physical channels of conduction yields the heat required for the production of the equable temperature of Jerusem. The full-light temperature is maintained at about 70 degrees Fahrenheit, while during the period of light recession it falls to a little lower than 50 degrees.” <a id="s948_565"></a>[UB 46:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p1_3)

2. Lighting system of Jerusem.

	> “The lighting system of Jerusem should not be so difficult for you to comprehend. There are no days and nights, no seasons of heat and cold. The power transformers maintain one hundred thousand centers from which rarefied energies are projected upward through the planetary atmosphere, undergoing certain changes, until they reach the electric air-ceiling of the sphere; and then these energies are reflected back and down as a gentle, sifting, and even light of about the intensity of Urantia sunlight when the sun is shining overhead at ten o’clock in the morning.” <a id="s952_571"></a>[UB 46:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p1_4)

3. Because of this gentle sifting light the headquarters worlds are not luminous in space.

	> “Under such conditions of lighting, the light rays do not seem to come from one place; they just sift out of the sky, emanating equally from all space directions. This light is very similar to natural sunlight except that it contains very much less heat. Thus it will be recognized that such headquarters worlds are not luminous in space; if Jerusem were very near Urantia, it would not be visible.” <a id="s956_403"></a>[UB 46:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p1_5)

4. Light is reflected by ionosphere gases much as such gases reflect broadcast waves on Urantia.

	> “The gases which reflect this light-energy from the Jerusem upper ionosphere back to the ground are very similar to those in the Urantia upper air belts which are concerned with the auroral phenomena of your so-called northern lights, although these are produced by different causes. On Urantia it is this same gas shield which prevents the escape of the terrestrial broadcast waves, reflecting them earthward when they strike this gas belt in their direct outward flight. In this way broadcasts are held near the surface as they journey through the air around your world.” <a id="s960_577"></a>[UB 46:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p1_6)

5. The Jerusem worlds are lighted seventy-five per cent of the day—the recession light is like full moon on Urantia.

	> “This lighting of the sphere is uniformly maintained for seventy-five per cent of the Jerusem day, and then there is a gradual recession until, at the time of minimum illumination, the light is about that of your full moon on a clear night. This is the quiet hour for all Jerusem. Only the broadcast-receiving stations are in operation during this period of rest and rehabilitation.” <a id="s964_387"></a>[UB 46:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p1_7)

6. All of the Jerusem worlds receive faint sunlight—like bright starlight—but are not disturbed by sun disturbances.

	> “Jerusem receives faint light from several near-by suns—a sort of brilliant starlight—but it is not dependent on them; worlds like Jerusem are not subject to the vicissitudes of sun disturbances, neither are they confronted with the problem of a cooling or dying sun.

	> “The seven transitional study worlds and their forty-nine satellites are heated, lighted, energized, and watered by the Jerusem technique.” <a id="s970_143"></a>[UB 46:1.8-9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p1_8)

7. Architectural worlds have two hundred elements—one hundred material and one hundred morontial.

	> “All of these worlds are architectural spheres, and they have just double the number of elements of the evolved planets. Such made-to-order worlds not only abound in the heavy metals and crystals, having one hundred physical elements, but likewise have exactly one hundred forms of a unique energy organization called _morontia material_. The Master Physical Controllers and the Morontia Power Supervisors are able so to modify the revolutions of the primary units of matter and at the same time so to transform these associations of energy as to create this new substance.” <a id="s974_578"></a>[UB 48:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p1_3)

8. The Jerusem landscape and other variations of topography.

	> “On Jerusem you will miss the rugged mountain ranges of Urantia and other evolved worlds since there are neither earthquakes nor rainfalls, but you will enjoy the beauteous highlands and other unique variations of topography and landscape. Enormous areas of Jerusem are preserved in a ‘natural state,’ and the grandeur of such districts is quite beyond the powers of human imagination.” <a id="s978_390"></a>[UB 46:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p2_1)

9. Jerusem climatic conditions and the system of water circulation. The interconnecting lakes.

	> “There are thousands upon thousands of small lakes but no raging rivers nor expansive oceans. There is no rainfall, neither storms nor blizzards, on any of the architectural worlds, but there is the daily precipitation of the condensation of moisture during the time of lowest temperature attending the light recession. (The dew point is higher on a three-gas world than on a two-gas planet like Urantia.) The physical plant life and the morontia world of living things both require moisture, but this is largely supplied by the subsoil system of circulation which extends all over the sphere, even up to the very tops of the highlands. This water system is not entirely subsurface, for there are many canals interconnecting the sparkling lakes of Jerusem.” <a id="s982_761"></a>[UB 46:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p2_1)

10. The three-gas atmosphere of Jerusem.

	> “The atmosphere of Jerusem is a three-gas mixture. This air is very similar to that of Urantia with the addition of a gas to the respiration of the morontia order of life. This third gas in no way unfits the air for the respiration of animals or plants of the material orders.” <a id="s986_281"></a>[UB 46:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p2_3)

#### E. Urantia.

1. The earth receives only one two-billionths of the sun’s light emanations; at two cents a kilowatt-hour, Chicago’s light bill would be one hundred million dollars a day.

	> “The planetary atmosphere filters through to the earth about one two-billionths of the sun’s total light emanation. If the light falling upon North America were paid for at the rate of two cents per kilowatt-hour, the annual light bill would be upward of 800 quadrillion dollars. Chicago’s bill for sunshine would amount to considerably over 100 million dollars a day. And it should be remembered that you receive from the sun other forms of energy—light is not the only solar contribution reaching your atmosphere. Vast solar energies pour in upon Urantia embracing wave lengths ranging both above and below the recognition range of human vision.” <a id="s992_652"></a>[UB 58:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p2_1)

2. The nature and function of the ozone layer about ten miles above the earth’s surface.

	> “The earth’s atmosphere is all but opaque to much of the solar radiation at the extreme ultraviolet end of the spectrum. Most of these short wave lengths are absorbed by a layer of ozone which exists throughout a level about ten miles above the surface of the earth, and which extends spaceward for another ten miles. The ozone permeating this region, at conditions prevailing on the earth’s surface, would make a layer only one tenth of an inch thick; nevertheless, this relatively small and apparently insignificant amount of ozone protects Urantia inhabitants from the excess of these dangerous and destructive ultraviolet radiations present in sunlight. But were this ozone layer just a trifle thicker, you would be deprived of the highly important and health-giving ultraviolet rays which now reach the earth’s surface, and which are ancestral to one of the most essential of your vitamins.” <a id="s996_900"></a>[UB 58:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p2_2)

3. The midwayers present over fifty thousand facts of physics and chemistry proving that the cosmos is not just an accident. They catalogue over a hundred thousand other findings.

	> “And yet some of the less imaginative of your mortal mechanists insist on viewing material creation and human evolution as an accident. The Urantia midwayers have assembled over fifty thousand facts of physics and chemistry which they deem to be incompatible with the laws of accidental chance, and which they contend unmistakably demonstrate the presence of intelligent purpose in the material creation. And all of this takes no account of their catalogue of more than one hundred thousand findings outside the domain of physics and chemistry which they maintain prove the presence of mind in the planning, creation, and maintenance of the material cosmos.” <a id="s1000_662"></a>[UB 58:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p2_3)

4. The nature and function of the earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and stratosphere.

	> “The lower five or six miles of the earth’s atmosphere is the troposphere; this is the region of winds and air currents which provide weather phenomena. Above this region is the inner ionosphere and next above is the stratosphere. Ascending from the surface of the earth, the temperature steadily falls for six or eight miles, at which height it registers around 70 degrees below zero F. This temperature range of from 65 to 70 degrees below zero F. is unchanged in the further ascent for forty miles; this realm of constant temperature is the stratosphere. At a height of forty-five or fifty miles, the temperature begins to rise, and this increase continues until, at the level of the auroral displays, a temperature of 1200° F. is attained, and it is this intense heat that ionizes the oxygen. But temperature in such a rarefied atmosphere is hardly comparable with heat reckoning at the surface of the earth. Bear in mind that one half of all your atmosphere is to be found in the first three miles. The height of the earth’s atmosphere is indicated by the highest auroral streamers—about four hundred miles.” <a id="s1004_1117"></a>[UB 58:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p2_6)

5. The relation of auroral phenomena to sunspots and other solar disturbances.

	> “Auroral phenomena are directly related to sunspots, those solar cyclones which whirl in opposite directions above and below the solar equator, even as do the terrestrial tropical hurricanes. Such atmospheric disturbances whirl in opposite directions when occurring above or below the equator.
	> 
	> “The power of sunspots to alter light frequencies shows that these solar storm centers function as enormous magnets. Such magnetic fields are able to hurl charged particles from the sunspot craters out through space to the earth’s outer atmosphere, where their ionizing influence produces such spectacular auroral displays. Therefore do you have the greatest auroral phenomena when sunspots are at their height—or soon thereafter—at which time the spots are more generally equatorially situated.” <a id="s1010_500"></a>[UB 58:2.7-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p2_7)

6. Relation of solar activities to the behavior of the compass.

	> “Even the compass needle is responsive to this solar influence since it turns slightly to the east as the sun rises and slightly to the west as the sun nears setting. This happens every day, but during the height of sunspot cycles this variation of the compass is twice as great. These diurnal wanderings of the compass are in response to the increased ionization of the upper atmosphere, which is produced by the sunlight.” <a id="s1014_428"></a>[UB 58:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p2_9)

7. Relation of the superstratosphere to broadcasting disturbances.

	> “It is the presence of two different levels of electrified conducting regions in the superstratosphere that accounts for the long-distance transmission of your long- and short-wave radiobroadcasts. Your broadcasting is sometimes disturbed by the terrific storms which occasionally rage in the realms of these outer ionospheres.” <a id="s1018_332"></a>[UB 58:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p2_10)

## CONCLUSION

> “There is a great and glorious purpose in the march of the universes through space. All of your mortal struggling is not in vain. We are all part of an immense plan, a gigantic enterprise, and it is the vastness of the undertaking that renders it impossible to see very much of it at any one time and during any one life. We are all a part of an eternal project which the Gods are supervising and outworking. The whole marvelous and universal mechanism moves on majestically through space to the music of the meter of the infinite thought and the eternal purpose of the First Great Source and Center.” <a id="s1022_604"></a>[UB 32:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p5_1)

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science/2"><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Part II. Geology</span></a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science#index"><span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span></a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science/4"><span class="pr-2">Part IV. Biology</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span></a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>