---
title: "Fargard XVI"
description: "The Zend Avesta, Part I: “Vendîdâd” (SBE 4)"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:15:27Z
tags: Zoroastrianism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:15:27Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/The_Zend_Avesta_Part_1/15">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Fargard XV</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/The_Zend_Avesta_Part_1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/The_Zend_Avesta_Part_1/17">
          <span class="pr-2">Fargard XVII</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

I (1-11). On the uncleanness of women during their sickness.

II (11-12). How it can be removed.

III (13-18). Sundry laws relating to the same matter. See Introd. V, 12.

## I.

1\. O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If there be in the house of a worshipper of Mazda a woman who has an issue of blood, either out of the ordinary course or at the usual period, what shall the worshippers of Mazda do?

2 (3). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘They shall clear the way [^944] of the wood there, both in growing trees and in logs [^945]; they shall strew dry dust on the ground [^946]; and they shall erect a building there [^947], higher than the house by a half, or a third, or a fourth, or a fifth part, lest her look should fall upon the fire [^948].’

3 (9). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How far from the fire? How far from the water? How far from the consecrated bundles of baresma? How far from the faithful?

4 (10). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Fifteen paces from the fire, fifteen paces from the water, fifteen <span id="p182">[<sup><small>p. 182</small></sup>]</span> paces from the consecrated bundles of baresma, three paces from the faithful.’

5 (11). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! How far from her shall he stay, who brings food to a woman who has an issue of blood, either out of the ordinary course or at the usual period?

6 (12). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Three paces [^949] from her shall he stay, who brings food to a woman who has an issue of blood, either out of the ordinary course or at the usual period.’

In what kind of vessels shall he bring the food? In what kind of vessels shall he bring the bread?

‘In vessels of brass, or of lead, or of any common metal [^950].’

7 (15). How much food shall he bring to her? How much bread shall he bring?

‘(Only) two danares [^951] of long bread, and one danare of milk pap, lest she should gather strength [^952].

‘If a child has just touched her, they shall first wash his hands and then his body [^953].

8 (21). ‘If she still see blood after three nights <span id="p183">[<sup><small>p. 183</small></sup>]</span> have passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until four nights have passed.

‘If she still see blood after four nights have passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until five nights, have passed.

9\. ‘If she still see blood after five nights have passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until six nights have passed.

‘If she still see blood after six nights have passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until seven nights have passed.

10\. ‘If she still see blood after seven nights have passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until eight nights have passed.

‘If she still see, blood after, eight nights have passed, she shall sit in the place of infirmity until nine nights have passed.

11\. ‘If she still see blood after nine nights have passed, this is a work of the Daêvas which they have performed for the worship and glorification of the Daêvas [^954].’

## II.

‘The worshippers of Mazda shall clear the way [^955] of the wood there, both in growing trees and in logs;

12 (26). ‘They shall dig three holes in the earth, and they shall wash the woman with gômêz by two of those holes and with water by the third.

‘They shall kill Khrafstras, to wit: two hundred corn-carrying ants, if it be summer; two hundred of <span id="p184">[<sup><small>p. 184</small></sup>]</span> any other sort of the Khrafstras made by Angra Mainyu, if it be winter [^956].’

## III.

13 (30). If a worshipper of Mazda shall suppress the issue of a woman who has an issue of blood, either out of the ordinary course or at the usual period, what is the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘He is a Peshôtanu: two hundred stripes with the Aspahê-a<i>s</i>tra, two hundred stripes with the Sraoshô-<i>k</i>arana.’

14 (33). O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! If a man shall again and again wilfully touch the body of a woman who has an issue of blood, either out of the ordinary course or at the usual period, so that the ordinary issue turns to the dye of the unusual one, or the unusual issue to the dye of the ordinary one, what is the penalty that he shall pay?

15 (36). Ahura Mazda answered: ‘For the first time he comes near unto her, for the first time he lies by her, thirty stripes with the Aspahê-a<i>s</i>tra, thirty stripes with the Sraoshô-<i>k</i>arana; for the second time he comes near unto her, for the second time he lies by her, fifty stripes with the Aspahê-a<i>s</i>tra, fifty stripes with the Sraoshô-<i>k</i>arana; for the third time he comes near unto her, for the third time he lies by her, seventy stripes with the Aspahê-a<i>s</i>tra, seventy stripes with the Sraoshô-<i>k</i>arana.’

16\. For the fourth time he comes near unto her, for the fourth time he lies by her, if he shall press the body under her clothes, if he shall press the <span id="p185">[<sup><small>p. 185</small></sup>]</span> unclean thigh, but without sexual intercourse) what is the penalty that he shall pay?

Ahura Mazda answered: ‘Ninety stripes with the Aspahê-a<i>s</i>tra, ninety stripes with the Sraoshô-<i>k</i>arana.

17 (39). ‘Whosoever shall lie in sexual intercourse with a woman who has an issue of blood, either out of the ordinary course or at the usual period, does no better deed than if he should burn the corpse of his own son, born of his own body and dead of naêza [^957], and drop its fat into the fire [^958].

18 (41). ‘All such sinners, embodiments of the Dru<i>g</i>, are scorners of the law: all scorners of the law are rebels against the Lord; all rebels against the Lord are ungodly men; and any ungodly man shall pay for it with his life [^959].’



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/The_Zend_Avesta_Part_1/15">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Fargard XV</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/The_Zend_Avesta_Part_1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/The_Zend_Avesta_Part_1/17">
          <span class="pr-2">Fargard XVII</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^956]: 181:1 The way to the Dashtânistân (see Introd. V, 12).

[^957]: 181:2 Lest the wood shall be touched and defiled by the woman on her way to the Dashtânistân.

[^958]: 181:3 Lest the earth shall be touched and defiled by her. Cf. Farg. IX, 11, and Introd. V, 10.

[^959]: 181:4 The Dashtânistân.

[^960]: 181:5 See Introd. V, 12.

[^961]: 182:1 The food is held out to her from a distance in a metal spoon.

[^962]: 182:2 Earthen vessels, when defiled, cannot be made clean; but metal vessels can (see Farg. VII, 73 seq.)

[^963]: 182:3 A danare is, according to Anquetil, as much as four tolas, a tola is from 105 to 175 grains.

[^964]: 182:4 ‘Sôshyôs says: For three nights cooked meat is not allowed to her, lest the issue shall grow stronger.’ As the fiend is in her, any strength she may gain accrues to Ahriman.

[^965]: 182:5 A child whom she suckles. The meaning is, Even a child, if he has touched her, must undergo the rites of cleansing. The general rule is given in the Commentary: ‘Whoever has touched a Dashtân woman must wash his body and his clothes with gômêz and water.’ The ceremony in question is the simple Ghosel, not the Barashnûm, since the woman herself performs the former only (vide infra, § 11 seq.; cf. Introd. V, 16).

[^966]: 183:1 See Introd. V, 12.

[^967]: 183:2 The way to the Barashnûm-gâh, where the cleansing takes place.

[^968]: 184:1 See Introd. IV, 35.

[^969]: 185:1 A disease (Farg. VII, 58). There is another word naêza, ‘a spear,’ so that one may translate also ‘killed by the spear’ (Asp.)

[^970]: 185:2 ‘Not that the two deeds are equal, but neither is good’ (Comm.) The sin in question is a simple tanâfûhr (Farg. XV, 7), and therefore can be atoned for by punishment and repentance, whereas the burning of a corpse is a crime for which there is no atonement (Farg. I, 17; VIII, 73 seq.; Introd. V, 8).

[^971]: 185:3 Literally, ‘is a Peshôtanu;’ ‘he is a tanâfûhr sinner, that is to say, margarzân (worthy of death),’ Comm.