---
title: "II. Mucilinda"
description: "The Udâna"
published: true
date: 2025-2-5T20:16:37Z
tags: Buddhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-5T20:16:37Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana/1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">I. The Enlightenment</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana/3">
          <span class="pr-2">III. Nanda</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p13">[<sup><small>p. 13</small></sup>]</span>

1\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion, subsequent to his attainment of Buddhahood, the Blessed One dwelt at Uruvela, on the banks of the stream Neranjara at the foot of the Mucilinda tree.

At that time, the Blessed One, having sat in an attitude of meditation for seven days, experienced the bliss of Emancipation.

Now it came pass that a great cloud appeared, out of season, and for seven days rain fell, cold winds blew and darkness prevailed. And the Serpent King, Mucilinda, came forth from his hidden realm and winding his coils seven times around the body of the Blessed One, he formed with his serpent's hood a great canopy above the head of the Buddha, and he uttered these words to himself; “may no coldness touch the Blessed One, nor any heat, may no gadflies or gnats, or winds, or sunheat distress the Blessed One.”

And the Blessed One, at the close of the seventh day arose from that state of trance and Mucilinda, the Serpent King, seeing that the sky was clear and cloudless, loosed his coils from around the body of the Blessed One and concealing his own nature, took upon him the form of a youth and stood before the Blessed One with folded hands, p. 14 worshipping him. And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:

“How sweet the solitude of the peaceful, of him who has heard and perceived the Truth!
Happy to be without malice! restraintful towards all beings!
Happy are the passion-free! Happy he who overcomes Desire!
To have removed the notion ‘I am’, that is the supreme joy!”

2\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika.

At that time a great number of Bhikkhus, when they had gone their rounds and finished the midday repast, assembled and fell into their places in the State room of the monastery. And a dispute arose to this effect; “Which, O Brothers, of the two Kings, the King Magadha Seniya Bimbasâra or the King Pasenadi Kosala, is the wealthiest, the possessor of the largest property, of treasure and chariots, which is the strongest, the most powerful, the most mighty?” Such were the dispute and contention which occupied these Bhikkhus at this time.

And the Blessed One, at even tide, arose from his solitary communings and went to the State room of the monastery and when he arrived there, he sat down on the appointed seat and while thus sitting, he called the Bhikkhus to him and said; “on what subject, O Bhikkhus, have dispute and contention arisen amongst you assembled and congregated here?”

<span id="p15">[<sup><small>p. 15</small></sup>]</span>

Just now, Sire, when we had gone our rounds and finished the midday repast we assembled and fell into our places in the State room of the monastery and a dispute arose to this effect; \[as above. _Translator_\].

That, Sire, was the subject of dispute and contention among us, when the Blessed One arrived.

“It is not fitting, O Bhikkhus, for such as you, scions of noble families, who for the sake of the faith, have abandoned your homes for the homeless state, to engage in such disputes. When you assemble, O Bhikkhus, one of these two is obligatory, religious discourse or a noble silence.”

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:

“Whatever of sensual pleasure there may be on earth, or in the kingdom of the gods,
It is not worth a sixteenth part of the joy which springs from the destruction of Desire.”

3\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika.

At that time a number of youths, somewhere between Savatthi and the Jetavana, were attacking a snake with sticks. And the Blessed One, robing himself in the forenoon and taking with him his almsbowl and tunic, entered Savatthi to receive alms. And the Blessed One saw these youths, somewhere between Savatthi and the Jetavana, attacking a snake with sticks.

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion breathed forth this solemn utterance:

<span id="p16">[<sup><small>p. 16</small></sup>]</span>

“He was seeking his own pleasure, does injury to the living,
For such a one there is no happiness hereafter.
But he who seeking his own pleasure, injures not the living,
For such a one there is happiness hereafter.”

4\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika. At that time the Blessed One was respected, reverenced, held in awe and esteemed. He was a recipient of the requisites of a monk, such as robes, alms, bed and medicine in case of sickness. The Brotherhood also was respected, reverenced, honoured, held in awe and esteemed, and received the requisites of monks such as robes, alms, bed and medicine in case of sickness.

The wandering monks, however, adherents of heretical sects were not held in honour and were not recipients of the requisites of monks.

And these wandering monks, adherents of heretical sects could not endure the honour paid to the Blessed One and the Brotherhood, and whenever they saw the disciples of the Blessed One, in the villages or the woods, they abused, reviled, annoyed and worried them, making use of vile and harsh expressions.

And a large number of disciples went to where the Blessed One was, and drawing near saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart and while thus sitting these disciples said to the Blessed One: "The Blessed One, Sire, is honoured, etc. \[as above. _Transl_.\]

The Brotherhood is honoured, etc. d°.

<span id="p17">[<sup><small>p. 17</small></sup>]</span>

The wandering monks are not held in honor. d°.

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“He who in village or in grove comes in contact with ease or discomfort,
Should not put it to the charge of himself or others.
The contacts of sensation affect a man on account of his _Upadhi_.[^1]
flow can they affect him who has freed himself from _Upadhi_?”

5\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika.

At that time a certain lay disciple, by name Icchanangolaka arrived at Savatthi for the purpose of transacting some business. When this lay disciple had completed what he had to do at Savatthi, he went to where the Blessed One was, and drawing near he saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart. And the Blessed One said to the disciple as he sat there: “For a long time, O disciple, you have behaved in this manner, that is, with regard to coming here.”

“For a long time, Sire, I have desired to approach and see the Blessed One, but I have been deterred by business, so I have been unable to approach and see the Blessed One.”

<span id="p18">[<sup><small>p. 18</small></sup>]</span>

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solernn utterance:—

“Happy is that upright and learned one who has no possessions!
See how the rich[^1] man is troubled;
How one man is in bondage to another.”

6\.—Omitted.

7\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion, the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika. Now, at that time, a little child, the only and dearly loved son of a certain lay disciple, died. And a number of lay disciples, with garments and hair wet (with tears)[^2] went, at inconvenient hours, to where the Blessed One was, and drawing near, they saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart. And as they thus sat apart, the Blessed One spoke to them saying: “Wherefore, O disciples, do you thus approach me at inconvenient hours, with garments and hair wet with tears?” When these words had been spoken, the lay disciple said to the Blessed One: “Sire, my only and dearly loved little son is dead, for this reason we come, at unseasonable hours, with garments and hair wet (with tears).” And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“The retinue of the gods and the unconverted,
Clinging to the joys and delights of form,
Depart into the power of the King of Death,
To wither and to weep.
But those who keep vigil by night and by day,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;p. 19 And forsake all that is loveable in form;
They truly dig up the root of sorrow.
Hard is it to overcome the temptations
That lead unto Death.”

8\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Kundi in the Kunditthâna Grove. Now at that time Suppavâsa, the daughter (of the King) of Koliya, had been in travail for seven days, after remaining childless for seven years. She, stricken with acute, piercing, terrible pains, found consolation in these three reflections;

“Surely, there is the Exalted One, the supreme Buddha who preaches the Doctrine whereby such pains as these are left behind.”

“Surely, there are the disciples of the Exalted One, who walk in righteousness, who have entered the path where pains like these are left behind.”

“O happy, too happy Nirvâna[^1], where pains like these will be no more!”

And Suppavâsa, the daughter (of the King) of Koliya called her husband and said; “Go, my Lord, to where the Exalted One tarries, and when you have drawn near to him, in my name bow down your head in salutation at the feet of the Exalted One, and ask if there is any slight ailment, if the Blessed One is free from bodily suffering and in vigorous health, and speak thus; ”Suppavâsa, Sire, the daughter (of the King) of Koliya, bows her head in salutation at the feet of the Exalted One and asks if there is any slight ailment, if the Blessed One is free from bodily suffering, in vigorous health and in the enjoyment of life.”

<span id="p20">[<sup><small>p. 20</small></sup>]</span>

And say; "Suppavâsa, Sire, the daughter (of the King) of Koliya was childless for seven years and now has been in travail for seven days; she, stricken with acute, \[as above\] pains, finds consolation in these three reflections; \[repetition as above. _Transl_.\].

“Be it so;” said Koliyaputta, in assent to Suppavâsa the daughter of Koliya, and he went to where the Blessed One was and having saluted the Blessed One, he stood respectfully on one side and while thus standing he said to the Blessed One; "Suppavâsa, Sire, the daughter of Koliya bows her head. . . . \[repetition as above. _Transl_.\].

(And the Blessed One said); “Let it be well with Suppavâsa, the daughter of Koliya, let her bring forth in health a healthy son.” (At the very moment the Blessed One spoke these words, it was well with Suppavâsa, the daughter of Koliya and she brought forth in health a healthy son).

“So be it, Sire,” said Koliyaputta praising the words of the Blessed One and giving thanks. Then he arose from his seat and having saluted the Blessed One, passing round with his right side to him, he returned to his own house. And Koliyaputta saw that it was well with Suppavâsa and that she had brought forth a healthy son and when he beheld her, he thought to himself; “How marvellous, how wonderful is the great strength and mighty power of the Perfect One, that at the very moment the Blessed One spoke these words, it was well with Suppavâsa, and she brought forth in health a healthy son.” And he was happy, gladdened and overjoyed.

And Suppavâsa cailed her husband and said; “Go, my Lord, to where the Blessed One is and drawing near to him, p. 21 in my name bow your head in salutation at the feet of the Blessed One and say thus; ”Suppavâsa, Sire, the daughter of Koliya, was childless for seven years, and for seven days she was in travail: it is now well with her, and she has brought forth in health a healthy son, she invites the Brethren to take their meals with her for seven days. May it please the Blessed One and the Brethren to take their meals with Suppavâsa the daughter of Koliya for seven days.”

“Be it so,” said Koliyaputta in assent to Suppavâsa and he went to where the Blessed One was and drawing near be saluted the Blessed One, and sat down respectfully apart, and while thus sitting he said to the Blessed One; “Suppavâsa, Sire, the daughter of Koliya bows her head . . . \[as above. _Transl_.\]. May it please the Blessed One and the Brethren to take their meals with her for seven days.”

Now at that time, the Brotherhood with the Buddha at their head had been invited by a certain lay disciple to take their morrow's meal with him. And that lay disciple was the servitor of the venerable Maha Moggallana. And the Blessed One called the venerable Maha Moggallana to him and said; “Go thou, Moggalana, to where that disciple is and drawing near to him, say; ”Friend, Suppavâsa, the daughter of Koliya who was childless for seven years . . . . \[repetition. _Transl_.\] has invited the Blessed One and the Brotherhood to take their meals with her for seven days. Permit Suppavâsa to provide these seven meals, afterwards you servitor shall provide the meal.”

“Be it so, Sire,” said the venerable Maha Moggalana in assent to the Blessed One and be went to where that lay disciple was and drawing near he said to him; “Suppavâsa, friend, . . . . \[repetition. _Transl_.\] has invited . . . . . . . p. 22 \[repetition. _Transl_.\] . . . . . afterwards, you shall provide the meal.” “If the lord Maha Moggalana will be my surety for three things, my property, my life and my faith, then let Suppavâsa the daughter of Koliya provide the seven meals, and afterwards I will provide the meal.”

“For two of these things, friend, I will be your surety, for your property and your life, but you must be your own surety in respect of the faith.”

If the Lord Maha Moggallana will be my surety for these two things, my property and my life, then let Suppavâsa provide the seven meals and afterwards I will provide the meal.

Then the venerable Maha Moggalana, having persuaded the lay disciple, went to where the Blessed One was and drawing near said to the Blessed One; “I have, Sire, persuaded the lay disciple to allow Suppavâsa to provide the seven meals and afterwards he will provide the meal.”

Then Suppavâsa, the daughter of Koliya, for seven days with her own hands, made ready sweet food, both hard and soft and served it to the Brotherhood and the Buddha, as the principal guest. And she did homage to the child and to the Blessed One and the Brotherhood.

And the venerable Sariputta said to the child; “I trust, child, that you are at ease, that you have sufficient food to support life, that you do not suffer in any respect.”

How, reverend Sariputta, can I be at ease, how can I be doing well, since I have been the cause of suffering to my mother for seven years?”

And Suppavâsa said to herself; “My son is conversing with the ‘Captain[^1] of the Faith’.” And she rejoiced exceedingly p. 24 and became enraptured and was filled with joy. And the Blessed One said to Suppavâsa, the daughter of Koliya; “Suppavâsa, would you have another son such as this one?”

“I would have, Blessed One, seven other sons such as this one.”

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“Joylessness in the guise of joy, delight in the guise of misery,
Pain in the guise of happiness, take possession of the thoughtless".[^1]

9\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Eastern Monastery, in the pavilion of Visakha Migaramata.

At that time Visakha Migaramata, desirous of obtaining some favor, importuned the King Pasenadi Kosala. The King Pasenadi Kosala did not accede to her request.

And Visakha Migaramata went, at an unseasonable hour, to where the Blessed One was and drawing near she saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart.

And the Blessed One said to Visakha Migaramata, as she sat thus apart; “Pray, how is it, Visakha, that you visit me thus at an unseasonable hour?” Just now, Sire, I was desirous of obtaining a favor from the King Pasenadi Kosala . . . \[repetition. _Transl_.\] but he did not accede to my request.”

And the Blessed One in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

<span id="p24">[<sup><small>p. 24</small></sup>]</span>

“All weakness is pain, all power is happiness:
When some struggle has to be encountered, men grieve:
It is hard to escape from the bondage thereof.”

10\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Anupiya, in the mango grove.

At that time, the venerable Bhaddiya, the son of Kaligodha was in the habit of roaming through the forests, sitting at the foot of trees and frequenting desolate places. And he repeatedly exclaimed these emotional words; “Ah, Happiness, Ah, Happiness.”

And a number of Bhikkhus heard the venerable Bhaddiya repeatedly exclaiming the emotional words, “Ah, Happiness, Ah, Happiness”, as he wandered through the forests, under trees and in desolate places.

And when they heard him, they said to themselves; “Doubtless our friend the venerable Bhaddiya, who formerly enjoyed the comforts of a royal home, is unhappy since he adopted the religious life, and remembering the past, he now roams through the forests, under trees and in desolate places, repeatedly exclaiming the emotional words: ”Ah, Happiness, Ah, Happiness." And a number of Bhikkhus went to where the Blessed One was and drawing near they saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart and while thus sitting, they told the Blessed One what they had seen and heard \[Text repeats above description. _Transl_.\].

And the Blessed One called one of the Bhikkhus to him and said; “Go, O Bhikkhu, and in my name summon the Bhikkhu Bhaddiya thus; ‘The Master, friend Bhaddiya, has sent for you’.”

<span id="p25">[<sup><small>p. 25</small></sup>]</span>

“So be it, Sire”, said that Bhikkhu in assent to the Blessed One and he went to where the venerable Bhaddiya, son of Kaligodha was, and drawing near, he said to him; “The Master, friend Bhaddiya, has sent for you.”

“So be it, friend”, said the venerable Bhaddiya in assent to that Bhikkhu and he went to where the Blessed One was, and drawing near, he saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart and the Blessed One said to the venerable Bhaddiya, as he sat there respectfully apart; “Is it true, what I hear, O Bhaddiya, that you wander through the forests \[repetition as above\] exclaiming these emotional words; ‘Ah, Happiness, Ah, Happiness’?”

“Even so, Sire”.

“What significance is there in this, as perceived by you, O Bhaddiya, that causes you to wander through forests? \[repetition as above. _Transl_.\].

“Formerly, Sire, when I was in the enjoyment of a royal home, I was guarded and closely protected both within and without the palace, within and without the city I was guarded and closely protected, within my country and beyond my country I was guarded and closely protected.

Thus guarded and closely watched, Sire, I lived in a state of anxiety, distrust and alarm; now, Sire, that I wander through the forests, under trees and in desolate places, I pass my days, fearless, at rest, confident, unalarmed, in comfort, unterrified, supported by gifts of food and garments from others, and with a heart free as that of a gazelle.

Clearly perceiving the significance of the matter, I chose, Sire, to wander through the forests, under trees and in p. 26 desolate places, exclaiming those emotional words; ‘Ah, Happiness, Ah, Happiness’.”

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“With whom there is no annoy, who has overcome birth and rebirth in this world,
Such a one, free from fear, happy and griefless,
Comes not within the ken of the gods.”




<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana/1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">I. The Enlightenment</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana/3">
          <span class="pr-2">III. Nanda</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^1]: _Upadhi_ is the inherited material basis of organic individual life. The idea is that things, exterior to oneself, are the result of law—outside oneself and equally having nothing to do with others. But the _Arahat_, who has conquered rebirth, for whom _Upadhi_ (except in the existing result of past _Upadhi_, his own body), has no importance, regards sensations with equanimity.

[^1]: Sakiñcana, lit.: “with the somethings”.

[^2]: Lit.: wet (with tears ?).

[^1]: Nirvâna—that peace of mind, obtainable in this existence, which results from the annihilation of human passion.

[^1]: The name given to the famous apostle Sariputta.

[^1]: Lit.: overwhelm the sluggard.