---
title: "III. Nanda"
description: "The Udâna"
published: true
date: 2025-2-5T20:16:37Z
tags: Buddhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-5T20:16:37Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana/2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">II. Mucilinda</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana/4">
          <span class="pr-2">IV. Meghiya</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p27">[<sup><small>p. 27</small></sup>]</span>

1\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika.

Now at that time a certain Bhikkhu, was sitting, not far from the Blessed One, in a cross-legged position, with body erect; and mindful and conscious, he bore without a murmur, acute, piercing and terrible pains, the result of deeds done in the past.

And the Blessed One beheld that Bhikkhu, sitting not far off, in a cross-legged position, with body erect, mindful and conscious, and bearing without a murmur, acute, piercing and terrible pains, the result of deeds done in the past.

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“The Bhikkhu who is freed from Karma,
Who has shaken off the dust (of sin) accumulated in the past,
Who has suppressed the notion ‘this is mine’,
For such a one, there is no cause to lament.”

2\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika.

<span id="p28">[<sup><small>p. 28</small></sup>]</span>

Now at that time the venerable Nanda, a cousin of the Blessed One, said to a number of Bhikkhus; “Friends, I am unhappy, leading the religious life, I am unable to bear (the burden of) a religious life, I intend to abandon the precepts and return to the lower life.”

And a certain Bhikkhu went to where the Blessed One was and drawing near he saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart and while thus sitting he said to the Blessed One: “Sire, the venerable Nanda, a cousin of the Blessed One, has spoken to a number of Bhikkhus, saying: ”I am unhappy etc. \[as above. _Transl_.\]. I intend to return to the lower life.”

And the Blessed One called one of the Bhikkhus to him and said: “Go, thou, and in my name summon the Bhikkhu Nanda here, saying, ‘The Master, friend Nanda, has sent for you’.”

“So be it, Sire”, said that Bhikkhu in assent to the Blessed One and he went to where the venerable Nanda was, and drawing near said to the venerable Nanda: “The Master, brother Nanda, has sent for you.” “So be it, brother,” said the venerable Nanda in assent to that Bhikkhu and he went to where the Blessed One was and drawing near he saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart, and the Blessed One said to the venerable Nanda as he sat there apart: “Is it true, what I hear, O Nanda, that you have spoken to a number of Bhikkhus, saying: ”I am unhappy etc. \[as above. _Transl_.\]. I intend to revert to the lower life?”

“Even so, Lord.”

“How is it, Nanda, that you are unhappy, leading the religious life, and intend to abandon the precepts and revert to the lower life?”

<span id="p29">[<sup><small>p. 29</small></sup>]</span>

“O, Sire, a daughter of the Sakya race, the fairest maid in all the land, looking out (of the window) with hair half-braided, called out to me, as I was leaving my house, ‘Delay not, Sir, thy return’. So calling her to mind, Sire, I am unhappy leading the religious life, I am unable to support the burden of a religious life and intend to abandon the precepts and revert to the lower life.”

Then the Blessed One taking the venerable Nanda by the arm, and just as if a strong man should outstretch his bent arm or draw back his outstretched arm, even thus he vanished from the Jetavana and reappeared in the heaven of the “Great Thirty-Three”[^1].

Now at that time some 500 pink-footed[^2] celestial nymphs had arrived to minister to Sakka the king of the gods.

Then the Blessed One called the venerable Nanda to him and said: “Do you not see, Nanda, these 500 pink-footed celestial nymphs?”

“Even so, Sire.”

“What do you think, Nanda, which is the most beautiful, the most lovely, the most entrancing, that daughter of the Sakya race, the fairest maid in all the land or these 500 pink-footed celestial nymphs?”

“It is, Sire, as if she was a singed she-monkey, with ears and nose cut off. The daughter of the Sakya race, the fairest maid in all the land, is not to be reckoned with these 500 pink-footed celestial nymphs, she is not worth a fraction of them, not worth having. These 500 pink-footed celestial nymphs are the most beautiful, the p. 30 most lovely, the most entrancing.” “Rejoice then, Nanda, rejoice, for I will guarantee you the possession of those 500 pink-footed celestial nymphs.”

“If the Blessed One will guarantee me the possession of these 500 pink-footed nymphs, I shall lead, Sire, the religious life in happiness.”

Then the Blessed One taking the venerable Nanda by the arm, just as if a strong man should outstretch his bent arm and bend back his outstretched arm, even thus he vanished from the heaven of the “Great Thirty-Three” and reappeared in the Jetavana.

And the Bhikkhus heard a report that the venerable Nanda, the cousin of the Blessed One, was leading the religious life because he had been promised celestial nymphs, for it was said that the Blessed One had guaranteed him the possession of 500 pink-footed celestial nymphs.

And the Bhikkhus, the companions of the venerable Nanda, called the venerable Nanda, a slave, a mean person; saying: “This venerable Nanda is a slave, a mean person. This venerable Nanda, we hear, leads the religious life for the sake of celestial nymphs. The Blessed One, we hear, has guaranteed him the possession of 500 pink-footed celestial nymphs.”

And the venerable Nanda saddened, humiliated, and rendered despicable by the abuse of his companions, who called him a drudge and a mean person,—alone, remote from the haunts of men, ardent, resolute, self possessed, not long afterwards, for the sake of which scions of noble families abandon their homes for the homeless state, he, acquiring by himself and realizing the higher knowledge, attained, in this very existence, to the supreme consummation p. 31 of a holy life. He knew that rebirth[^1] was at an end, the religious life had been lived, that which ought to he done had been done: “I have finished with this world.”

And the venerable Nanda hecame yet another of the Arahats.

When the night was far spent, certain celestial beings of dazzling beauty, illuminating the whole of the Jetavana with their radiance, went to where the Blessed One was and drawing near, they saluted the Blessed One and stationed themselves respectfully apart and while thus standing, those celestial beings said to the Blessed One; “The venerable Nanda, Sire, the cousin of the Blessed One, by the destruction of the sins, has acquired by himself and realized the higher Knowledge, and in this very existence, he experiences the joy of a heart set free, and of that emancipation which springs from wisdom.”

And to the Blessed One also had come the knowledge that the venerable Nanda, by the destruction of the sins etc. \[as above. _Transl_.\]. And at the end of that night the venerable Nanda went to where the Blessed One was, and drawing near he saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart, and while thus sitting the venerable Nanda said to the Blessed One; “Sire, the Blessed One guaranteed to give me the possession of 500 pink-footed celestial nymphs; I now release the Blessed One from that promise.” “With my own mind, Nanda, I have grasped what is in your heart and know that Nanda by the destruction of the sins etc. \[as above. _Transl_.\].” The gods also have told me p. 32 thus; “The venerable Nanda, by the destruction of the sins etc. \[as above. _Transl_.\]. ”Since, Nanda, your heart is freed from ‘attachment’ and the sins, I too am released from that promise.”

And the Blessed One in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“He who has crossed the slough of impurity,
Who has crushed the thorns of desire,
That Bhikkhu, whether there be ease or discomfort,
Is at peace.”

3\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika.

Now at that time some 500 Bhikkhus, with Yasoja at their head, came to see the Blessed One.

And these newly arrived Bhikkhus, while interchanging courtesies with the resident Bhikkhus and arranging their sleeping places, alms-bowls and garments, created a great uproar.

And the Blessed One called the venerable Ananda to him and said; “Who, Ananda, are these noisy and uproarious people? One would suppose they were fishermen catching fish.”

“Sire, some 500 Bhikkhus, with Yasoja at their head, have come to Savatthi to see the Blessed One. And these newly arrived Bhikkhus while exchanging courtesies with the resident Bhikkhus and arranging their sleeping places, alms-bowls and garments, are creating this uproar.”

“Then in my name, Ananda, call those Bhikkhus here, saying, ‘Reverend Sirs, the Master has sent for you’.”

“So be it, Sire;” said Ananda in assent to the Blessed p. 33 One and he went to where those Bhikkhus were, and drawing near, he said to those Bhikkhus; “Reverend Sirs, the Master has sent for you.”

“So be it, brother;” said those Bhikkhus in assent to the venerable Ananda and they went to where the Blessed One was, and drawing near, they saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart, and the Blessed One said to them as they sat there; “What is the meaning of this noise and uproar? One would suppose you were fishermen catching fish.”

When these words had been spoken, the venerable Yasoja said to the Blessed One; “These newly arrived Bhikkhus etc. \[as above. _Transl_.\] are creating this uproar.”

“I direct you to leave, O Bhikkhus; it is not fitting that you should converse with me.”

“So be it, Sire;” said those Bhikkhus in assent to the Blessed One and they arose from their seats and saluted the Blessed One, and passing round keeping their right sides to him, they packed up their bedding and taking with them their alms-bowls and tunics, they departed for the country of the Vajjis, and as they journeyed on through the country of the Vajjis they came to the river Vaggumuda and when they arrived there, they built for themselves leaf-huts on the banks of the river Vaggumuda and spent the rainy season there.

And the venerable Yasoja, who spent the rainy season there, called the Bhikkhus to him and said; “Friends, the Blessed One has directed us hither, desirous of our good and welfare, out of mercy and in compassion for us. Now, friends, we should so live, that the Blessed One may be pleased with our manner of living.”

<span id="p34">[<sup><small>p. 34</small></sup>]</span>

“Even so, brother”; said those Bhikkhus in assent. And these Bhikkhus, living remote from the haunts of men, unflagging in zeal, ardent, restrained, within the duration of the rainy season, attained to the ‘threefold knowledge’.

And the Blessed One having tarried at Savatthi as long as it was agreeable to him, set forth on his way to Vesali, and wandering from place to place he arrived at Vesali.

And the Blessed One lodged at Vesali in the Pagoda Hall, in the Mahavana.

And the Blessed One, having grasped with his own mind what was in the thoughts of those Bhikkhus, called the venerable Ananda to him and said; “It seems to me, Ananda, as if this quarter of the earth had become illuminated, had become radiant with light, it occurs to me as an agreeable idea to go[^1] to where those Bhikkhus live on the banks of the Vaggumuda. Send, Ananda, a messenger to those Bhikkhus on the banks of the Vaggumuda; ‘the Master sends for the reverend brethren, the Master desires to see the reverend brethren’.”

“So be it, Sire;” said the venerable Ananda in assent to the Blessed One and he went to where a certain Bhikkhu was and drawing near, he said to that Bhikkhu; “Go, thou, friend, to where the Bhikkhus live on the banks of the Vaggumuda and say to them; ‘the master sends for the reverend brethren, the master desires to see the reverend brethren’.”

“So be it, brother;” said that Bhikkhu in assent to the venerable Ananda, and just as if a strong man should stretch out his bent arm or bend back his outstretched arm, even thus he vanished from the Pagoda Hall in the p. 35 Mahavana, and reappeared in the presence of those Bhikkhus on the banks of the river Vaggumuda.

And that Bhikkhu said to the Bhikkhus on the banks of the river Vaggumuda: “The Master sends for the reverend brethren, the Master desires to see the reverend brethren.”

“So be it, brother;” said those Bhikkhus in assent to that Bhikkhu and packing up their bedding and taking with them their alms-bowls and tunics—just as if a strong man etc. \[as above. _Transl_.\]—even thus, they vanished from the banks of the river Vaggumuda and reappeared at the Pagoda Hall in the Mahavana, face to face with the Blessed One.

Now at that time the Blessed One was sitting in a state of motionless trance.

And those Bhikkhus said to themselves: “The Blessed One is in a motionless state;” and they all sat down in a motionless state of trance. And the venerable Ananda, as the first watch of the advancing night was passing arose from his seat, and placing his tunic upon one shoulder only (leaving the other bare) went to where the Blessed One was and stretching forth his hands said to the Blessed One: “Sire, the night is advanced, the first watch is passing, the newly arrived Bhikkhus have waited long. May it please the Blessed One to exchange courtesies with the newly arrived Bhikkhus.”

When these words had been spoken, the Blessed One remained silent.

A second time the venerable Ananda, as the middle watch of the advancing night was passing, arose from his seat and placing his tunic upon one shoulder only went to where the Blessed One was, and stretching forth his p. 36 hands said to the Blessed One: “Sire, the night is advancing, the middle watch is passing; the newly arrived Bhikkhus have waited long. May it please the Blessed One to exchange courtesies with the newly arrived Bhikkhus.”

A second time, the Blessed One remained silent. A third time the venerable Ananda, as the last watch of the advancing night was passing, and the dawn arising[^1], and the night far spent, got up from his seat and placing his tunic upon one shoulder only, went to where the Blessed One was, and stretching forth his hands, said to the Blessed One: “Sire, the night is advancing, the last watch is passing, dawn is arising, the night is far spent, the newly arrived Bhikkhus have waited long. May it please the Blessed One to exchange courtesies with the newly arrived Bhikkhus.”

And the Blessed One arising from that state of trance, called the venerable Ananda to him and said: “If, Ananda, you know, you should not reply[^2] to them: I and all these 500 Bhikkhus have sat in a state of motionless trance.”

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“He who has overcome the thorns of desire,
Who has overcome abuse and stripes and imprisonment,
He stands firm as a mountain,
Whether there be ease or discomfort,
That Bhikkhu trembles not.”

4\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika.

<span id="p37">[<sup><small>p. 37</small></sup>]</span>

Now at that time, the venerable Sariputta sat, not far from the Blessed One, in a cross-legged position, with body erect, placing memory directly before him. And the Blessed One saw the venerable Sariputta as he sat, not far off, in a cross-legged position, with body erect, placing memory directly before him. And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“As the mountain rock unshaken stands
So, delusion slain, the Bhikkhu
Like to a mountain, trembles not.”

5\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika.

Now at that time the venerable Mahamoggallana was sitting, not far from the Blessed One, in a cross-legged position, with body erect, subjectively engaged in meditation on the body.

And the Blessed One saw the venerable Mahamoggalana etc. \[as above. _Transl_.\] subjectively engaged in meditation on the body.

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:

“He who is engaged in meditation on the body,
Who is restrained as to the ‘five realms’ of contact,
That Bhikkhu, ever tranquil, will realize his own deliverance.”

6\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Râjagaha, in the Bambu Grove, in Kalandikanivapa.

<span id="p38">[<sup><small>p. 38</small></sup>]</span>

Now at that time the venerable Pilindavaccha was in the habit of reviling the Bhikkhus and calling them outcasts (Vasalas).

And a number of Bhikkhus went to where the Blessed One was, and drawing near, they saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart, and while thus sitting they said to the Blessed One; “Sire, the venerable Pilindavaccha is in the habit of reviling the Bhikkhus and calling them outcasts (Vasalas).”

And the Blessed One called one of the Bhikkhus to him and said: “Go, thou Bhikkhu, and in my name summon hither the Bhikkhu Pilindavaccha and say ”Brother, the Master sends for you.”

“So be it, Sire;” said that Bhikkhu in assent to the Blessed One and he went to where the venerable Pilindavaccha was, and drawing near, he said to Pilindavaccha; “The Master, brother, sends for you.”

“So be it, brother;” said the venerable Pilindavaccha in assent to that Bhikkhu and he went to where the Blessed One was and drawing near, he saluted the Blessed One and sat down respectfully apart, and the Blessed One said to him as he sat there; “Is it true, Vaccha, what I hear, that you are in the habit of calling the Bhikkhus outcasts (Vasalas)?”

“Even so, Lord.”

And the Blessed One calling to mind the former existence of Pilindavaccha said to the Bikkhus; “Molest not, O Bhikkhus, the Bhikkhu Vaccha. There is no guilt to be found in Vaccha, O Bhikkhus, in that he addresses the Bhikkhus as outcasts. In five hundred previous existences the Bhikkhu Vaccha was born, as one of low caste, p. 39 in a Brahmin family. He contracted this habit of abuse long ago. Hence it is the custom of this Vaccha to call the Bhikkhus outcasts.”

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“From whom no deceit or pride proceeds,
In whom avarice is annihilated,
Who has got rid of the notion ‘this is mine’,
Who is passionless and has put away wrath,
Who is freed from all cares,
That Bhikkhu is a Brahmana and a Samana.”

7\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Râjagaha, in the Bambu Grove, in Kalandikanivâpa.

Now at that time the venerable Mahakassapa who lived in the Pipphali cave, had been sitting for seven days in a cross-legged position, and entered into a state of trance.

And the venerable Mahakassapa, at the end of the seventh day, arose from that state of trance.

And when he arose from that state of trance, this thought occurred to the venerable Mahakassapa; “what if I were to go to Râjagaha in search of alms.”

Now at that time there were some 500 Devas zealously employed in obtaining alms for the venerable Mahakassapa. And the venerable Mahakassapa, dismissing those 500 Devas, put on his robe, in the forenoon, and taking his alms-bowl and tunic, entered Râjagaha for alms.

At that time Sakka, the King of the Devas, anxious to present alms to the venerable Mahakassapa took upon himself p. 40 the form of a weaver and wove. Sujâtâ Asurakanna filled, etc.[^1].

And the venerable Mahakassapa, wandering from house to house in search of alms, drew near to the dwelling place of Sakka, King of the Devas, and Sakka, King of the Devas, seeing from afar the approach of the venerable Mahakassapa, left his house and received him with honor; and relieving him of his alms bowl, took him into his house. And he took boiled rice out of a jar with his hand and filled the alms bowl and presented it to the venerable Mahakassapa. With the rice there was a great variety of soups and sauces and many juicy concoctions.

And this thought occurred to the venerable Mahakassapa: “Who can this person be, who possesses such magical powers?”

And this thought also occurred to the venerable Mahakassapa: “Can it be that this is Sakka, King of the Devas?”

And perceiving it to be Sakka, King of the Devas, he said to him, “you have done this, O Kosiya; do not such a thing again.”

“Revered Kassapa, for us even there is need of meritorious actions, by us even meritorious deeds should be performed.”

And Sakka, King of the Devas, saluted the venerable Kassapa and passing round keeping his right side to him, rose into the air and three times from his place in the sky uttered these ecstatic words: “O, charity, supreme charity, set up by Kassapa.”

And the Blessed One, with his divine, clear sense of hearing, surpassing that of men, heard Sakka, King of the p. 41 Devas, uttering, three times, from his place in the sky, the ecstatic words: “O Charity, Supreme Charity, set up by Kassapa.”

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“The Bhikkhu who receives alms in conformity to the rules,
Who nurtures and cherishes the lonely ones,
Such a one, ever mindful and serene, the gods envy.”

8\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika.

Now at that time a large number of Bhikkhus having returned from their rounds and finished their meal, assembled and fell to their places in the Kareri Circular Hall, and a discussion arose to this effect: “The Bhikkhu, brothers, who conforms to the rules concerning alms, on going his rounds, is privileged to see, from time to time, with his eyes agreeable forms, to hear from time to time, with his ears agreeable sounds, to perceive from time to time with his nose agreeable perfumes, to taste from time to time with his tongue agreeable tastes, and to come in contact from time to time with bodies pleasant to touch. The Bhikkhu, brothers, who conforms to the rules concerning alms, while going on his rounds, is honoured, respected, held in reverence, esteemed and looked up to. Come now, brothers, let us also conform to the rules concerning alms, and then we too will be privileged to see from time to time with our eyes agreeable forms, to hear from time to time with our ears agreeable sounds, to perceive p. 42 from time to time with our noses agreeable perfumes, to taste from time to time with our tongues agreeable tastes, and to come in contact from time to time with bodies pleasant to touch. We, too, while going our rounds will be honoured, respected, held in reverence, esteemed and looked up to.” Such was the subject of discussion and dispute that engaged those Bhikkhus.

And the Blessed One, arising from his solitary communings at eventide, went to where the Kareri Circular Hall was and when he arrived there, he sat down on the appointed seat and while thus sitting, he called the Bhikkhus to him and said: “What, O Bhikkhus, is the nature of the discussion, what is the dispute, that has arisen amongst you assembled here?”

Just now, Sire, we assembled and fell into our places in the Kareri Circular Hall after going our rounds and a discussion took place to the following effect; \[as above. _Transl_.\]. “This was the subject of discussion and dispute when the Blessed One arrived.”

“It is not fitting, O Bhikkhus, for such as you, scions of noble families, who through faith have abandoned your homes for the homeless state, to be occupied in such discussions. When you assemble and fall into your places, one of two courses should be pursued, either righteous converse, or a noble silence.”

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“The Bhikkhu who conforms to the rules concerning alms,
Who is a nurturer and cherisher of the lonely,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;p. 43 Him the gods envy, not if his heart is set on fame and honour.”

9\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Blessed One dwelt at Savatthi, in the Jetavana, the garden of Anâthapindika.

Now at that time a number of Bhikkhus \[as above. _Transl_.\] and a dispute arose thus; “Who, brothers, is proficient in the arts, who trains himself in the arts, which is the greatest of the arts?”

Some said; “Skill in the management of elephants;” some said, “Skill in the management of horses, of vehicles;” others said, “Skill in the manufacture of bows, of sword hilts; skill in conveyancing, in mathematics, in estimates, in engraving, in poetry, in casuistry, in agriculture.”

Such was the subject of dispute that arose amongst these Bhikkhus.

And the Blessed One, arising at eventide from his solitary communings \[as above. _Transl_.\], said; “what is the nature of the dispute that has arisen amongst you?” \[as above. _Transl_.\].

This was the subject of discussion and dispute when the Blessed One arrived.

“It is not fitting, O Bhikkhus, \[as above\] etc. One of two causes should be pursued, either righteous converse or a noble silence.”

And the Blessed One, in this connection, on that occasion, breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“Verily he who is skilled not in the arts, who is desirous of good, with senses stilled, wholly free,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;p. 44 Who goes homeless, in whom the notion ‘this is mine’ is not,
Who is passion free,
That Bhikkhu having slain the Tempter, walks alone (independent of skill in the arts).”

10\. Thus have I heard. On a certain occasion the Exalted One, soon after the attainment of Buddhahood, dwelt at Uruvela, on the banks of the stream Neranjara, at the foot of the tree of Enlightenment.

Now at that time the Exalted One had sat for seven days in an attitude of meditation and was experiencing the bliss of Emancipation.

And the Exalted One, at the end of the seventh day, arose from the state of trance and surveyed the world with the eyes of a Buddha.

And the Exalted One surveying the world with the eyes of a Buddha, saw beings burnt by many fires, consumed by grief, sins and delusions.

And the Exalted One, in this connection, on that occasion breathed forth this solemn utterance:—

“This world is a consuming fire. The people are sunk in ‘Contact,’ they proclaim disease as something good.
What a man supposes will happen, the opposite to that happens.
This people, who differentiate themselves, having attained to existence, sunk in existence, praise existence.
When a man praises it, there is fear: where there is fear, there is sorrow.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;p. 45 The complete abandonment (of the love) of existence: that is called the holy life.
All these Samanas and Brahmanas who say that by existence there is escape from existence, these, I declare, will not escape from existence.
But all these Samanas and Brahmanas who say that by non-existence there is escape from existence, these, I declare, are independent of existence.
Not from _Upadhi_, as a result, does sorrow arise: when all ‘attachment’ is destroyed, then is there no resurgence of sorrow.
Behold this variegated world, sunk in ignorance, full of pleasure-loving beings, unemancipated!
All existence, whatever or wherever, is impermanent, full of sorrow and subject to change.”



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana/2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">II. Mucilinda</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Udana/4">
          <span class="pr-2">IV. Meghiya</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Footnotes

[^1]: The suite of thirty three superior angels of whom the Archangel Sakka is the first—(Childers).

[^2]: Lit.: Dove-footed i.e. with feet pink as those of doves.

[^1]: _Not to be reborn_, implies the attainment of that supreme saintship which does not shed influences conducive to a clinging to existence.

[^1]: Text readings differ here. ‘To go’ omitted in one MS.

[^1]: Nandi-Mukhiyâ. See Note 2. p. 211. Sacred Books of the East. Vol. XVII.

[^2]: Text obscure.

[^1]: Text obscure.