---
title: "Disseminating the Teachings"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-9-16T10:55:6Z
tags: IUA, Journal, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-9-16T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2000 Jeffrey Wattles<br>© 2000 Urantia Association International (IUA)</p>

Presented at the observance of the 50th Anniversary of the founding of Urantia Foundation
Chicago, USA, March 19, 2000

Ralph D. Zehr, USA

Imagine for a moment that you are now standing on the Isle of Paradise. You recently experienced your last transition sleep of time. As on all previous occasions you thanked your transport supernaphim for her most pleasant, comfortable, and timely service. While on Havona on each of your forward trips into “unachieved” space she had transported you ([UB 14:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p5_5)) She had quickly perfected the technique of awakening you from deep transport slumber with Havona symphonic melodies. Although each circuit of Havona worlds utilized unique celestial musical techniques, the results were perfect every time. This trip represented the end of an era. No longer would there be the exhilaration of viewing for the first time, new, completely perfect, unique, and original surroundings ([UB 14:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p5_6)).

Afterward you had gathered with your fellow ascendant mortals hailing from the universes of time and space representing all seven superuniverses. As you stood together for the first time on the shores of Paradise you were overwhelmed with praise and thanksgiving for the Universal Father of all. Your spontaneous supreme adoration and spiritual praise of the Creator, Controller, and Infinite Upholder of the Universe of Universes welled up in your hearts commingling with that of your fellow ascenders until your combined worship reached to such heights that the _divine beart of the gods_ was fully and completely satisfied. For the first time you observed the _threefold fluctuation of the ligbt of the Deity abode . . . What a triumph of technique! What a fruition of the eternal plan and purpose of the Gods that the intelligent love of the creature child should give full satisfaction to the infinite love of the Creator Father!_ [[UB 27:7.7-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/27#p7_7)]

During the Paradise progression you many times participated in these overwhelming worshipful experiences. Having attained the supreme satisfaction of the fullness of worship on Paradise you qualified for admission to the Corps of the Finality. After individually taking the final oath one, _of sweeping implications and eternal import_ [UB 31:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p1_3), you could savor the sweetness of success as you wholeheartedly enjoyed the seventh and final jubilee of time.

You met with fellow ascenders, compared backgrounds, shared insights, and reminisced about common experiences. Each of you had ages ago begun life at the bottom as animal origin beings and had joyfully climbed the ladder of life, round by round, and had recently reached the heights of glory ([UB 32:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p3_10)). You could now look back on your ascension career in its entirety. You had the opportunity to evaluate all that had contributed to your successful ascension, the teachings, the concepts, the experiences, and the numerous assistants, associates, and instructors.

## Cosmic Citizenship

You had learned that, _It is the business of religion to create, sustain, and inspire such a cosmic loyalty in the individual citizen as will direct bim to the acbievement of success in the advancement of all these difficult but desirable social services_ [UB 99:3.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/99#p3_16). And furthermore, _Economic necessities tie man up with reality, and personal religious experience brings this same man face to face with the eternal realities of an ever-expanding and progressing cosmic citizenship_ [UB 99:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/99#p7_5).

As a young parent, the idea that you and your spouse were _procreating cosmic citizens_ [UB 84:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/84#p7_4) brought an entirely new and expanded dimension to parenting. And what satisfaction you enjoyed when your children were mature enough that you could share with them your hopes of eternal survival, and of taking up residence on the Mansion Worlds. But the greatest possible satisfaction is knowing that they will soon join you in the Corps of the Finality.

## Mansion World Students

Your awakening in the resurrection hall on Mansonia was a never-to-be-forgotten experience. Your long time seraphic associates were standing near watching as you opened your eyes to your new morontia surroundings. You were also for the first time _truly conscious of the identity and presence of the divine Monitor who so long indwelt your mind on earth. . . ._ [It was]. . . _a glorious awakening, a real resurrection_ [UB 113:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/113#p7_1). _Throughout all eternity you will recall the profound memory impressions of your first witnessing of these resurrection mornings_ [UB 47:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p3_5). This was your second jubilee ([UB 27:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/27#p7_8)).

You then began the de-animalization process, the _deficiency ministry_ [UB 47:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p3_8): _Biological deficiencies were largely made up on the first mansion world. There, defects and planetary experiences pertaining to sex life, family association, and parental function were either corrected or were projected for future rectification . . ._ [UB 47:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p4_7).

On mansonia number two there was provision for removal of _all phases of intellectual conflict and for the cure of all varieties of mental disharmony_ [UB 47:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p4_8).

On the third mansion world you really began your _progressive morontia culture_. The chief purpose of this training was _to enbance the understanding of the correlation of morontia mota and mortal logic, the co-ordination of morontia mota and human philosophy_ [UB 47:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p5_3).

It was during the period of training on world number four that you were _first introduced to the demands and delights of the true social life of morontia creatures_. It was indeed a new experience for an evolutionary mortal to participate in social activities which were _predicated neither on personal aggrandizement nor on self-seeking conquest_ [UB 47:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p6_3).

_A real birth of cosmic consciousness_ took place on mansonia number five. You were becoming universe minded. This was indeed a _time of expanding horizons_ [UB 47:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p7_5).

On mansion world number six you were introduced to the _technique of universe administration_ [UB 47:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p8_2). This was a brilliant age for you and your ascending mortal associates which usually witnessed _the perfect fusion of the human mind and the divine Adjuster_ [UB 47:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p8_3). The ceremony was profound in its simplicity: The supervising superangel and the archangel of record in unison made the announcement before your morontia associates, “_This is a beloved son in whom I am well pleased_” [UB 47:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p8_4). Immediately following fusion you received your new name, a descriptive Nebadon name bestowed by your guardian of destiny ([UB 108:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p3_3)). (Who, but the guardian of destiny, who had worked so closely with you and knew you so well, was more qualified to choose a descriptive name for your ascension career?) Now your eternal destiny was assured ([UB 5:1.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p1_11)) and you had received the _equivalent to a divine validation of eventual Paradise attainment . . ._ [UB 40:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/40#p7_5). This was your third jubilee ([UB 27:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/27#p7_8)) as well as one of the great days for your Adjuster ([UB 110:6.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_22)). As one, you spent the next forty days in _spiritual retirement_ and communion. It was a time of reflection and for planning the ascension career, an opportunity to select from the optional routes to Hawona and the _differential techniques of Paradise attainment_ [UB 47:8.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p8_5).

You were soon on the seventh mansion world, the sphere of the _crowning achievement of the immediate postmortal career_. Here you were _purged of all the remnants of unfortunate beredity, unwholesome environment, and unspiritual planetary tendencies. The last remnants of the “mark of the beast” are here eradicated_ [UB 47:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p9_1). You were now ready to enseraphim preparatory for transport to Jerusem and your last “literal” resurrection ([UB 47:10.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p10_4)). As a successful mansion world graduate you were eligible for citizenship on Jerusem, your system capital.

## Citizenship on Jerusem

As you began to experience the reality of cosmic citizenship, having completed Mansion World training and actually registered on Jerusem as a bona fide citizen, you were enthralled. The beauty and the grandeur of it all was exhilarating and to participate as a responsible citizen was deeply satisfying.

Your formal training began with the college of selfevaluation and ended with the schools of Jerusem citizenship. Here the Material Sons and Daughters joined with the Melchizedeks and others in _their supreme effort to qualify the mortal survivors for the assumption of the bigh responsibilities of representative government_ [UB 45:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/45#p7_3).

At your first election you had one precious vote. As you left the voting chamber, you knew you had voted for a representative with ideals as well as ideas and one whose pre-election aspirations represented sincere goals ([UB 111:4.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p4_10)). The voter ahead, an ascending mortal from a neighboring planet, paused at the exit and asked, “Are you not from ‘the world of the cross’?” You were relieved that he did not expect an answer ([UB 20:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p6_6)). By the next election you had progressed in morontial wisdom, spiritual insight, and socialization such that your mota status as determined by the citizenship registrars of representative government qualified you for three votes ([UB 45:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/45#p7_7)). Citizenship on Jerusem was sweet.

Earlier you had visited the Finaliter World and when the Morontia Power Supervisors and energy transformers enabled you _momentarily to glimpse_ [UB 45:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/45#p1_2) for the first time these high spirit personalities who had completed the Paradise ascent, you knew in your heart you could do it.

## Citizenship on Edentia

It did not seem long after that until you achieved citizenship on Edentia with its seemingly endless _gardens of God_. The _botanic artistry_ with its _living embellishments_ stretched as far as your Morontial vision could see [UB 43:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p6_1). What a visual feast!

You recalled your first visit to the _most holy mount of assembly_ [UB 43:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p4_1), the dwelling place of the Faithful of Days, the seventh order of Supreme Trinity Personalities who form an interrelated line of administrative perfection extending from Paradise to the constellation capitals ([UB 15:13.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p13_6)). It was awe inspiring. You gathered on this _consecrated highland_ with other ascending mortals to _hear this Son of Paradise tell of the long and intriguing journey of progressing mortals through the one billion perfection worlds of Havona and on to the indescribable delights of Paradise_. And you became _. . . more fully acquainted with the various groups of personalities of origin in the central universe_ [UB 43:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p4_5).

You learned of the times when Lucifer and Satan would attend the councils of the system Sovereigns held on this holy mount. Lucifer`s arrogant claim: “_I will exalt my throne above the Sons of God; I will sit upon the mount of assembly in the north; I will be likee the Most High_” [UB 43:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p4_6) had long ago fallen on deaf ears. And you recalled the records of the time when these archrebels continued to attend these assemblies down to the time of Jesus' bestowal on Urantia. All sympathy for them was finally lost, “_The doors of the bearts of all Edentia closed against Satan; he was unanimously rejected by the assembled System Sovereigns, and it was at this time that the Son of Man 'beheld Satan fall as lightening from heaven_” [UB 43:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p4_9). Like the thunderbolt, evil and sin may seem exciting, they may attract attention, they may seem powerful and emotionally moving, but after the flash has faded and the sound subsided, the energy is forever dissipated. It was a vivid reminder of the truth-fact: “_The the wages of sin is death . . ._” [UB 46:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p8_4). Evil and sin are a denial of reality, they are entirely negative perceptions, unreal. This would be your last encounter with the effects of sin and iniquity during your Paradise ascension.

Soon you were on your way to Salvington. You went by Seraphic transport to the headquarters of Nebadon there to complete your local universe training. On worlds one through six you reviewed your ascendant experience to date. This was prerequisite to entering the _Melchizedek primary schools of universe training_ [[UB 35:4.1-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p4_1)]. Then the real training began, there was the Melchizedek school of administration, the Melchizedek school of spiritual wisdom, the schools of energy research, matter research, organization research, communication research, records research, ethics research, and comparative creature existence research.

There was the unique _Melchizedek College of Spiritual Endowment_ in which _. . . all orders-even the Paradise orders-of the Sons of God co-operate with the Melchizedek and the seraphic teachers in training the hosts who go forth as evangels of destiny, proclaiming spiritual liberty and divine sonship even to the remote worlds of the universe. This particular school of the Melchizedek University is an exclusive universe institution; student visitors are not received from other realms._” Finally you graduated from the _College of High Ethics_, the highest course of training in universe administration [[UB 35:3.20-22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p3_20)].

Though you could not fully appreciate it at the time, it was an experience you would always cherish. After your second failure of the course, “Ethics of the Eventuation of Transcendentalers” your selfconfidence was deeply shaken. Even your companion of Urantia days, who took post-graduate electives as she tarried for you, was becoming eager to progress. You then met personally with the original Father Melchizedek who presided over the college. Among other things, he asked you to consider the directive to repeat an indication of confidence by the faculty in your ability to eventually succeed. He concluded, “Son, always remember, perfection is our goal.” You were now well on your way to becoming _disappointment proof_, a prerequisite to the Havona experience [UB 26:4.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p4_13).

## Citizenship on Salvington

On reaching Salvington you had a new opportunity to gain an expanded concept of the meaning of the life and teachings of Jesus, the final bestowal of Michael of Nebadon, now Master Son and Supreme Ruler. Here he spent _much of his time in counseling and instructing the college of associate Sons, the Magisterial Sons and others_ [who] _in love and devotion, with tender mercy and affectionate consideration. . . bestow themselves upon the worlds of space_ [UB 20:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p5_6). After that experience the answer was clear to that rhetorical question: _Why should man bemoan bis lowly origin and enforced evolutionary career when the very Gods must pass through an equivalent experience before they are accounted experientially worthy and competent finally and fully to rule over their universe domains!_” [UB 21:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p4_6). Here you experienced the reality of Michael's pronouncement while on Urantia, ”_I am the way, the truth, and the life_” [UB 21:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p6_4). How true it was that _The surest safeguard for the creature throughout the long struggle to attain the Father, during this time when inherent conditions make such attainment impossible, is tenaciously to hold on to the truth-fact of the Father's presence in his Sons. Literally and figuratively, spiritually and personally, the Father and the Sons are one. It is a fact: He who bas seen a Creator Son bas seen the Father_ [UB 32:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p3_6).

## Citizenship in the Superuniverse

By now the experience of _ever-ascending citizenship in the eternal universe_ [UB 94:10.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/94#p10_3) was a reality. Each progressive achievement on a higher level enabled a correspondingly greater opportunity for understanding, maturity, service, and travel. You subsequently achieved citizenship on Uminor, Umajor, and Uversa, completing the superuniverse segment of the ascension career. Throughout this experience you became a full-fledged spirit personality. Your status as an ascending mortal was forever settled. _Superuniverse wards have never been known to go astray_ [UB 30:4.21](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p4_21).

## Citizenship on Havona and Paradise

And now having traversed the one billion worlds of Havona and achieved Paradise, you have found your eternal home. Havona will be your workshop and playground ([UB 14:6.39](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p6_39)). Now that you are a bona fide citizen of Paradise, after you have completed a service assignment on each of the other six superuniverses, you will be free to travel throughout the entire grand universe. Ascendington will be the rendezvous for you and your ascendant mortal associates and here will forever be maintained the secrets of _the eternal fusion of divine Adjuster and an immortal soul of human origin . . . as an absolute reality_ [UB 13:1.23](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_23). Having achieved the final goal of cosmic citizenship, _the tonic of adventure and the stimulus of curiosity disappear from your career_ and now _. . . will the urge, the forward impulse of eternity, replace its forerunner, the adventure lure of time_ [UB 14:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p5_7).

## Service in Eternity

You now stand at the threshold of a new career-service in eternity. Your company of finaliters is about to be mobilized. The preliminary announcement indicates the assignment will primarily involve the upstepping of revealed truth on an isolated planet in superuniverse six. There is now opportunity to analyze past experience with epochal revelations from the combined viewpoint of destiny, history, and origin ([UB 19:1.4-12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_4)). The first successful ones on Urantia came immediately to mind. Concerning Melchizedek's incarnation, _Like Jesus, Melchizedek attended strictly to the fulfillment of the mission of his bestowal. He came to achieve two tasks: to keep alive on earth the truth of one God and to prepare the way for the subsequent mortal bestowal of a Paradise Son of that Universal Father_ [UB 93:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p4_15).

Machiventa was successful in reestablishing the concept of monotheism, the foundation upon which Jesus could build his concept of a loving Heavenly Father even a personal Father of all.

Jesus came and showed us the Father, and by living example he established the concepts of sonship with God and brotherhood with man for His entire universe. But tucked away under “Religion in Tibet” was the statement, _The Tibetans have something of all the leading world religions except the simple teachings of the Jesusonian gospel: sonship with God, brotherhood with man, and ever-ascending citizenship in the eternal universe_ [UB 94:10.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/94#p10_3). This indicates that there was a third facet to the gospel of Jesus. Jesus did make many references to this aspect of his gospel such as “_the glorified spirits of mortal men who bave gone on to progress through the mansions on high_” [UB 167:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/167#p7_2). “_I have many other sheep not of this fold . . ._” [UB 165:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/165#p2_9); _his chosen ambassadors of the kingdom_ [UB 178:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/178#p3_5); and many references to angels ([UB 167:7.1-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/167#p7_1)) and other heavenly personalities. It would appear that a comprehensive and replete revelation of ever-ascending citizenship must await the time when we had achieved an adequate understanding of cosmology.

From this vantage point, the following principles for disseminating truth emerge:

## Understand the Teachings to be Disseminated, Both Qualitatively and Quantitatively.

1. Machiventa's mission was embodied in the simple statement, “_I am Melchizedek, priest of El Elyon, the Most High, the one and only God_” [UB 93:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p2_1). He further proclaimed, “_El Elyon, the Most High, is the divine creator of the stars of the firmament and even of this very earth on which we live, and be is also the supreme God of heaven_” [UB 93:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p2_3). In fact, _Melchizedek taught his followers all they had capacity to receive and assimilate. . . . . But this great teacher subordinated everything to the doctrine of one God, a universe Diety, a beavenly Creator, a divine Father. Emphasis was placed upon this teaching for the purpose of appealing to man's adoration and of preparing the way for the subsequent appearance of Michael as the Son of this same Universal Father_ [[UB 93:3.6-7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p3_6)].
2. Jesus came to _grow up on Urantia as a child ... and complete_ [his] _education—all the while subject to the will of_ [his] _Paradise Father_ [UB 120:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/120#p2_1). His _great mission to be realized and experienced in the mortal incarnation_ [was embraced in his] _decision to live a life wholeheartedly motivated to do the will of_ [your] _Paradise Father, thus to_ ***reveal God*** _. . . in the flesh and especially to the creatures of the flesh. . . ._ [His life was a] _new revelation and angmented interpretation of the Paradise Father to the human and the superhuman type of mind . . . as . . . a new revelation of man to God_ [UB 120:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/120#p2_8). He demonstrated the _achievement of God seeking man and finding bim and the phenomenon of man seeking God and finding him; and doing all of this to mutual satisfaction and doing it during one short lifetime in the flesh_ [UB 120:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/120#p2_9).
3. _The Urantia Book_ clarified Melchizedek's bestowal mission, restated Jesus' life and teachings, described the eternal universe through which we mortals ascend, presented the concept of cosmic citizenship including our Paradise destiny, and introduced the extended family of God. It reviewed and presented afresh the Jesusonian gospel commensurate with current human understanding and needs.

## Establish the Foundation for Truth, the Edifice Must Fit the Foundation.

1. Machiventa laid a monotheistic foundation for Jesus' subsequent bestowal ([UB 93:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p3_8)). He also provided for the Adjuster experience which enabled this spirit of the Father to function so valiantly in the human mind [of Jesus] [UB 93:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p2_7).
2. Jesus taught that we are all sons and daughters of His Heavenly Father and therefore we are all brothers and sisters. His life demonstrated that the Father is love.
3. The giving of _The Urantia Book_ needed to await that time when an adequate foundation of facts and meanings had been established. Mankind could hardly accept the concept of the Grand Universe until astronomers had dispelled the belief that the earth was the center of the universe. The concept of isolation from the extensive Local Universe communication network is greatly facilitated by experience with radio and television as well as an electronic system of communication.

## Choose Appropriate Messenger(s)

1. The Melchizedeks are highly versatile personalities who function effectively in emergency situations. Five thousand years ago the light of truth was threatened with extinction. It had reached emergency status ([UB 93:0.1-3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p0_1)).
2. Concerning Jesus' mission, there can never be a more effective mortal bestowal for showing us the Father and demonstrating sonship with God and brotherhood with man than that of the Creator Son, Michael of Nebadon. “_Whosoever has seen the Son bas seen the Father_” [UB 20:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p6_5).
3. The Urantia Book, authored by sixteen completely different orders of personalities ranging from Divine Counselors on Paradise to the Midway Creatures of Urantia, provided eyewitness accounts of every level of the mortal ascension. One member of the Orvonton Commission, a Divine Counselor, presented his credentials as follows, _I am commissioned to sponsor those papers portraying the nature and attributes of God because I represent the bighest source of information available for such a purpose on any inbabited world. . . . I portray the reality and truth of the Father's nature and attributes with unchallengeable authority; I know whereof I speak_ [UB 1:7.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p7_9).

## Select a Suitable Venue

1. Machiventa came to the human group most likely to respond favorably to his monotheistic teachings. It was timed to engage Abraham, a most gifted individual, in the revelatory project ([UB 93:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p5_2)-[UB 93:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p6_8)).
2. Jesus came to the Hebrew people because Melchizedek had prepared them well for his teachings ([UB 98:7.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/98#p7_12)) and they were geographically located at the commercial crossroads of the civilized world ([UB 93:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p5_2); [UB 121:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/121#p2_2)). At the time of Michael's incarnation, _the world presented the most favorable condition for the Creator Son's bestowal that had ever previously prevailed or has since obtained_ [UB 121:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/121#p1_1).
3. The Fifth Epochal Revelation came as a book in the English language, first published in Chicago, U.S. A. It was given during a time of great international turmoil and political unrest. It was intended for the peoples of Urantia for the next one thousand years ([UB 30:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p0_2); [UB 101:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/101#p4_2)). The reading of books had become widespread throughout America and much of the Western world.

## Provide Adequate Support

1. Machiventa could make contact with his fellow Melchizedeks as needed ([UB 93:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p2_8)).
2. Immanuel relieved Jesus of all of his administrative duties. His Thought Adjuster provided him with perfect guidance. Gabriel was constantly on hand with a host of assistants. Immanuel did send Jesus a brief message when twelve years old advising him that it was time to be about His Father's business ([UB 124:6.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/124#p6_15)). More than twelve legions of angels awaited Jesus' command at all times ([UB 136:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/136#p5_1); [UB 183:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/183#p3_8)).
3. An Orvonton Commission of 24 superuniverse administrators hailing from Uversa was sent to Urantia for the purpose of formulating a series of papers _dealing with Deity and the universe of universes_ [UB 0:0.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p0_4); cf [UB 0:0.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p0_5),[UB 31:10.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p10_22). This Corps of Superuniverse Personalities came to Urantia by authority of the Orvonton Ancients of Days ([Part I](/en/The_Urantia_Book/Index_Extended#p1_1)) who are presently the supreme rulers of the superuniverse ([UB 18:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p3_8)). The Local Universe and History of Urantia were sponsored by a Nebadon Corps of Local Universe Personalities numbering twelve acting by authority of Gabriel of Salvington, chief executive of Nebadon ([Part II](/en/The_Urantia_Book/Index_Extended#p2_1); [UB 56:10.23](/en/The_Urantia_Book/56#p10_23)). The Life and Teachings of Jesus was _sponsored by a commission of twelve Urantia midwayers acting under the supervision of a Melchizedek revelatory director. The basis of this narrative was supplied by a secondary midwayer who was onetime assigned to the superhuman watchcare of the Apostle Andrew_ [Part IV](/en/The_Urantia_Book/Index_Extended#p4_1).

## Provide for the Continuation of Truth Dissemination

1. Machiventa personally chose Abraham and prepared him to continue the dissemination of truth after his departure. He also continued to foster the expansion of the God concept among the Hebrew prophets and seers until Jesus' appearance on Urantia ([UB 93:10.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p10_4)).
2. Jesus chose twelve apostles whom He sent into all the world to preach the gospel. Following His ascension He sent His Spirit of Truth and at the same time opened the way for Adjuster indwelling of all normal minds ([UB 108:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p6_2)).
3. The United Midwayers committed themselves to the success of the Fifth Epochal Revelation ([UB 77:8.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p8_13)); “_What the United Midwayers undertake, the United Midwayers do_” [UB 77:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p9_3). Urantia has become _the individual and personal ward of_ [Christ Michael] _and as such, is wholly subject to bis own plans and rulings_ [UB 20:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p4_5). He continues to _make and carry out the plans of_ [his] _own choosing in all matters of special planetary needs . . ._ [on this his] _realm of terminal bestowal_ [UB 21:5.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p5_9). Urantia Foundation was established to protect the copyright, publish the book, produce excellent translations, distribute it globally, achieve sound financial support, and provide for the dissemination of the teachings at all levels of human interaction.

## Maintain the Paradise Perspective

1. Machiventa advised Abraham to avoid military conquest. Given his advanced concept of animal sacri- fice rather than human sacrifice, time alone would enable Abraham's offspring to overcome the surrounding backward tribes ([UB 93:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p6_2)).
2. Jesus taught, permit good and evil to coexist just as nature allows the wheat and the tares to grow together until the harvest. Ignore evil, seek good ([UB 130:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p1_6)).
3. _The Urantia Book_ teaches: _The human mind would ordinarily crave to approach the cosmic philosophy portrayed in these revelations by proceeding from the simple and the finite to the complex and the infinite, from human origins to divine destinies. But that path does not lead to **spiritual wisdom**. Such a procedure is the easiest path to a certain form of ***genetic knowledge*** ..._ [UB 19:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_5). _The true perspective of any reality problem—human or divine, terrestrial or cosmic—can be bad only by the full and unprejudiced study and correlation of three phases of universe reality: origin, history, and destiny_ [UB 19:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_6).

Having reviewed the basic principles of truth dissemination from the point of view of destiny, history, and origin, you are now ready to join your fellow Finaliters in sharing truth with the hungry souls on a dark, confused planet of time and space, whose lives—eternal lives—depend on it. Likewise, you and I as budding cosmic citizens, have the opportunity, privilege, and responsibility to share the truth we have been given with our fellowmen as we leave this Urantia Foundation Fiftieth Year Anniversary Celebration.