---
title: "I. OBSTACLES AND HINDRANCES TO CHRISTIAN FAITH IN A NEW AGE"
description: "A Preface to Christian Faith in a New Age"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:27:14Z
tags: Theology, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:27:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/Foreword">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">A FOREWORD OF EXPLANATION</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/2">
          <span class="pr-2">II. A REEXAMINATION OF THE SPIRITUAL FOUNDATIONS</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## I. _Conquests of Christianity_

The conquests of Christianity at critical epochs of history seem like marvels of romance rather than records of sober fact. A little band of disciples. of a crucified carpenter from an obscure town inaugurated a missionary movement which in less than three centuries conquered the Roman Empire. The spiritual conquest and transformation of the virile pagan races which emerged out of the northern forests and, in the fifth century, overthrew the Roman civilization was perhaps an even greater marvel.

Hardly less extraordinary, though of a different order, was the slow absorption of the Platonic and Neoplatonic stream of thought into the central current of the Christian Faith. That is, once more, a thrilling story of doing what one would have supposed to be the impossible. The adoption of the philosophy of Aristotle into the Christian Faith in the thirteenth century <span id="p1"><sup><small>[ p. 1 ]</small></sup></span> <span id="p2"><sup><small>[ p. 2 ]</small></sup></span> would have seemed in advance an even less possible achievement. At the opening of that century Aristotle was banned as a dangerous menace to the Christian Faith. At the end of the same century, through the labors of a little group of saintly scholars, the immense contribution of the great Macedonian philosopher was poured into and heightened the intellectual life of the Christian world. The “new learning,” which came into power in the fifteenth century and produced a new birth for the Western world, carrying in its current the discovery of America, the invention of printing, the Copernican cosmic revolution, the translation of the Bible and the reformation of the Church, was by no means the least of these marvels of conquests.

This brief, thumb-nail, review may perhaps suffice to remind us that Christianity has been in the habit of doing impossible things and that fact may help us to form the conviction that a new conquest more significant than any that has been made in these former crises can possibly be achieved in the difficult epoch of our time.

Beyond question, the present task which confronts Christianity in the world to-day is one of the most momentous of all its undertakings. In a word, the primary task before us is the appreciative recognition of the expanded range of truth which has been gained through the various fields of research, and the discovery of how to penetrate this new body of knowledge <span id="p3"><sup><small>[ p. 3 ]</small></sup></span> with a corresponding spiritual significance for man's life and faith. Certainly not less important is the task now confronting us of transforming the social and economic order of human life so that it will manifest in the sphere of practical living the spirit and ideals of Christian faith and hope and love. We are still in the period of “New Learning,” and in the broad perspectives of distant historians our time will be reckoned as an inherent part of the Renaissance epoch, a period of fresh births, of surprise and wonder, of immense adventure and of faith in the infinite perfectability of man. Throughout this entire period the working principle has been accepted that the human mind is free to explore every domain of the universe and to report with fearlessness whatever is found to be true. No one department of truth need be afraid of any discoveries of truth made in any other department.

## II. _The Dominance of Scientific Method and Theory_

It will in the end be an advantage if, for the clarification of our minds, we briefly look straight in the face some of the obstacles which confront those who are engaged in the work of spiritual penetration and the transformation of life in this age. Strangely enough, the gravest difficulties in the way of such creative work are usually to be found in the realm of theory — some <span id="p4"><sup><small>[ p. 4 ]</small></sup></span> theory of the universe which blocks the mind from the acceptance of the resources of religion. It is just there in the dominance of a theory that the most rigid obstacle to Christian faith and the Christian way of life is to be found. Mountains and ocean spaces which seem uncrossable are in reality not as impenetrable barriers in these matters as are ideas in men’s minds. It is easier to conquer Nero’s dungeon than it is to let fresh thought and richer content of life and actual experience break through a theory of the universe.

At first the adventurous explorers in the realms of nature were deeply religious men, as the names of Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler, Descartes, Pascal and Newton indicate. Gradually the sphere of science differentiated from that of religion and confined itself to a wholly independent field of activity. Scientific explorers ceased to ask, as their forerunners had done, what effect their discoveries and formulations might have upon the fundamental faiths of the race. They were concerned alone with the discovery of facts. That and that only was their aim. But it was inevitable that impartial science and religion formulated in theological terms should come into collision at critical points and should in time come to regard each other as rival claimants to dominion over human life and drought.

Meantime in the nineteenth century laboratory science showed an amazing maturing of its powers. <span id="p5"><sup><small>[ p. 5 ]</small></sup></span> With its effective technique, its methods of demonstration, its successes in verification and prediction, and its triumphs in the field of practical invention science has become a well-nigh universal educational discipline. It has scored an immense number of triumphs. It has changed the very basis of the explanation and interpretation of the world. It has pushed back the span of time and widened out the frontiers of space in quite revolutionary fashion. It has lengthened the reach of our hands and the dominion of our minds. It has profoundly altered the intellectual formulations of thinkers, and, no less, it has affected the habits and practices of all persons who engage in labor. Almost every student in institutions of higher learning comes under its spell. Its method carries conviction. Its power of demonstration satisfies the mind. Its directness, simplicity and mathematical accuracy impress all who are capable of understanding. The person who sets himself against the scientific method and the long results of research and demonstration is like a warrior going out with a bow and arrow to meet an army equipped with machine guns and armored tanks.

The expansion of the range and scope of life through scientific smdy is everywhere in evidence. The enlargement of man’s control over natural forces and over many of the diseases and perils which threaten existence here on earth is also generally recognized. Science, <span id="p6"><sup><small>[ p. 6 ]</small></sup></span> taken in its largest sense, has, furthermore, made a genuine contribution to the spiritual life of man. It has banished many of the fears and terrors which obsessed primitive man. It has enabled us to feel more at home in the universe, which at least we partly understand. It has shown us how organic our life is with the whole of things. It has made it possible for us to read intelligently the great past of which we are inheritors. It has given us a deeper and truer conception of the spiritual revelation that has come through our Scriptures and the other creative books of the race. It has made us more aware of the forward “pull” of a future that is big with possibilities. The idea of an evolving world and of unfolding life has unmistakably had an awakening and kindling spiritual influence upon many minds. If there is a progressive tendency in operation, as science seems to indicate, if there is increasing coherence and integration, if there is an intelligible and dramatic order revealed in and through the process, then it is a natural inference, at least to the lay person, that an intelligent Mind is somehow present and that there is a spiritual Ground out of which the process has sprung.

This scientific temper has inevitably produced, by slow and almost unnoticed influences, a subtle change of outlook which has affected every aspect of human life. Even die nonscientific mind, however little it suspects it, is altered in its attitude and in its approach to <span id="p7"><sup><small>[ p. 7 ]</small></sup></span> all problems by the very atmosphere which scientific research has produced. Ancient and time-honored explanations of sacred events have weakened their hold on many minds as scientific explanations have permeated human thought. A preference for demonstrable methods of procedure has crept in, grown to be a habit of mind, and has become second nature with people generally. Views that have been transmitted by tradition, distinctly religious interpretations resting on faith, and “deposits” of thought from the uncritical past, are at once met by a powerful drift in an opposite direction. Whether one likes it or not, and whether one admits it or not, some such profound change has been silently taking place.

The careful historical research work of scholars has convinced those who follow such studies that the religions which have come out of an immemorial past carry unconsciously a large inheritance from magic and superstition. It is a recognized fact that the human race has passed through a stage of _animism_. The essential meaning of animism is the belief that all events, especially startling ones, are to be explained in terms of mysterious spiritual agencies, like the _animus_, or soul, in man. Around this theory of explanation vast systems of mythology grew up and became revered as sacred truths. This stream of thought from the doll-stage of human life has run on into the more enlightened ages and has left a deep deposit of ideas which come into <span id="p8"><sup><small>[ p. 8 ]</small></sup></span> sharp conflict with the verified conclusions of scientific and historical evidence. It has been an easy inference for persons trained in exact scientific methods to assume with undue haste that every belief not demonstrable is a case of animistic superstition. And on the other hand for the religious thinker the task of weeding out the accumulations of superstition and of purifying the spiritual interpretation of life is notoriously slow and difficult.

To hosts of experts and to multitudes of young students, the scientific method has come to be thought of as the only way of approach to truth and reality that is worthy of respect. Not to be able to prove and demonstrate seems to such minds synonymous with complete failure to explain and to _know_. Soviet Russia has put the scientific method at the center of its creed. Every educational institution of higher rank in the mission field of the Orient has a large group of students who claim to do their thinking entirely on the intellectualist platform and who discount any alternative to scientific knowledge. They bracket their own national religions with Christianity as inheritances of “superstitions,” and as having no place in the life of grown-up men. It is, too, a basic conviction in the minds of a very large proportion of the young men and women who fill the colleges and universities of America that the key of the scientific method is the only one that can unlock the secrets of the universe.

<span id="p9"><sup><small>[ p. 9 ]</small></sup></span>

This situation has brought a narrowing of the range of life and thought which amounts in its limitations to a real tragedy. The first limitation comes from an unnecessary narrowing of the scope and meaning of “knowledge.” It seems strange that any person who has considered the full rich nature of human experience should conclude that only the method of explanation employed by exact science can reveal the truth of things. Some of the most marvelous _perceivers_ of reality that have ever lived, the poets and the artists of the race, without reflectively understanding or explaining through causes and formulae, have come very close to the heart of things. We could hardly _live_ without their type of knowledge.

Another tragic limitation has been made by the prevalence of a narrow and rigid theory of the scientific method. The Newtonian method of exact mathematical description and explanation gave such remarkable results in physics and astronomy that it tended to become in the nineteenth century the pattern and model method in all scientific fields of research. It assumed exact equivalence between cause and effect and it took for granted that the field of scientific knowledge is confined to the sphere of matter and motion. There is no sound reason why the word “science” should be used only in this reduced sense and many scholars to-day quite rightly use it with enlarged and more significant meaning. But a large number of laboratory workers <span id="p10"><sup><small>[ p. 10 ]</small></sup></span> and popular writers have tried to carry the exact Newtonian method all the way up from the physical plane through all the levels of nature and life. It is this application of this severe and rigid scientific method that has terminated, as it was bound to do, in a hard and fast cosmic theory of “naturalism.”

## III. _The Reign of Naturalism_

“Naturalism” may, of course, be taken to mean nothing more than a marking off of a special field of interest for observation and study, or, again, it may be regarded as a philosophy of the universe. Some of the more magnanimous scientific leaders are very modest in their claims as to the range of their intellectual dominion. They are satisfied to confine their explorations to the narrow field of research which they can manage and to report only on that limited area within which they are experts. Their “naturalism” means only that they are severely occupied with their domain of research and with their method of explanation, and that they do not profess to be able to interpret what lies beyond their chosen “naturalistic” field.

There are others, however, who, made bold by their successful work in a single line of expert knowledge, proceed thereupon in the light of their achievement to construct dogmatic theories about the universe as a <span id="p11"><sup><small>[ p. 11 ]</small></sup></span> whole. Most of the “isms” which lock up lives into arid and defeative systems are constructed in that way. They spring out of vast generalizations which are drawn from some narrow field of observation and abstraction. “Naturalism” of this second type is one of the dogmatic isms of that order of generalization. It makes its assumptions on very slender capital. A very large part of its domain rests on no other title than the unverified assertion of claims. It seizes and builds on a few impressive facts, but it forgets or overlooks a vast array of counter-implications.

A careful distinction must of course be made between “the world of Nature” and “the world of Naturalism.” Nature is the rich world of our human experiences, throbbing with life and beauty, crammed with change and variety, and arousing ceaseless interest and wonder in the beholder, the world of the poet and of the common man. We ourselves are a vital part of it and it is indispensable to us. “Naturalism,” on the other hand, is the world as it appears after it has been reduced to scientific description, causal explanation, mechanistic system and mathematical formulae. It is the universe as it appears in intellectualized form. “Whatever we may conclude the ground and origin of Nature to be, there can be little doubt that “naturalism” as a system with its immense complexity is a man-constructed affair. It is the world reconstructed to fit mathematical categories and the formulae of exact <span id="p12"><sup><small>[ p. 12 ]</small></sup></span> description, and from which everything has been eliminated that does not fit those categories.

‘Wherever “naturalism” of this rationalized type is accepted, and _carried all the way through as a world-system_, it leaves, and can leave, no place for spiritual verities or values. Everything that belongs in a “naturalistic” world is explained. Psychology, when it represents an attempt to carry the methods of physical science into the higher realms of life, is forthwith reduced to behavior, perceptive experiences are explained by physical impacts and the personal inner life of man is treated as though it were nonexistent, or negligible. A “naturalistic” interpretation of religion follows as a matter of course. Life, where this severe system of thought prevails, is treated as only a more complicated' stage of mechanism, the “higher” forms being explained in terms of “lower” units. This “naturalistic” tendency of current thought is essentially academic, but it tends to filter down into the popular mind, and wherever it spreads it blights the faiths of the ages and the ideals and hopes of the race which have fed and deepened the heart of humanity fade away.

## IV. _Secularism_

The busy, practical man does not much “bother his head” with “naturalism” as a theory, but at the same <span id="p13"><sup><small>[ p. 13 ]</small></sup></span> time he is immersed in another type of secularism, which is practical rather than intellectual in its character. The physical energies which have been discovered in the laboratory have been harnessed by skillful inventions and the whole world of life and industry have been thereby transformed. New industrial, economic, and social problems have emerged so far-reaching in scope that they bring a new epoch in civilization. “Secularism” in the world of activity and business has colored all life and thought for the practical man, somewhat as the formulation of “naturalism” has for the academic mind. The two systems arrive at very much the same terminus. They both put the emphasis on _things_ that are seen and handled. They both focus attention on what is out there in space and time. The ponderable becomes so important that imponderable realities and values are pushed out of consideration.

This exclusion of the transcendent aspects of life is often, perhaps usually, not a meditated and willful act of choice. It is rather the tragic elimination of the spiritual realm because there is no time for it and no room for it in the crowd of issues that demand the person’s entire thought. The vistas which the faiths and hopes of the race once opened to the soul of man have, by such processes, disappeared from view. The frontiers of vision have foreshortened. The horizon of life has narrowed. The seen and the tangible have usurped the claim of reality. The soul’s inward dimensions are dis- <span id="p14"><sup><small>[ p. 14 ]</small></sup></span> counted and even its very existence questioned. The universe of matter is treated as a closed system. No surprises out of the blue are looked for. No resources of a spiritual order are expected. The vast mechanism clanks on, and will continue to clank until it runs down, cools off, or wears out.

A great many persons who accept in a general way the “naturalistic-mechanistic” world-view and the secular way of life would not be ready to go as far with it as the logic of the above account would carry them. They would temper the hard stern theory of the world with checks and reservations. Or they would inject mysterious gaps into the material system where there might be free scope for unknown forces to break in and relieve the strain of endurance. But either mechanistic “naturalism” is true as an interpretation of the universe or it is not true. We cannot play with it when it fits our mood and then drop it when we want to refresh ourselves with freedom and vision. Even for those who endeavor to stop with “naturalism” midway it cuts the nerve of expectation; it blocks spiritual adventure and it tends to reduce life to a purely material and calculable level. It inevitably ends in futilism. The truncated forms of “new humanism” that have sprung up in certain religious circles of the liberal type are adjustments of accommodation to this stern stepmother view of life and the world. There is a severe insistence upon mental honesty, fidelity to <span id="p15"><sup><small>[ p. 15 ]</small></sup></span> truth and a careful avoidance of all emotional visions of relief. Some kind of “religion” seems essential to life, and this curtailed humanistic religion appears to its formulators to be all that is legitimate in a world of shrunken hopes and values. The true way out can come only through a recognition of the fact that the universe everywhere overbrims rigid scientific categories.

One striking effect of “naturalism” on the modern mind has been the disappearance, or at least the weakened hold, of faith in immortal life. No one quite knows in a particular case why his faith in a future life has oozed away and vanished. It has not usually been dislodged by argument, certainly not by any proofs. _Eternal_ life somehow does not seem to fit the kind of world one finds left to him by current interpretations. The hope of a great future life has grown dim, the expectation of it has waned away. To a great many persons this vision of relief from the hard present facts has ceased to count vitally. It no longer figures as an inward resource in a day of sorrow and frustration. It cannot be reckoned on as a dynamic for noble living. The modern person has grown “weak in futurity.” The “spell of eternity” is not for him. It may well be surmised that no other one change of outlook has so profoundly affected the life and thought of this generation as has this blight of temporality that has thus fallen upon it. If a new day of faith <span id="p16"><sup><small>[ p. 16 ]</small></sup></span> is to dawn for this age it will almost certainly have as its morning star a new-born expectancy in the conservation of the supreme value of personal life.

Meantime, the main effect of this general tendency has been a prevailing pessimism of mind about the significance of life. There are not so very many persons who are thoroughly committed to an intellectual academic theory of “naturalism.” And the number of practical men who _consciously_ accept secularism with finality as a creed of life is perhaps not so very large. The trouble comes from the fact that a powerful “drift” of suggestion, sentiment, and habit carries along a multitude of persons who have no explicit creed or theory of things, but who go with the push and trend of the secular current. There is extremely little serious and severe thinking behind secular modern drifts. They are not the result of profound thinking but rather of thin and superficial living. Hosts of persons join the rush just because there is a rush. They exhibit an attitude of “frantic immediacy” because “frantic immediacy” is a contagious state of mind. They join the speed throng because _speed_ is a temporary substitute for direction. They discount “spiritual realities” because popular writers make such realities seem absurd and they suppose “science” has proved them to be unreal. The entire “drift” _runs_ on extremely little intellectual motor-force. Its havoc is altogether <span id="p17"><sup><small>[ p. 17 ]</small></sup></span> out of proportion to the stock of mental power which is supposed to give it momentum.

The prevailing confusion of life and thought is almost exactly parallel to that which occasions a “run” on a thoroughly sound and reliable bank in a time of financial depression. Everything is uncertain; fears are abroad; panic is contagious; loss of nerve follows; rumor starts doubts. If in that state of mind anybody questions the solvency of a given bank and starts a suspicion of its soundness, the “run” on its resources begins. Nobody waits to get an accurate report on its assets. Fear and imagination exaggerate the liabilities.

That panicky state of mind, with which many banks are familiar, is a fair illustration of the present-day attitude toward the spiritual assets of human life. These assets have been challenged or doubted or pronounced unreal on a quite inadequate consideration of the inexhaustible grounds on which they rest. In the “drift” of secular living and naturalistic formulations, in the rush and hurry with no time for meditation and restoration, in the weariness and the disillusionment that come from the failure of enthusiastic adventures and yeasty ideals, there suddenly seems to be nothing in the far visions and the fond hopes that buoyed up and supported those of an earlier time in their endurances and in their adventurous pilgrimages. Like the naive little child who blurted out the truth that the king was naked when all the sophisticated people were express- <span id="p18"><sup><small>[ p. 18 ]</small></sup></span> ing their amazement over his invisible suit, so this frank and honest generation, not seeing anything where those before them saw a world of invisible realities, announce the nakedness of life and the bankruptcy of its spiritual assets.

It seems cold and unpromising to describe this secular drift of the time with its futilities without offering any remedy for it. But there are no quick and easy solutions for states of mind and ways of life that are bound up with a dominant and prevailing type of civilization. One can urge a return to “the simple life,” or one can advise the strained and frantic hurrier to insist on periods of hush and silence and meditation. But these expedients are all short of the mark and they leave the world-confusion still unsolved. In some way we must discover how to acquire more adequate interior resources to live by and we must set our faces toward a transformation of our civilization by processes of education and influences of religion. Later chapters will give some light on this deep problem which, though difficult, is not insoluble.

## V. Changed Meanings

One striking sign of this spiritual ’'nakedness” is seen in the way in which great religious phrases have become empty words, out of which the meaning has <span id="p19"><sup><small>[ p. 19 ]</small></sup></span> evaporated. “Words that have drawn transcendent meanings up from the best passion of all bygone time” have waned away to ordinary sounds. They no longer thrill the soul nor sweep the heartstrings. The same old trumpet is blown which once sent men to battle, but no one is roused by it to put on his armor.

I recently asked a prominent preacher and scholar what he considered to be the chief obstacle in the way of a return in our generation to great Christian faith. His answer is that a former generation “surveyed the wondrous Cross on which the Prince of glory died,” and then went out and turned their communities upside down, while we to-day spend endless time “surveying” our communities, and leave them about as they were before.

He believes that everything would be solved if this new generation would once more “survey the Cross” and go out to victory over the world. But the urgent question to ask is, Why it is that they do not do it? And the answer is that they no longer see the tremendous meaning in that phrase which thrilled the heart of Isaac Watts when he wrote the hymn. Why is it that they do not see it? Why doesn’t the old trumpet rally them to battle? It is the answer to those questions which we are here seeking. It is not enough to reply that nobody any more uses the great phrases or any longer blows the trumpet. The trouble is that for hosts of persons the noble words have lost their magic when they are <span id="p20"><sup><small>[ p. 20 ]</small></sup></span> heard. Constant repetition of the phrases has, in some instances, tended to lessen their dynamic quality, as always happens with words. More often perhaps they have been interpreted in terms that are no longer real and vital to-day and thus _expectancy_ has become dulled. Then, again, an altered central interest on the part of the hearer has weakened their power of arresting attention. For better or for worse, new interests have arisen that shift the focus of attention. It is one of those new current interests to make social “surveys” of communities, to understand neighborhood conditions better, to try to find out why there are dark areas and twilight zones in these modern communities. To persons with that focus of attention the ancient phrases about “surveying the Cross” come as a false substitute for the real remedy. It sounds to them like a resort to “the patois of Canaan” instead of making a true diagnosis of life.

Dean Inge not long ago humorously remarked that Jesus said, “Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in their midst,” but that now where three people assemble one is sure to be made chairman, the second treasurer and the third secretary, and then they proceed to attack their problem in committee fashion. That situation, like my friend’s wise remark about the change in “surveys” is true enough, but it solves nothing. It only reemphasizes the real problem. Organization, surveys, practical results, are <span id="p21"><sup><small>[ p. 21 ]</small></sup></span> the order of the day./ They absorb the mind and in the change of focal interest the meaning has dropped out of the old words, those words with which miracles were once wrought. It would not do any good to shout the same old words louder. It is not a megaphone that is needed. What is wanted is vivid, vital interpretation in terms of our epoch of the great truths those ancient words were uttering, and they must be so interpreted that they take on kindling meaning for men who are bent on social reorganization and reconstruction, and who will not allow any catch words of theology, however sacred, to turn them away from the stupendous tasks that confront them in the world where they live.

## VI. The Post-War World Situation

Meantime Christianity stands confronted with a unique world-situation of major importance. It is partly an outcome of the state of mind produced by the war and the “war settlements,” but even without the acceleration of processes which the war brought on many of these present situations would have slowly matured. The passionate upheaval of social forces in Russia, transforming before our eyes the entire social and economic order in an ancient civilization, has profoundly affected the psychology of the world. It has <span id="p22"><sup><small>[ p. 22 ]</small></sup></span> deeply stirred in men’s minds in many lands a consciousness of social injustice and has awakened a yearning for a reorganization of social systems with enlarged freedom for self-determination. The entire Orient, to specify only one part of the world, has been swept with a new consciousness of changing destiny.

Counter-methods of repression and control have emerged in some of the countries of the world and as a result the surging hopes of the liberal and radical movements there have been sternly held in check. Both tendencies where they have prevailed have brought an end to what we had come to know as free democratic government. There is apparent in the world to-day a far-reaching disillusionment over what seemed once to be an almost divine solution of the problems of life through the spread of individual freedom and equality and democratic self-government. Nationalism and free determination are absorbing passions in many countries but everywhere there are signs of weakness when it comes to a question of wisdom and ability sufficient for the almost superhuman tasks in hand.

There is no use blinking the difficulties and saying “all is well with the world.” All is not well and every crucial situation in every country affects and concerns all other countries. It is impossible any longer to live in isolation and to be satisfied with being “a hundred per cent American.” The cultivation of an international mind is essential to any kind of adequate living.

<span id="p23"><sup><small>[ p. 23 ]</small></sup></span>

And somehow our Christian spirit and our Christian ideals must be brought into action in the solution of these world problems.

It must be so, too, in no less degree in the vast issues which confront us in the problems of the social and economic order. For hosts of persons at home and abroad these questions are more urgent and more vital than any question of theology, or of religious faith. The passion for social justice and for an enlarged scope of life for depressed classes has swung into first place in the thought and life of many persons. It has supplanted religious interests and for many persons it dominates the heart and mind. It is one of those widespread up-surging moral passions which move masses of people in certain epochs of the world and which must be seriously reckoned with. No solution of course can be offered here. But those of us who are concerned to have Christian faith become a new conquering power in the world must realize with some clarity that these world-situations must be solemnly faced.

## VII. _Psychological Theories_

“Psychology,” which was once hailed as a solvent of many of our religious difficulties, has indeed brought much practical help and guidance, and has much more to bring, but on its theoretical side it has in- <span id="p24"><sup><small>[ p. 24 ]</small></sup></span> troduced new problems instead of banishing old ones. Theories of “the unconscious” have added a new terror to life for those who have come under the sway of the so-called “New Psychology.” For those who hold these theories, the area of rational control and volitional direction of life is believed to be small. Most of life is conceived of as under the sway of vast nonrational forces, urges, drives and complexes. The person who thinks he is “captain of his soul” is shown by “New Psychology” to be either benighted or selfdeceived. In the first century of our era there was a widespread belief that human destiny was controlled by “the world-rulers” of the planetary spheres. That doctrine carried with it gloom, depression, loss of nerve and despair. Unless some secret could be attained through initiation into the “Mysteries” that would free the soul from foreign control higher up, all man’s strivings were bound to be defeated. But that theory of “control” was no more depressing than the current theories that life is carried “whither it would not” in the grip of cyclonic drives, urges, and complexes beyond the range of rational control or direction, and with no captain on the bridge.

It is further assumed by these theories that religion is nothing but an idealistic “projection,” as a method of relief from the hard conditions of life and of the world. Man “represses,” it is assumed, that is, refuses to notice or pay attention to, disturbing facts on the one hand. <span id="p25"><sup><small>[ p. 25 ]</small></sup></span> and on the other he builds up by vivid idealistic imagination, a way o£ escape by which he fools himself into thinking that his universe has in it a realm of realities other than those which our senses find and verify, the senses being assumed to be the one sure test.

There are other types of psychology-made theories which, while discounting this doctrine of the “unconscious,” would nevertheless reduce all religious experiences to subjective seemings. The comforts of religion are held to be in the same order as daydreamings, autosuggestions, wish-visions and mind-creations. This view brings us in the end to the same goal of unreality as does the theory of “projection.” All the hopes and faiths of the centuries are considered in both cases to be as “frail as frost-landscapes on a window-pane.”

It is not possible in brief space to make an excursion into what has been called “the sedimentary depths” of the soul or to deal extensively with the mysterious “unconscious” realm within us. There can be no question that there is a tendency in neurotic persons to have what look like cleavages and split-off fractions of the self. The most “normal” person, too, has moments when he seems to be a “divided self.” It can be said, however, that the tendency of the personal self to cleave into separate compartments reveals at the same time a deeper unity, never quite lost, which underspans the divisions.

It is, further, noteworthy that a psychology which <span id="p26"><sup><small>[ p. 26 ]</small></sup></span> attacks die validity of man’s spiritual values on the ground that they are “subjective seemings,” mere buzzings in the head of the individual, is in grave danger of reducing also all states of mind, all mental processes including its own theories, to “subjective seemings.” Subjectivist psychology, which has no way of getting across to objective reality, is a cult of irrationalism and ends like the rivers of Damascus in a desert of aridity and sterility. A true psychology must include more than what goes on in the mind. It must recognize not only the deep-lying fundamental unity of the mind but also its inherent capacity to transcend itself and be related to objects which are as real as are its own processes.

## VIII. _The Reign of Relativity_

Ideas of relativity, which have entered the stream of modem thought through Einstein’s contribution to science, have tended to upset our old-time stable faiths in the immutable, the permanent, the eternal. If everything changes, if all things flow, if the universe is through and through a relative affair, how can we expea to find exceptions to this reign of relativity? How can we hope to discover truth that is eternally so? Where can we look for an _absolute goodness_, an _absolute right_, which is set forever over against what <span id="p27"><sup><small>[ p. 27 ]</small></sup></span> is utterly wrong? What becomes of _must_ and _ought_, those gloriously defective verbs which have always up till now challenged the souls of men? These “absolutes” for many persons have joined the ranks of the relativities. They seem to be no longer solid rock for anchorage, but rather like the shifting sea-beast to which Sinbad the Sailor fastened his boat, supposing it by mistake to be a permanent island.[^1]

Among the relativities some things have appeared to be better, that is, more desirable, than other things, but no place is seen in such philosophy for absolutes. Moral standards, in the confusion of Babel voices, are counted to be no more than social customs which go back for origin to the prestige of some outstanding person whom the “herd” followed. Each age must make its own moral codes as it makes its own road maps. If we are to be reduced to relativities, pleasure (possibly the richer word happiness sounds better) will almost certainly be selected as the best thing to pursue. If we cannot have intrinsic and unfailing ends to live for let us perfect the art of pleasure-seeking and become adepts in the cult of happiness. That has been a natural conclusion and has become a philosophy of life for a multitude of busy, hurrying men and women who know of no heaven except Vanity Fair. Selfexpression is the current popular word for what

 <span id="p28"><sup><small>[ p. 28 ]</small></sup></span> ethical writers used to name “hedonism.” This easy type of self-expression means practically following the line of least resistance. The natural instinctive drives, or urges, are taken to be the surest guides of life. They are assumed to be a natural revelation of the inherited tendencies of the ages. And in a world where guideposts are rare and hard to find instinctive tendencies offer the quickest and most direct intimation of the way. Self-expression means giving scope to one’s peculiar gifts or life-urges. Just why they should count more powerfully than “the still small voice” of the ideal self, or than the gathered experience of the race, it would perhaps be difficult to explain, but they are in any case more emphatically urgent and they seem to be more obviously “natural.”

## IX. _The Survivals out of the Past_

There is one more class of liabilities that should be briefly reviewed before we begin to consider the real status of our spiritual assets in the world of our time. We have referred already to the fact that every generation is bound to inherit a large stock of ideas and practices from the past. Inheritances of every type carry at the same time both gains and losses. Some persons are fortunate in lines and curves of facial beauty that have come to them by heredity, but possibly along <span id="p29"><sup><small>[ p. 29 ]</small></sup></span> with the beauty of face they may have received, as sometimes happens, a disagreeable disposition or unfortunate traits of temper. Somewhat so the ages behind us have accumulated out of racial experience immense gains, won through the struggles and sufferings of remote and forgotten forbears. But just as certainly false formulations, crude interpretations, hasty generalizations and unfortunate racial habits of thought have come down through this same line of transmission. They have grown with cumulative force like a rolling snowball, and have acquired a powerful momentum. We find ourselves the happy possessors of privileges for which we have paid no price, and we also find ourselves loaded with burdens of faith and thought which are out of harmony with the spirit of our age.

To put it another way, the river of truth — if we may assume such a river — that runs on through the centuries has received many tributaries from many lands, carrying into the main stream a vast _melange_ of speculation and superstition. We find ourselves not at the headwaters of a crystal clear, uncolored stream; we are rather the recipients of a flood out of ancient times, bearing the mingled currents of all lands and all ages. It is easy, in a moment of petulance, and in a state of revolt against the crude and false aspects of the volume of thought that rolls down out of the past, to say, “a plague on the entire legacy of the centuries behind us. We will build our own thought-world and <span id="p30"><sup><small>[ p. 30 ]</small></sup></span> dispense with the accumulated stock which has been transmitted to us out of the confused and uncritical past.”

The heavy load of inheritance is apparent in the structure of our social order, in our prevailing economic systems, in the basic foundation of what we call civilization, and, of course, it is an inherent part of the life and thought of the Christian Church. Obviously there could be no Church without the historic past. Churches cannot be “new-born” at each critical epoch in the time-stream. They are bound to be deep-rooted in the ages behind us and to have in the very substance of their being the “deposits” of generations and centuries of human experience.

Our new generation is impatient. It wants “all things made new” to fit the new-made minds of youth. It asks why it should be bothered with the accumulation of ideas from dead centuries. “Why expect us,” it says, “to spend our time on books and creeds that were written when none of the laws of the universe had been discovered and verified? Why should we listen to interpretations of life which are based on ethical and religious formulations of a world that was hoary with age at the time when modern science was born?” That attitude of impatience is an important factor in the present situation. The Churches are the conservators of the accumulated inheritance of the past and the youth of this generation are emancipated <span id="p31"><sup><small>[ p. 31 ]</small></sup></span> spirits, disillusioned by the blunders of the past, convinced that science holds the key to truth and not quite willing to take the pains that are necessary to winnow out the chaff and to garner the real grain that has come down to us by transmission. As a matter of fact, life could not go on without the transmitted stock of experience.

The attitude of revolt can be only a temporary state of mind. It can be maintained only for brief periods of impulse or temper. We can no more reject the intellectual legacy of the past than we can reject the hereditary transmissions in our bodies. There are no forts and no guns on any frontiers of the world that can keep out the drift of thought and sentiment which forms the climate and atmosphere in which our young lives are formed. The past has “made us” before we begin to “make ourselves,” The best we can do is to use our deepest insight and wisdom to select out of the contribution of the ages what fits in most satisfactorily with our verified truth, and with our own aims and aspirations, since under no known circumstances can a person wipe the slate clean and start entirely afresh to build his thought-world. That immemorial stream of life and truth that has poured its “deposits” on into our spiritual soil can no more be dammed back or stopped than the time-stream itself can be. Nor can any generation afford to dispense with the accumulated wisdom of the years, even if it could do so. Every item <span id="p32"><sup><small>[ p. 32 ]</small></sup></span> of human experience is precious for the light it throws on the meaning and significance of life. Every tablet of cuneiform inscription, every scrap of papyrus writing, every jar or vase from the mounds and graves of lost cities, is eagerly sought because it adds to the knowledge of the long human struggle to make life a triumphant and significant thing. It is only in the light of the lessons of the past that the on-flowing stream of life can be purged and purified of its outworn detritus. It is only through patient mastery of the experience of history which has builded the Church that the Church itself which is to serve the future ages can be rebuilded. The critical attitude of the present generation toward the Church will be dealt with in Chapter V

The question which we are here raising, namely, whether there is sufficient vitality and creative power in Christianity to penetrate the new culture of this scientific age and the secular currents of life to-day with a spiritual quality and with a transforming insight is not an academic question. The issues of life and the stability of civilization hang upon the answer. It has become pretty clearly apparent that, whether men live by bread alone, or not, they cannot _live_ in a world reduced to mechanism and secularism. The futility of that kind of a world breaks man’s spirit and defeats his undertakings. He cannot stand the strain and stress and monotony without the refreshment and restora- <span id="p33"><sup><small>[ p. 33 ]</small></sup></span> tion that come from deeper resources. He is too sensitive in the core of his being to face the agonies and frustrations of the world without the fortification which can come only from springs of energy greater than his own powers.

If he is to live a victorious life he must draw upon realms other than those of space and time. These difficulties which confront a man when the scope of his spirit is contracted are due to the very nobility of human life. And there are moments in the lives of most sane persons when the irresistible tides of life flood over all man-made theories.

## X. _Paganized Areas of Life_

There are other difficulties which inherently attach to life in a world stripped of spiritual resources. There are probably some highborn souls who would remain clean and pure in thought and action even though they were convinced that there were no spiritual Spectator of their deeds and no Great Companion in intimate fellowship with their lives. It will usually be found, however, that such persons have formed the lines of their character in the spiritual atmosphere of the great religious tradition of the past. They have drawn upon a stock of spiritual resources which the faith of many generations before has made a quick <span id="p34"><sup><small>[ p. 34 ]</small></sup></span> and vital part of the air they have breathed in their youth.

There are, however, many other persons whose moral fiber weakens and wanes away with the loss of religious incentives and with the disappearance of the inspiration of faith in eternal realities. The moral breakdown of lives that lack such inspiration and fortification is an ominous recurrence. The collapse of family life when it has no depth of spiritual soil is frequent enough to arrest attention, like an alarm bell. A contemporary writer has recently said:

> Our cynicism, our lawlessness, our cleverness, our substitution of the appeal of economic determinism for the appeal of righteousness, our blurring of ethical distinctions, our shallow and showy sentimentalism, our incapacity for moral wrath — these are the precise phenomena one would expect to find in a society which has allowed the moral dignity of its individual members to be dethroned by their indifference to any life beyond this one.

We get occasional glimpses into the tragic depths of the moral chaos which follows the disintegration of faith and the stoutest person who stands on the brink and looks down into those boiling deeps gets a shudder of horror at what would happen if all the forces of moral and spiritual coherence vanished. There are areas in the social world of our time in which die naked paganism of the inner life reveals with startling effect, as in a laboratory experiment, what would <span id="p35"><sup><small>[ p. 35 ]</small></sup></span> certainly happen if the rest of the areas of life were likewise paganized. A pyramid standing reversed on its apex is no more unstable than is a social civilization that has completely lost the poise and balance of a broad-grounded faith in the realities of the spirit. It has been well said that “what gravitation is to the solar system that is morality to the social life.” If the moral imperatives ceased to hold and the ethical and spiritual bonds which bind men together by higher loyalties were dissolved, it is difficult to see how any worthwhile human society could survive.

The present moral confusion, like the financial confusion from which the whole world is suffering, is in large degree an aftermath of the World War. It is impossible to live for four years in an atmosphere of hate and constant slaughter, of deceit and disregard for truth, of cheapened estimates of human life, of poison gas and poison propaganda, and then to come back all of a sudden to the old stable moralities of life. The world cannot go through such a shattering moral earthquake as that and not have the very foundations of civilization shaken. When nations make a moratorium of the moral commandments, individuals will learn the lesson and proceed to take the short and ugly way to secure what they want. If the bankers and financial experts are driven to desperation to discover some way to restore confidence and to stabilize business it need not surprise us to find that a moral and <span id="p36"><sup><small>[ p. 36 ]</small></sup></span> spiritual task of gigantic proportions suddenly confronts the churches and the educational institutions. The fact that Christianity in its organized forms lowered its ideals and enthusiastically ''blessed” the war weakens its creative and constructive power for die crisis in which it now finds itself, but a return to clear spiritual vision and moral leadership on the part of the churches is the one hope of the hour. The only way out of the world confusion is through a clarification of spiritual vision and a recording of those moral realities on which a solid civilization can be built. That task is greater and even more urgent than the task with which the bankers are grappling.

## XI. _New Leadership for New Conditions_

With man’s increased powers and his control of the forces of Nature for his own ends it needs no stem prophet like Amos of Tekoa with his plumb line to prophesy disaster to the social structure in which august imperatives no longer operate in men’s souls and in which convictions of faith in immutable truth, in absolute goodness, and in undying love have faded out and vanished from the world. There are experiments in process to reconstruct civilization without the light and guidance of religion and without the living power of faith in God. There are at the same time large groups <span id="p37"><sup><small>[ p. 37 ]</small></sup></span> of laboring men and women in all countries who have lost all “expectation” of creative leadership or of truly reconstructive social and economic changes at the hands of those who belong to organized Chris tiani ty. For better or for worse, they have divorced themselves from union with the Church and, giving up the thought of “a new heaven,” they have turned to secular means for their hope of “a new earth, in which justice dwells.” The ground of their disillusionment toward religion is their belief that religion has been a drug of the opiate type rather than a constructive force. They mean by the term “opiate” that a hypnotic dream of a faraway comfortable heaven has acted like a spell on the minds of Church people and has lulled them into quiescence in regard to the civic conditions and the injustices of life here and now, in the real world where men live and suffer.

Those who have become thoroughly awakened to the actual conditions of human life and who have formed a deep-seated passion for social and economic transformation — and there are many such — are profoundly impressed with the glaring inconsistency between the ideals of the Gospel and the dull reality which passes for Christian civilization. A kind of chilling blight falls on the spirit of a young man who has been quickened by the hopes and aims of progressive teachers, when he comes home from college and finds his Church busy with bygone issues and unconcerned <span id="p38"><sup><small>[ p. 38 ]</small></sup></span> over what seem to him the most vital questions in the world. Instead of hearing about Joshua’s conquest of Hittites and Jebusites, he wants light and guidance on the way to conquer the real giants and Philistines of bis own time. He keeps his eye on the discrepancy between the original Christian program and the sequel of it, and he wonders how a Church, representing Christ in the world, can be so complacent and comfortable in the face of the manifest failure to apply the gospel to the needs of the world. No matter how much one tries to explain away this point of difficulty and smooth it over, it remains in the minds of many noble youth as an obstacle of first rank. It can be taken for settled that persons of this type will never be won to Christianity until its leaders become dedicated to the actual tasks for which Christ lived and died. But, on the other hand, these persons with their social passion need to be reminded that it has usually been, though not always, religious inspiration and the quickening power of faith that have produced the creators of new eras and the champions of enlarged human rights and equal justice. The inspiration lies at the very heart of original Christianity to inaugurate a new age and to build a new world for men to dwell in. If the Church _has_ missed that vision, as its severest aides charge, and if it has failed to take seriously this mission of regenerating the social order it must be awakened by its prophets and be brought back to its essential task. The Church of the <span id="p39"><sup><small>[ p. 39 ]</small></sup></span> future, if it is to be a living Church, must become the organ of Christ’s grace and tender sympathy for those who labor and are heavy laden, and it must be supremely engaged in the work of building the Kingdom of God, not in a realm beyond the stars, but here in the cities and green fields where men toil and are weary with care and strain.

There come at certain more or less mysterious mutation epochs of history a disintegration of the accumulated stock of ideas which had beforetime always seemed as stable and reliable as the solid earth on which men walked. The period of “the Sophists” in Greece and “the era of illumination” in the eighteenth century are impressive illustrations of such mutations. They are, of course, not wholly inexplicable. A rational basis can be found for part of what happens. We can trace certain historical “causes.” But at such times there are factors which elude us and elements which defy analysis. Words change their meanings. Old ideas of momentous significance cease to be any longer alive. Slogans that seemed to work miracles in former times fail to operate. A spell of disenchantment falls upon old-time phrases. The bottom appears to have fallen away beneath the old paths on which men once walked in security. We seem stranded between two worlds, he old one dead and the new not yet bom. We are passing through such a mutation epoch now, and we all feel the element of mystery that goes with <span id="p40"><sup><small>[ p. 40 ]</small></sup></span> the disappearance of old labels and the loss of trails and guideboards.

## XII. _The Hour Has Struck_

Giristianity’s power to survive in this present world and to be a religion of life depends upon the capacity of its prophets and guides to understand the conditions, the needs and the spirit of this new time and to reinterpret the message of human salvation and the mission of the Church in the light of the accumulated truth of the centuries and in terms of the spirit and wisdom of the Galilean Founder of this stream of life. Christianity has many times met epochs of new culture, periods of ferment and mutation, and has, through the absorption and mastery of the fresh tributary stream been able to enrich its own life and to reshape its interpretation and its mission. Can it once more prove to be equal to the situation that has emerged? Can it become enriched through the achievements of the cooperative minds of the present age and can it lead the way to a new spiritual adventure? That is the vital question we shall endeavor to answer.

If there are no basic spiritual realities to be discovered, if life is by the very nature of things bound to be a sheer biological process, with no legitimate upper story to complete it, we must, of course, face the facts <span id="p41"><sup><small>[ p. 41 ]</small></sup></span> and make the best we can of our one-story compartment of life. The severely honest modern person abominates hypocrisy and sham more than most things, and he has a deep-seated dread of fancy-built additions to the realistic world. He will not save his own face, nor will he even save civilization, by imaginative supplements to the universe as it actually is. If religion is ever to be his personal comfort, and if it is to be accepted as a creative power toward a better civilization, we must find realities that are as stable as mountains for the foundations of the spiritual structure.

There will always be some persons who are content to satisfy their hopes and drown their fears with iridescent dreams, and there will be a comfortable residue who will accept unquestioningly ancient faiths just because they are ancient. But a stage of the maturing of the human mind has now been reached when henceforth a large and ever-increasing proportion of enlightened people will insist that religious truth, if it is to be truth for them, must not rest upon a less secure foundation than is adequate for any other kind of truth. The days are over, almost certainly forever over, when easy-going, jog-trot, “good-enough,” faiths will hold the allegiance of the mature and solid section of our communities. The challenge is as dear as a bell. The house, as of old, must be set in order. We must face the issues of the religious life with the same honesty and die same severity of truth that we show when we <span id="p42"><sup><small>[ p. 42 ]</small></sup></span> deal with the nature of atoms and the processes of the stars.

The new age cannot _live_ on naturalism or on secularism. Life becomes sterile and futile without the depth and power which come from participation in eternal realities. But this new age cannot any more successfully _live_ on religious faiths that are out of harmony with known truth, or that hang loose in the air, cut apart from the fundamental intellectual culture of the age. The hour has struck for the serious business of rediscovering the foundations, and of interpenetrating all life and thought with the truths and realities of a victorious religious faith.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/Foreword">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">A FOREWORD OF EXPLANATION</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/2">
          <span class="pr-2">II. A REEXAMINATION OF THE SPIRITUAL FOUNDATIONS</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^1]: It ought to be noted that Einstein merely extends “the reign of relativity.“ He insists on some “absolutes” as solidly as any one ever has done.