---
title: "III. THE TESTIMONY OF HUMAN EXPERIENCE"
description: "A Preface to Christian Faith in a New Age"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:27:14Z
tags: Theology, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:27:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">II. A REEXAMINATION OF THE SPIRITUAL FOUNDATIONS</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/4">
          <span class="pr-2">IV. THE HEART OF CHRISTIANITY</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## I. _Direct Approach_

If there is to be a renewal of spiritual life and power in die modem world it will certainly have its birth in a fresh and vital personal contact with God. We live in a period which puts a strong emphasis on direct experience. We study geography by going to the countries in question. Botany and geology classes do much of their work out in the field where die actual specimens are. The empirical method, as we call it, of the laboratory seems to almost everybody the ideal way of approach to truth. Whatever field we are exploring we ask for the demonstration of facts. Science, in its large constructive sense, is no longer a series of happy guesses, it is a solidly organized system of knowledge, built upon and buttressed by observed facts. Historical research follows the same line of procedure. Its findings must be supported by actual records and documents. It is the trait and genius of our time to discount mere assertion, and to challenge deliverances which are “fulminated,” or which <span id="p71">[<sup><small>p. 71</small></sup>]</span> <span id="p72">[<sup><small>p. 72</small></sup>]</span> reveal personal bias or individual prejudice. Even in the case of the most august and sacred matters of life and destiny we want well-grounded truth, and not fancy-built hopes.

This empirical method of exploration, this appeal to experience and to facts, has come to be expected as the way of approach in religion as well as in the more external fields of research. It seems even in the first century to have been Christ’s way of meeting all issues of life. In answer to questioners He is reported to have said: “ _Come and see ; you will find out by living, by following, by doing._” We cannot ever, of course, deal with “the burning of the heart” and “the pludrings of the soul” which come in high moments of converse with God, by exact laboratory methods, and we shall perhaps never have a technique for spiritual communion comparable to the technique by which we measure the speed of light, but nevertheless religion demonstrably roots back into aptitudes and capacities of life and experience, and conforms to indubitable realities and principles by which it can be tested and verified. If we expea to find out why man is a religious being we must take account first of all of what happens at high-tide moments in the sphere of our own interior self. This implies no intention of reducing religion to a one-sided, man-made affair. A religion which proves to be a subjective upheaval alone is a futile performance. But we can discover the divine Other as the <span id="p73">[<sup><small>p. 73</small></sup>]</span> goal and object of our faith only by searching carefully to see what it is that the soul experiences, what it does in its greatest moments and what type of reality it reveals itself to be in its most exalted relationships.

We risk life itself to ascend into the stratosphere, ten miles above the earth, in order to get first-hand accounts of temperature and pressure at those unusual altitudes, and to make experiments with the character of the cosmic ray before it reaches the heavier layers of air. Why should we not take some pains to find out how it fares with man’s inner being on those frontier regions where the finite and the infinite join? The returns at first will obviously be meager. We may be compelled in the first instance to give account of “nothing more than what we are,” but even that would prepare us for a next stage of exploration after we had faithfully sounded the deeps of our own being. We should need to speak modestly and soberly as all great explorers speak, but it is of primary importance that we should take the full measure of the range and scope of the human soul.

We have been passing through an era of financial depression which has touched everybody’s life. We have, too, been passing through an even longer and more severe period of depression in reference to spiritual values of life. There has been such a widespread depreciation of the nature and significance of the human soul that it has taken and still requires strength <span id="p74">[<sup><small>p. 74</small></sup>]</span> of character and real courage for a person to profess faith in the reality of his own soul. The time has come to break that ominous drift of depression and to rediscover our inherent spiritual assets. We need to recover once more what Tertullian at the end of the second century called “the testimony of the soul.” “Whenever the soul comes to itself,” he said, “as out of a surfeit or a sleep, or a sickness, and attains something of its natural soundness, it bears witness to God.”

Dr. William McDougall, with his principle of “lifedirection,” Dr. A. J. Hadfield, with his conception of “self-ideals,” and other psychologists who recognize in Man “a dynamic tendency to strive for completeness,” offer a new basis for a significant testimony of the self. Rudolf Otto, with his theory of “Ahnung,” by which he means a deep, obscure conviction of transcendent reality that comes to life in f eeling and in will, has written a new chapter to the testimony of the inmost self.

## II. _Many Types of Approach_

It would be a profound mistake to assume that only one type of experience, and that a unique one, has the sole right to be called “a direct approach” to God. In John’s vision of the New Jerusalem there were gates of entrance on all sides of the four-square city. So, too, <span id="p75">[<sup><small>p. 75</small></sup>]</span> when many persons stand on the shore of the sea in a moonlight night the path of light comes across the water straight in front of each beholder, and meets him where he stands as though he were the only one to be favored with the lane of light It is somewhat so with the ways which lead to God. They are many in number and they are adapted to the needs and aptitudes of the different wayfarers who are to make the pilgrimage. Any way which brings a person home is a good way.

The ministry of beauty opens doors for many persons into a world they would never have found if flowers and snowflakes, stars and rainbows, mountains and sunsets had not laid their spell upon them. Music and art, poetry and song, have carried some persons up to heights they would have missed if they had not been awakened by the touch of those transmitters of light and joy. That approach is as “direct” as is any approach. Sometimes a beautiful life is more effective in its ministry than any other form of beauty could be. “The most consummately beautiful thing in the world,” Professor George Herbert Palmer used to say, “is a good life,” and not seldom such consummate beauty lays its hand upon us and leads us out of our old self into a diviner one.

One of the most “direct” ways to God is along the path of one’s day’s work, through the ministry of one’s occupation or profession. If we knew the whole story of the carpenter shop at Nazareth we should find, as <span id="p76">[<sup><small>p. 76</small></sup>]</span> Winifred Kirkland has been showing in her _Portrait of a Carpenter_, how Jesus grew in wisdom and spiritual insight and in his approach to God as he worked at his common labor and found his divine contacts through it. There are Some men at the dull work of sweeping our city streets — we used to call them “white angels” — who in their desire to make the street dean and safe for the little children who play in it, or for the shops that front it, reach through their hard labor to an end of genuine service beyond it and touch, perhaps without fully knowing it, the fringe at least of an infinite love that comes to meet them as they toil. The best saints are not in cloisters; they have hands rough with toil or minds that let the saving light come through them for other lives.

> It is through such souls
> God, stooping, shows sufficient of His light
> For men in the dark to rise by.

The discovery of truth along any path of search or research may prove, and often does prove, to be a “direct” way of approach to God. The fact that something out beyond us answers back to our search and meets our inquiring mind with a truth that fits it, is one of the most amazing things about our universe. It looks very much like “a double search.” It seems as though the More than ourselves out beyond us were seeking for our mind as an organ of the new truth all <span id="p77">[<sup><small>p. 77</small></sup>]</span> the while that our mind is striving to reach through the mystery to its solution. Anyhow the pursuit of truth is never a one-sided affair. Truth, to _be_ truth, must be more than _my_ guess, or _my_ faith, or _my_ insight; it must be something beyond me that answers back to my search with an inevitable _must_ be so. Men, no doubt, seek and find truth without finding God, but He is always dose at hand where truth is being found.

It needs no argument to convince persons of sensitive spirits that love is a “direct” way to God. An inventor — Paul Humphrey McNeil — has produced an instrument by which a mariner can “see” the sun, even when it is hidden by douds or fog or snow. It is an “allweather” sextant, which deteas the influence of the sun’s rays even when they cannot be actually seen. A similar device for life has long been known. Love is an “all-weather” sextant for feeling the presence of God even in the midst of clouds and darkness. Here, again, there are lovers who do not see or feel the implications that go with love. They fail to reach through their private love to the infinite deeps where Love is bom. Plato knew better. For him love is a temporal window opening into an eternal realm where Love dwells forever in fullness.

It is odd how often some great frustration proves in the end to be “a direct” approach to the Heart of things. It is not always so. It may break down faith and leave a soul stranded exactly when there is the greatest <span id="p78">[<sup><small>p. 78</small></sup>]</span> need of everlasting Love. But hosts of us can give our testimony that when we were stunned or blinded or flung into a dark tunnel by some overwhelming event we discovered a healing Presence meeting us in the dark and pushing back the skirts of our darkness and restoring us into a more complete healdi and wholeness than we ever knew before. “A little child shall lead them.” So it has been. A little child that was so divinely beautiful, so rich in promise, that he had come to be unspeakably precious and indispensable, and yet who went on and left us behind, has led some of us to the very door of the Father’s house and made love a new revelation when through the darkness we found that love went right on holding across all separations and on into the invisibles.

Professor John Oman of Cambridge, an English scholar of massive mind and fine insight, has recently interpreted what he calls the “supernatural” sphere as “the world that manifests values which stir in us the sense of the holy.” The word “supernatural” is used by Professor Oman, not as something miraculous, not as something foreign to our world, and not as a region above the natural world, but rather as a living, creative environment with which we are in constant correspondence and which awakens in us our experiences of value as the other environment gives us experiences of things and facts. This deeper environment is revealed <span id="p79">[<sup><small>p. 79</small></sup>]</span> and discovered by human experience, he thinks, in ways as numerous and as convincing as is true of the environment of nature. Any way of life by which we come into the enjoyment of eternal values, such as beauty, truth, or love, and by which we are stirred with a sense of reverence for something greater than ourselves, may thus become a way to God.

Kenneth Kirk in his Bampton Lectures on _The Vision of God_ [^1] has strikingly widened out “the direct approach” in the following words:

> Wherever a man’s mind has been uplifted, his temptations thwarted, his sorrows comforted, his resolutions strengthened, his aberrations controlled, by the sight of purity, innocence, love or beauty, — indeed, wherever he has, even for a moment, recognized and responded to the distinction between good and evil, between better and worse, — such a man has had in part the mystical experience. Dim though his mirror may have been, he has yet seen God. Where he has seen God once there he may see Him again. Purity, innocence, love and beauty are to be seen no doubt most fully in die gospel. But they are to be seen elsewhere as well; and seeing them elsewhere we can discern their delicacies and refinements in the gospel better even than before.

If we took pains to consider what is involved in man’s momentous testimony through the centuries to die reality of truth and beauty and love we should be carried out beyond those primary verities to their <span id="p80">[<sup><small>p. 80</small></sup>]</span> deeper Source, and we should at least form a profound respect for the essential nature of a being, for whom _Truth_ has played such a mighty role. It is the depth of the soul rather than its tumult that counts, and the intimations that come from the depth of the soul are as significant as are the cosmic rays from the strata above us.

## III. _First-hand Religion_

What the hour demands is a vital return to religion as it is in its first intention. However important it may be to maintain the _transmitted_ forms and types of religion as it has come out of the past, it is no less important to keep burning that unique flame of light and joy which is kindled in the soul by direct contact with God H im self. We owe much to the reports which others give us about our external world, but it would soon become a myth or a dream if we had no first-hand account through our own senses. Imagine what would happen to our apprehension of sunrise if we knew about it only in Assyrian clay tablets, or in Egyptian papyri and no one of us could ever say, “I have seen it myself!” These first-hand experiences, however, which make religion a living flame are, as we have said, of many types and not merely what happens to a person in his solitude as William James inclined to <span id="p81">[<sup><small>p. 81</small></sup>]</span> think. I have just been hearing of a man who was instrumental in bringing about a settlement of a long and tragic coal strike. He went through what was almost like a crucifixion of suffering in his sacrificial efforts for justice and adjustment, and through this experience, not in solitude but in an agonizing social task, he discovered that absolute reality of God, as clearly as any mystic ever felt it.

These traits of our essential nature which made man a religious being in the immemorial past of the race are still alive in us and still capable of significant function. The stirring of the deeps of the soul in the presence of supreme realities, resulting in an overbrimming sense of surprise and wonder, of awe and reverence, is as unique an experience as beauty is, and it is as deeply rooted in the innate capacities of our being. The religious response cannot be explained in terms of anything else. Those traits of self-transcendence in us which carry us out beyond our material needs, and which are essential to the full enjoyment of personality, form an inalienable basis for religious attitudes. The litde child, perhaps, is more naturally prone to have these first-hand experiences of awe and wonder, these overbrimming moments of life, than older persons are. The poets are right in believing that the child is, in some mysterious way, nearer the open door into the Infini te than the rest of us are. George Macdonald strikingly expressed the child’s response in his simple <span id="p82">[<sup><small>p. 82</small></sup>]</span> lines which beautifully catch the child’s state of mind:

> I am a little child, and I
> Am ignorant and weak.
> I gaze into the starry sky
> And then I cannot speak.
> For all behind the starry sky.
> Behind the world so broad,
> Behind men’s hearts and souls doth lie
> The infinite of God.

It is, however, possible to recover the child’s “innocence of eye,” to become like a little child again. Michael Fairless in _The Roadmender_ tells of a child from the slums, who, after listening to the spell of organ music, put up his face to be kissed by the hardened old organ grinder; the organ grinder swore at the child and struck him a blow, at which the child ran away in fear. A few days later the organ man met with an accident and lay for days in a hospital where he was all the time haunted by the memory of that upturned face. As soon as he was well again he went in search of the child that tried to kiss him, playing the tunes which always drew the children out of the alleys to his organ. He never found the child whom he had repelled, but in his loving search for him he became kind and gentle, loving and noble in spirit, and the author of the book says of him: “He saw the face of a little child and looked on God.” It is exactly what would happen to <span id="p83">[<sup><small>p. 83</small></sup>]</span> anyone who recovered the child-spirit and it is what has happened to many o£ us.

States of mind of the type of awe and wonder and overbrimming joy, however, are not confined to litde children, or at least would not be so limited if we could learn how to preserve and carry on through life that primitive sensitiveness of soul to the deeper world of Spirit with which we are allied. The walls that separate the child from this closely environing world are very thin and he “can travel thither” with ease and naturalness, but the locking up of life by habit, the tendency to focus on external things, the growth of the acquisitive attitude, the loss of expectancy and simplicity make the walls thicker and less pervious. The real cure for the disease of secularism, and the way to conquer the fears that go with it will best be found in the recovery of that expectancy and simplicity.

## IV. _The Door Open_

Anker Larsen, the Danish novelist, who has beautifully interpreted his own meetings with the eternally Real, not in a far-off country, but here in the midst of time, has very happily characterized two well-known types of child:

> Look at the youngster over there in his litde wagon — bis babbling lips, his striving, struggling arms and legs, the fingers <span id="p84">[<sup><small>p. 84</small></sup>]</span> forever grasping at something. Does he not differ from us grown-ups merely in that our hands are grasping more firmly, are reaching farther and that we know how limited their range is? Yes, he is a small grown-up, and often worse than the fully developed adult, because life has not yet administered a good sound box on the ear to the spoilt child who coolly assumes, therefore, that the whole world revolves around him. He is an unqualified expression of this temporal life.
> But come over to the wagon at another time — there lies the little fellow quietly, in a peace we do not understand, but which moves us. His eyes look as if he knew far more than we grown people could ever experience. He is able to keep on lying thus, in a rest and peace which is denied to most of his elders. If in this repose a smile comes to his lips, one almost sees an angel smiling. I believe that is the direct, unconcealed smile of Eternity. [^2]

Anker Larsen has, in his little book from which I have quoted, given a simple, natural and convincing account of his own experiences of the discovery of the eternal in the temporal, and of the way the temporal realizes, or may realize, the eternal. He has given a revealing instance of one person who has carried “the child’s smile of eternity” on through the years of his adult life, one person who has not lost the Tree of Life here in the midst of the garden of earth. It would be difficult to find anywhere a more vivid personal passage describing the joy of what he calls the experience of “the Eternal Now” than in his book, _With the Door Open_.

<span id="p85">[<sup><small>p. 85</small></sup>]</span>

> I have always had [he says] a healthy appetite for all the pleasures of life, and I have no reason to complain even now, either about the appetite or the digestion — but if I had all the food in the world in one dish, all the wine in the world in one glass, all its tobacco in one cigar, all the women under one petticoat, and all the honors of all the kings conferred upon me in one decoration, and the promise, in addition, that I should have all these things continuously, if only I were willing to renounce the possibility of experiencing again those meetings with the eternal Now, and the ill umina tion of life which they bring — I would laugh heartily and throw the whole collection of trinkets on the dunghill. If I have forgotten anything else one might covet, I throw it after the rest without looking at it. [^3]

Those who have kept the child-minded spirit unspoiled and who have “gone the whole way” on into this life which fuses the eternal and the temporal into an unbroken unity — persons like Jesus and Francis of Assisi and Brother Lawrence — always tell us that life is so saturated with joy that no amount of pain or sacrifice can spoil it, and that there is no exchange value by which its worth can be estimated.

Brother Lawrence, to begin with, was “a great awkward fellow, that broke everything,” but with an unusual simplicity and naturalness he entered so completely into reciprocal communion with the life of God and learned how to practice the Presence of God so normally that joy became his constant and habitual state of mind. He formed a fixed resolve, saying to <span id="p86">[<sup><small>p. 86</small></sup>]</span> himself: “Whatever becomes of me, whether I be lost or saved, I will always continue to act purely for the love of God.” “From that time on,” the simple narrative says, “he passed his life in perfect liberty and continual joy.”

The friend who told his humble story has given this charming picture of the drudgery of his life in the kitchen and of the way he changed drudgery to glory. “In his business in the kitchen (of the brotherhood) to which he had naturally a great aversion, having accustomed hims elf to do everything there for the love of God, and with prayer on all occasions for God’s grace to do his work well, he found everything easy during the fifteen years that he was employed there.” Then comes this striking testimony to the reality of the eternal Presence in the midst of the temporal sphere: “With him the set times of prayer were not different from other times. He retired to pray according to the directions of his Superior, but he did not want such retirement, nor ask for it, _because his greatest business did not divert him from God._” There is presented an impressive case of a busy man, occupied with the things of the world, doing work of drudgery, and yet keeping the spirit and joy of the child in his unspoiled Eden. He feels no need for special times of organized and directed religious devotions, for his whole life in its ordinary round of toil and duty had become a perennial practice of the Presence of God, a joyous fusion of eternity and time.

<span id="p87">[<sup><small>p. 87</small></sup>]</span>

This does not at all mean that organized forms of religion are unimportant and may be dispensed with, but the instances here given do indicate die reality of religion as it is in its first intention, religion as direct intercourse and relationship with God who becomes here and now a real Presence. In this respect religion closely corresponds to the enjoyment of beauty.

Nobody would consent to have congealed descriptions and formal accounts of lovely objects and beautiful creations substituted for the experience of beauty itself. The moment beauty is reduced to patternstamped accounts of it, the moment one tries to convey it in words and formulas its essence is lost and it is turned from a thing of joy to a thing of dullness. Imagine how powerfully our minds would revolt from any attempt to settle once and for all and for everybody what the standards of beauty must be, exactly when and how the appreciation of beauty must operate and before precisely what objects the joy might be expected to radiate. We want _surprises_. We desire to live in a world where beauty is an essential feature of it and where it may burst in on us at any minute unregimented and unheralded.

Religion, too, must be kept as an open door for die soul into the world of absolute and eternal reality with which we have commerce. It must be as fresh as dew, as free as the migrating bird, as unpredictable as life itself. It is essentially the soul’s response to that divine Other, that spiritual Beyond, that completes and fulfills <span id="p88">[<sup><small>p. 88</small></sup>]</span> our native yearnings and strivings after true reality. There is no sound reason why the restoration of the soul and the burning of the heart should not be as real and as frequent as are our exaltations over gleams of unwonted beauty.

When Rudyard Kipling was lying at the point of death many years ago in a New York hospital and all hope of recovery seemed to be gone a nurse bent over and asked him if he wanted anything. “Yes,” he whispered, “I want my heavenly Father.” There in that spontaneous expression is revealed the simple, natural min d of the little child breaking in and exhibiting itself. Whenever we come back to the native surge of our truest self we discover that we want our Father.

Joseph Twitchell used to tell how once on a camping trip in the Adirondack Mountains with Horace Bushnell, who was one of the foremost of all the spiritual leaders of American life and thought, Bushnell on the slopes of Mount Marcy prayed in their tent at bedtime one night so simply and so naturally, and with such apparent certainty of the near Presence of the Person to whom he was talking, that God seemed close beside them. Dr. Twitchell, in telling of this experience to his friend, Mark Twain, used to say that every time during that night when he reached out of bed with his arms it seemed as though he _touched God_. Why should not one feel so, if he has not by his blunders and stupidities lost the Tree of Life out of his garden!

<span id="p89">[<sup><small>p. 89</small></sup>]</span>

There come, as we all know, days of unusual visibility when distant mountains, far-away spires and objects generally merged in with the horizon become clearly, perfectly seen and look surprisingly near. We wonder as we see the horizon expand and take in an immensely enlarged area of view whether the change is in us or in our world. There are days of enlarged spiritual visibility also when the boundaries more or less vanish. We are no longer cabined, cribbed and co nfin ed in our tiny domain. We breathe as though a window had opened into a new dimension. The soul expands with life and is restored like a child feeding on its mother’s breast. There is a unique buoyancy of spirit as though an unwonted tide of life had come in under us.

## V. _Buoyancy of Life_

The moment a person discovers the buoyancy of water he becomes forthwith a swimmer. The beginner defeats his efforts because he supposes that it is the natural thing for the body to sink in the water. He assumes that he is likely to go to the bottom and drown if he risks himself in it. He starts out on his timid venture with a defeative state of mind. But by an act of bold experiment he finds some day that the water holds him easily and conveys him onward if he exerts himself. And with one heroic leap he becomes from <span id="p90">[<sup><small>p. 90</small></sup>]</span> that moment a swimmer. It is so too with the experience of finding the eternal in the midst of the temporal. Something happens on some sudden occasion that awakens in us those slumbering capacities which bring us into vital relations with “a World within the World we see,” but of which we had until then only the dimmest suspicions. The heroic leap of confidence is as important for the seeker for God as it is for the swimmer. And the discovery of buoyance is as important in one case as it is in the other. Expectancy comes as near working miracles as any state of mind does.

The experience of contact with a divine Presence, and with it the discovery of a buoyancy of life, are experiences which are as old as the race. The statement that “Enoch walked with God” comes out of the early Hebrew records. Something like it appears wherever we get early records of human experience. Whenever we get a glimpse back into the dawn of human history we find along with hunters and implement makers and creators of arts and crafts, spiritually buoyant persons who had made their heroic plunge and who had discovered that Something besides the solid earth could hold them and give them fortification to live by. The mystic and the prophet are as old as the tent-makers and it may be that they have been as important for the life and development of the race.

Moses is not the first of those who saw “Him who is invisible” and in the power of his vision went out to <span id="p91">[<sup><small>p. 91</small></sup>]</span> build a new civilization. The Philistines had the best land in Palestine and the future seemed to be with them, while Abraham, the father of a unique race, settled on the unpromising rocks of Hebron, but Abraham could see divine visitors coming to his tent door, while the Philistines throughout their entire history remained “too blind to have desire to see” any invisible realities. There is no question now in the long perspectives of time which of the two races was in the line of selection as a chosen people for the business of making a spiritual contribution to the life of the world.

## VI. _Man’s Spirit a Shining Light_

A remarkable phrase which at its birth expressed a profound personal experience was caught up and embedded in that collection of practical wisdom and everyday common sense, the Book of Proverbs. It declares that “The spirit of man is a candle of the Lord.” It must have circulated from man to man in common speech before it was set like a gem in this ancient book. It represents something more than 'die testimony of a solitary individual. It bears tie marks of communal experience. It means in the simplest intepretation of it that there is something in man’s inmost spiritual nature which can be kindled and struck into flame by God, and that as a man feeds the flame with his life he <span id="p92">[<sup><small>p. 92</small></sup>]</span> becomes a revealing-place for God. His spirit burns as one of God’s centers of illumination in the world. One of the Sufi poets of Persia in a similar phrase said:

> Every heart that has slept one night in Thy air,
> O God, is like radiant day.

As far back as we can make our soundings into the life and thought of the early Aryan race in India we get the same testimony from man’s soul. The Vedic hymns utter in primitive form a profound faith in the reality of a divine Presence breaking in on man’s life, bringing spiritual vision, divine illumination and creative power. When we pass over to the later and more intellectual Upanishads we find a noble and sustained confidence in the soul of man as the pathway upward to the eternal Reality.

Eight hundred years before Christ a certain king asked an Indian sage to tell him “what is the light of man.” “The sun, O king,” the sage replied, “for having the sun for his light man sits, moves about, does his work and returns.” “But when the sun is set, O Yojnavalkya, what is the light of man?” “When the sun is set, then the moon is the light of man; for having the moon for his light man sits, moves about, does his work and returns.” “But when the sun is set, and the moon is set, what is the light of man?” Yojnavalkya answered: “When the sun is set and the moon is set, then fire is the light of man; for having fire for his light man sits, moves about, does his work and <span id="p93">[<sup><small>p. 93</small></sup>]</span> returns.” “But sun sets, moon sets and fire goes out. What then is the light of man?” The ancient sage gave this reply: “When the sun is set, and the moon is set, and the fire is gone out, _the soul is the light of man_ ” [^4]

The great note which the sages of China sounded clearest was the reality of the moral order of the universe. “The moral law,” Confucius said, “in its utmost reaches reigns supreme over heaven and earth. It is this — one system running through all — that makes the universe so impressively great.” But while that moral order held the primacy in the thought of Confucius as “the great root of the world” he felt a sense of awe as he considered the vast and inexhaustible deeps of man’s soul and its relations with silent and hidden spiritual forces in the universe. “Like the rush of mighty waters,” he declared, “the presence of unseen Powers is felt, sometimes above us and sometimes around us.”

In the third century of our era Plotinus, the last major thinker in the succession of great Greek philosophers, proved to be one of the world’s foremost prophets of the nobility of the human soul as it finds itself in direct relation with God. “The Holy Place, the fountain-head of Beauty,” according to his thought, “is within man.” “Man’s dear Fatherland” is not reached by coaches nor by chariots, nor in ships, but by the awakening of the soul to “a vision which is its own birth-right.” “A stream from the divine Fount flows through man’s own soul.”

<span id="p94">[<sup><small>p. 94</small></sup>]</span>

I will give one more testimony from the great throng of poets and seers of the ancient world, this time from a Mohammedan mystic who had probably felt the inspiration of Plotinus.

> Go sweep out the chamber of your heart,
> Make it ready to be the dwelling place of the
> Beloved. When you depart out, He will enter in.
> In you, void of yourself. He will display His beauty.

As soon as we come over into the central stream of Christian experience and thought there is an almost unbroken line of testimony to the reality of man’s direct approach to God. The emphasis on theology and doctrine and on imperial organization has been so strong that the quiet flow of this “hidden stream,” running like the rivers Abana and Pharpar underneath the city of Damascus, has often been missed, but nevertheless it is really there all the time. The great saying of Christ, “the Kingdom of God is in you,” may be taken as a headwater source of this stream of mystical life. What is too often missed as we read the original story in the Gospels is the note of joy and the thrill in life itself which is there for those who have eyes to see it. Christ brought _life_ to the first place in attention and emphasis. There is in His thought no substitute for life, if so be the life that one is living is rich and abundant. He always sees life in its potential significance and glory. The little child becomes infinit ely precious and wonderful. Lilies and birds and germinating <span id="p95">[<sup><small>p. 95</small></sup>]</span> mustard seeds suggest ranges of life that have no earthly frontiers. A prodigal son who “comes to himself,” a sinful woman who is awakened to the full mea ning of love, an impulsive fisherman who is turned into stable-rock character, reveal the true line of the spiritual unfolding of life which makes the Gospel such a marvelous narrative. Any kingdom that Christ builds is sure to be a _kingdom of life_.

St. Paul’s words in Athens, “In God we live and move and have our being,” are as positive a declaration as words can make that religion begins, however it may end, as life itself does, in direct mutual and recip rocal correspondence with the Life of God. One of the latest interpreters of the same truth, the English poet, Francis Thompson, compared this intimate, vital connection between the soul and God to that of the fish with the ocean in which it swims, to that of the eagle with the air in which it flies:

> Does the fish soar to find the ocean?
> Does the eagle plunge to find the air?

The Gospel spoken at Jacob’s Well was of this same type. It brought religion out of slavery to forms and places and attached it directly to a state and attitude of soul: God is Spirit and His true worshipers meet with Him and commune with Him _spiritually and in reality_.

St. Paul’s Aigean Gospel, as we find in his Epistles, <span id="p96">[<sup><small>p. 96</small></sup>]</span> expects every individual person to become a living temple, certainly a new kind of temple quite unlike the seventh wonder of the world built to enshrine Diana of the Ephesians. “You are temples and the Spirit of God dwells in you.” “You are builded together for a habitation of God through the Spirit.” We have heard these exalted statements so often that they have become common phrases and they slide over our minds without awakening us to the wonder and the daring that are hidden in them. What a Christianity the world would have seen if the Aigean Gospel had remained the live reality which beat and throbbed in the heart of this spiritual conqueror of the JEge an cities.

Irenasus was overbusy in his world of the second century fighting heretics and the drift of strange heresies, but the original stream of life in a measure flowed on through him. He was speaking out of his own experience when he said: “ _The glory of God is a living man and the life of man is the vision of God._” Clement of Alexandria was telling of his own experience when he declared that “Christ has turned all our sunsets to sunrises.”

“Thou hast made us for thyself and our hearts are restless until they find rest in Thee,” is the way another one of these first-hand witnesses announced the two stages of his life, the stormy, baffled, beaten period of sear ch i ng and sinning on the one hand and the peace and joy of the second period when this Carthagini an <span id="p97">[<sup><small>p. 97</small></sup>]</span> man of the world became transformed into the St. Augustine who “willed entirely to have God,” and who “in one trembling flash” found Him.

“There are as many revelations of God as there are holy souls to be revealers of Him,” is the testimony of Irish John usually called Erigena who, in the ninth century, went to France to lay the foundations of French education. This great scholar in the darkest period of the dark ages became one of the important transmitters to later centuries of the spiritual heritage which came from the stream of Platonism and which again and again reawakened and refreshed the Western world.

Joachim of Fiori in the twelfth century, speaking as a prophet of the Spirit, announced the birth of “the eternal Gospel,” by which he meant the dawning of an epoch in which religion would become a life of complete health and joy in the ever-present Spirit. The “spiritual Franciscans” always believed that it was the mission of their beloved St. Francis to inaugurate this epoch of spiritual health and joy, the era of new radiance, an era marked by a unique spirit of love and fellowship. Like his great Galilean Master, Francis once more restored _life_ to the first place in interest and attention. It is a mistake to think of him as an ascetic person, killing out the beauty and joy of life, for just the opposite is the fact. He took the path of poverty as the way to freedom and to the full realization of the <span id="p98">[<sup><small>p. 98</small></sup>]</span> divine possibilities of life, not as a hard last resort to save his soul. His joy is as natural as a bird’s song and his life shows the touch of genius which reveals the poet and artist as well as the saint. If one wishes to find a buoyant s wimm er living in the thrill and joy of the eternal Life, there is no better instance of it than that of this Umbrian saint.

The Friends of God in the Rhine valley in the fourteenth century exhibited in high degree this intense first-hand type of religion, expressed in life and service, in faith and practice, in joy and radiance. “I would fain be to the Eternal God,” one of them, said, “what a man’s hand is to his own life.” Another one of them declared in the period of the suspension of all Church services and functions during a pitiable interdict: “Although the Church can take from us the external sacraments, no one can take from us the spiritual joy which comes from union with God and inward joy from partaking freely of the body and blood of Christ.” A third Friend of God, Meister Eckhart, the “father” of the movement, said out of his own heart, “Nothing is so close to me as God. He is nearer to me than I am to myself.”

## VII. _The Soul a Center of Eternity_

The Reformation had so many aspects that one can find in the sweep of its movement almost anything <span id="p99">[<sup><small>p. 99</small></sup>]</span> one desires to find, but there is no mistaking the fact that Luther put his primary emphasis on the saving power and transforming effect of inward personal faith as a living thing. The way to a new life lies in the attitude and resolute will of the individual soul. The Reformation was an awakening to the majestic significance of the human soul. New dogmatisms were bom, new ecclesiastidsms were set up and new alliances of Church and State were formed, but the deepest current of life and thought of the Reformation epoch was the significance of the soul’s own attitude. All victories that are won in the world are first won wi thin in some person’s soul.

Thomas Traherne in the seventeenth century expressed in noble fashion this Protestant faith in the spiritual dominion of the soul: “You are never your true self,” he said in his _Centuries of Meditation_, “till you live by your soul more than by your body, and you never live by your soul until you feel its incomparable excellence... as a centre of Eternity.”

The Counter-Reformation in the Roman Catholic Church produced a wave of mystical life which has no parallel except possibly in the fourteenth-century movements. Abbe Bremond has taken six huge volumes to tell the story of this first-hand spiritual awakening in France alone. In St. Teresa and St. John of the Cross it readied an even greater height in Spain. Jacob Boehme, George Fox, William Law, Jonathan Ed- <span id="p100">[<sup><small>p. 100</small></sup>]</span> wards, John Woolman, Horace Bushnell, William Wordsworth, and Ralph Waldo Emerson are striking interpreters of this stream of mystical life in Protestant circles. But it would take volumes to make the list of names complete, for besides those who have possessed a literary gift and who have expressed their experiences for others to read there have been thousands who w r ere nameless and unvocal, but who have lived in the power of unseen realities and have practiced the presence of God in their daily walk and conversation.

> As torrents in summer
> Half dried in their channels.
> Suddenly rise, though the
> Sky is still cloudless
> For rain has been falling
> Far off at their fountains;
> 
> So hearts that are fainting
> Grow full to o’erflowing.
> And they that behold it
> Marvel and know not
> That God at their fountains
> Far off hath been raining.

## VIII. _Upward and Outward_

We may take it for granted that die religion of the future, so far as it is creative, dyn ami c and tr ans form- <span id="p101">[<sup><small>p. 101</small></sup>]</span> ing, will be at heart mystical, its evidence and authority will lie in an inward conviction of reality, in the discovery of a power to live by and in direct fortification for the tasks of life. We do not forget the importance of what is called “the social gospel.” No gospel that is to touch and minister to the whole of life can ever cease from now on to be a social gospel. But the horizontal social gospel from man to man must never become a _substitute_ for the soul’s personal upward relations with God as the source of inspiration and power, though both the upward reach and the horizontal way of life are as essential for religion as are the systole and dyastole of the heart for circulation. There is always danger of attaining inclusive breadth of life without a corresponding height and depth to it. It is possible to have a passion for social and economic reconstruction and still to leave life thin and quite devoid of creative and dynamic resources. A being that is made for intercourse with God and for correspondence with Him can never reach his full stature merely by improving his adjustment to his physical environment, or by increasing his social adaptations. This mystical aspect of life in no sense means a rejection of the immense inheritance from the historical stream of Christian life and thought, nor does it mean the glorification of the solitary individual and the elimina tion of the mission of the Church, as the next two chapters will show. It means that vital <span id="p102">[<sup><small>p. 102</small></sup>]</span> religion can live and flourish and progress in a complex environment, such as the social and intellectual world has become, only by fresh, renewing, direct contacts with the life of God.

The conception of a remote, absentee God is utterly dead. We have not yet attained to an adequate spiritual interpretation of God so that our imagery of Him can be as vivid and real as was the case under the older conceptions, but for most of us there is found to be both within the universe and within ourselves, a deeper World of Spirit, our Source and Ground of being and the essential Environment of any life that has spiritual scope and significance. To live and breathe and grow is to correspond with God. The spiritual experts have always known it. The time has come for the rank and file which make up the spiritual force of society to know it and to practice it.

## IX. _Technique and Method_

Many will no doubt feel that they need a system, a well-defined technique as a training and preparation for this quickening experience of God. India has its system of Yoga by which the Hindu saint is trained and disciplined for the life of meditation and the great mystics of the Middle Ages had a systematized method of steps and approaches by which they climbed up to <span id="p103">[<sup><small>p. 103</small></sup>]</span> their highest moments of unutterable union. But experiences of this exalted type can never be reduced to set form and regimentation, nor can they be gained by a fixed system or a scientific technique. There is a close parallel between poetic experience and experiences of the mystical type. They both draw heavily upon swift flashes of intuition. The antennas of the soul seem suddenly to reach out beyond what has been ordered and explained. The thing which counts most for such processes will be frequent periods of hush and quiet when the deep-lying strata of the self come into function and operate as they seem to do, in conjunction with a Reality beyond our own margins. The removal of obstacles and hindrances is more important than is the invention of artificial contrivances to aid the soul to accomplish what belongs to its native capacities.

It is not so much technique that is needed as patience and expectancy. Confidence in the range and power of the soul, faith in the nearness and kinship of God, and simple trust in the buoyancy of the great Ocean that surrounds our souls are almost certainly the most important attitudes of mind. Many persons find corporate silence more effective than solitary silence, though this is by no means a universal experience. The hush and expectancy of many cooperating together seem often to have the cumulative effect of teamwork and to bring the individual into the best condition for this higher type of correspondence.

<span id="p104">[<sup><small>p. 104</small></sup>]</span>

In the past the spiritual culture of home life and the prayer habit, where they existed, have been strong influences in the formation of expectancy. Where little children have grown up in an atmosphere shot through with an experience of real Presence and of creative faith in the nearness of God, and where the radiant life of the family has borne a powerful testimony to the reality of God, no other technique seemed necessary. But where such natural and unconscious spiritual nurture is absent, as it too often is absent to-day, the Church finds its task in this direction greatly increased, and it must be taken as settled that this type of nurture in the future belongs essentially to the function of the Church. Hardly anything in the sphere of religion stands more in need of attainment by the rank and file of Christians to-day than does the spontaneous natural and joyous _practice of prayer_. It has too often grown dull and meaningless and has finally for many persons dropped away as an empty performance. If Christianity is coming back in living power in our lives we must have vital correspondence with God in prayer and communion.

It may be said with complete assurance that sensitiveness to the moral issues and implications of life is of the highest importance for the personal discovery of God. The relation between ethics and religion is so intimate that many writers have treated these two aspects of life as identical, or at least as two flowers from a single root. Christ put the love of God and <span id="p105">[<sup><small>p. 105</small></sup>]</span> love of neighbor together into one fundamental duly of man, as though the upward love for God and the outward love for man formed one single spiritual whole. So, too, Christ set forth purity of heart as the essential condition for seeing God. Purity of heart in this great beatitude no doubt means more than freedom from immoral taints. It is simplicity and singleness of heart, elimination of prejudice and hardness. It is primarily _capacity for love_, but however we define it, the fact remains that the vision of God is directly bound up with ethical traits and qualities of life. All the experts are further agreed that love of beauty and loyalty to truth are also inevitably linked with this religion of direct and immediate approach to God, as breathing and heart-beating are indivisible parts of the natural function of life.

The richness and exuberance of life in the great birth period which follows the spring equinox, as contrasted with the barren stretch of winter months, may perhaps furnish us with a parable of the difference between the full life of correspondence with God and the wellknown arid stage of life which sets in when the door to the Beyond is shut and the magic casements which admit the soul’s upper air are tight closed. It is possible, no doubt, to “survive” so long as lungs keep breathing and heart keeps beating, but life — life of the thrilling and adventurous type — needs larger horizons and wider ranges of correspondence.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">II. A REEXAMINATION OF THE SPIRITUAL FOUNDATIONS</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/4">
          <span class="pr-2">IV. THE HEART OF CHRISTIANITY</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^1]: P. 464.

[^2]: _With the Door Open_, pp. 76-77.

[^3]: _Op. cit._ pp. 82-83.

[^4]: Brihadoranyaka, Upanishad IV. 3.