---
title: "IV. THE HEART OF CHRISTIANITY"
description: "A Preface to Christian Faith in a New Age"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:27:14Z
tags: Theology, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:27:14Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">III. THE TESTIMONY OF HUMAN EXPERIENCE</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/5">
          <span class="pr-2">V. THE NATURE AND THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## I. _Things That Cannot Be Shaken Remain_

Sometime near the end of the first century, in the midst of earthquakes, shattering disasters, and depressing uncertainties, an unnam ed Christian writer, looking out on the turmoil and upheaval, calmly declared that the shaking processes which were disturbing the world had the significance of a genuine revelation. “The things that are being shaken,” he announced, “are obviously things that _can be shaken_. They are thus revealed to be man-made, passing and temporal things by the very fact that they are shaken, and they are being removed out of the way, so that _the things which cannot be shaken_ may remain.” [^1] There are recurrent periods in history which have this testing and sorting function. They are always disturbing times to live in. They try men’s hearts with fear and anxiety. They seem to threaten the very foundations underneath the solid structure which the ages have built. It is difficult for those who are living <span id="p106"><sup><small>[ p. 106 ]</small></sup></span> <span id="p107"><sup><small>[ p. 107 ]</small></sup></span> through the shaking process to distinguish between the outworn, temporal aspects which ought to be removed, and those eternal verities which will be still standing as solid as ever when the shaking is over.

We are in one of these testing periods now. The seismograph is working overtime and keeps reporting serious “shakings” abroad in the land. There is a disturbing quantity of debris being removed. The fearful and timorous wonder whether “anything will be left.” The Rock of Ages seems to them to be dissolving. They are in the desperate straits of the travelers with St. Paul who found themselves in the sea on “planks and broken pieces of the ship.”

We may be assured that this testing, sorting time is, once more, a revealing period. It is demonstrating, as earthquakes always do demonstrate, what is built to abide through shakings and what is only makeshift work to be removed. There is, we may be assured, an unshaken and unshakable foundation of truth and reality which is of an eternal order. We want to discover that.

## II. _What “ Christianity ” Means_

“Christianity” is a word of many meanings. It is often used to cover what we indefinitely call Western tivili- <span id="p108"><sup><small>[ p. 108 ]</small></sup></span> zation and in accord with that superficial use of the word, the nations which make up that civilization are frequently called “Christian nations.” “Christendom” thus includes all the regions of the earth that are in some measure under the sway of ideas and ideals which have come to be called “Christian” in the loose sense of the above-mentioned type of civilization. As soon as one turns to consider the characteristics of this type of civilization called “Christianity” the fact is quickly revealed that it bears very slight resemblance to the way of life presented in the Gospels. It is the product of many strands of thought and life and culture. In other words, Christian civilization is the confluence of many streams.

That is exactly as we should expea it to be. The historical movement is immensely complex and cumulative. No nation, no race, no people, has ever lived unto itself alone, nor can it be done. Contacts are bound to happen. Influences flow in like tributaries to a river. Every time one civilization, or one culture, conquers another one, there is a reciprocal interaction which alters conqueror and conquered alike. Again and again in matters of culture the conquered have been, in the end, the conquerors, the captor has been led captive. Every time the Christian forces have conquered a civilization or culture, a national or racial system of life and thought, Christianity has in its turn been altered by the “conquest.” The “defeat” of the mystery reli- <span id="p109"><sup><small>[ p. 109 ]</small></sup></span> gions and of Gnostic movements by Christianity in the first two centuries was by no means a one-sided victory. The “conversion” of Constantine and the “triumph” of Christianity over the Roman Empire was a “victory” in which the spoil was woefully divided. A corresponding conquest of the Christian conquerors has marked every “invasion” which Christianity has made upon the culture of any people throughout its two thousand years of history. Christian civili2ation is, therefore, by no means a river with a single source. On the contrary, it drains swamps and morasses and remote watersheds as well as that high Galilean tableland from which the original stream emerged.

If we are to go on calling Western civilization “Christianity,” we must keep clearly in mind what an enormous fusion and complex it is. The philosophy of Greece, the organizing genius of Rome, the customs and mental habits of Goth and Frank and Saxon have poured in and have helped to form the civilization and culture to which we give the name of Christianity. Reformers in all periods have endeavored to “return” to the purity and simplicity of the original source. They have aspired to “revive primitive Christianity.” The difficulty about such an undertaking is the impossibility of lifting a spiritual movement out of its organic, historical setting and transporting it into the life and culture of another epoch. “A way of life” cannot go on in a vacuum. It cannot be disembodied. It is bound <span id="p110"><sup><small>[ p. 110 ]</small></sup></span> to express itself in the concrete terms of an existing civilization and culture.

If we are to “follow Christ,” it will not be over Galilean hills, nor shall we do it with sandals, or in the Pales tinian garments of the first century. Nor can we think about our universe, or of our national aims, or of our social duties, in the terms of Galilean peasants and fishermen. For better or for worse — it is almost certainly for better — we are the inheritors of Western civilization and the scientific culture of the twentieth century and sharers in it. We cannot “go back” to an earlier purity and simplicity. No “return” journey is possible. The only direction of travel that is open to us is the one-way mad forward and if we are concerned to get closer to the original quality of Christian faith and power it must be by discovering what were the essential aspects of that faith and power, and by going forward to reconstruct and rebuild our culture and our civilization through the recreative energies of that dynamic way of life. Those “essential aspects of faith and power” which constituted the driving energy or the creative element of the Galilean way of life is what is meant by the phrase, “the heart of Christianity.” It is that nucleus of faith or truth which underlies all genuine types of Christian discipleship. It is that essential element of faith around which all the brandies of the great Christian family gather. It is the center of loyalty that in all lands and centuries differentiates <span id="p111"><sup><small>[ p. 111 ]</small></sup></span> Christian from non-Christian. It is the common inheritance shared by every sea or aeed or name which roots back for life and power into the original Source of the Christian stream.

## III. _Is the “Heart” Still Beating?_

Is there “a heart of Christianity” still beating underneath all the visible variations, all the talk, all the form and show, all the pumped-up effort, all the committees and conferences and retreats, and prayer-meetings and revivals? In the midst of the staggering secularism and externality, the seeming deadness and dullness, is there a heart that throbs with life? Is there a current of vitality, still dynamic with the power of God? Is there a _faith_ that can still raise the dead and set men to the task of overcoming the world? Is that Name, which was once held to be above all names, able even now to quicken and revitalize the spiritual pulse of humanity? Is there a driving energy at the heart of Christianity which can, not only build hospitals and centers of repair for broken lives, but that can, in faa and reality, transform and reconstrua the social and economic order which has become inadequate for the life of men to-day? Is there something vital enough in quality and power at die heart of this faith of ours to warrant our carrying a message and a way of life to other nations <span id="p112"><sup><small>[ p. 112 ]</small></sup></span> and races beyond our borders? Have we a missionary faith which gives us a right to be a missionary people? _Are we more than conquerors_, in the sense that we have an overbrimming spiritual life which flows over for others? Does our cup run over?

These questions are serious ones to face and yet they must be faced. We have no claim to be purveyors of truth and light to the people of other lands if we are spiritually bankrupt ourselves. If religion in the homeland is in word but riot in power, we need not be surprised to find that our workers out on the far frontiers grow weak and discouraged and ineffective. The moment the great tides of the life and love of God flow through us over here with creative and redemptive power, that same tide will run high in the ranks of those who are far away on the other side of the world.

Let us endeavor to recover for our thought that central conquering faith which lay at the heart of primitive Christianity, when it first became _apostolic_, which literally means “missionary.” It was on its highest level a new revelation of God, and it was on the human plane an equally new revelation of man’s potential nature. We have not got back to the heart of Christianity until we have recovered both of these essential aspects of Christ's life and message. They are so indissolubly woven together that either one is apt to be missed if the other is overlooked, as has too often happened in the course of Christian history. But for Christ <span id="p113"><sup><small>[ p. 113 ]</small></sup></span> himself, the character-nature of God could not be thought of in the abstract, apart from the human branches through which the divine life is poured, nor could human nature rise to its normal spiritual potency until the life of God flows through it. His “way of life” included contact and expansion upward as well as complete adjustment through right social relationships down here.

## IV. _The Unique Aspect_

Every great religion, that is, every religion that has made a permanent contribution to human culture and civilization, has brought to light some unique aspect of the nature of God. In fact, a religion is only a phase of “humanism” until it becomes deepened and vitalized through a fresh discovery of the reality of God. One might as well talk of the dynamic quality of a dynamo that is letting through no electric energies as to talk of a new dynamic for life when no energies from beyond our human forces have been discovered. The supreme founders of religions have always brought a new spring of energy to the world through their ability to reveal some aspect of die nature of God which had until then been hidden.

The peculiar aspect which receives emphasis through the life of a given race or people will quite naturally <span id="p114"><sup><small>[ p. 114 ]</small></sup></span> be something intimately consonant with the special genius of that race or people. The prophets of Israel, with their burning passion for righteousness, brought more clearly into focus the _moral aspect_ of the nature of God than had been done by any other revealers of the divine character. They reversed the easy, comfortable, popular idea that sacrifices and offerings would appease and satisfy God and make Him lenient toward the sin and wickedness of persons who duly performed the expected sacrifices. They refused to tolerate die view that religion is essentially a matter of form and etiquette and ritual. The God of the prophets is the guardian of the moral structure of the world. He does what is eternally _right_, and He calls for worshipers who have high respect for righteousness of heart and life in all their relations with Him and with men. If they do not preserve and maintain that attitude there is no safety, no security, for them anywhere in God’s universe. They announce that laws of moral gravitation are as real and as inevitable as the laws of physical gravitation, and that doom forever dogs the violator of those unalterable moral principles which enforce and execute themselves.

That is the unique contribution of the great Hebrew prophets, and it may well be called the heart of the prophetic message of Israel to the world. It was never wholly lost. In fact, no essential truth of the eternal nature of things is likely to be lost. This inevitable <span id="p115"><sup><small>[ p. 115 ]</small></sup></span> moral structure at the core and center of things is as well an inherent part of vital Christian faith. Christ was nurtured in the teachings of the great prophets of His race and their essential contribution came over undiluted into the religion which had its source in Him.

Dimly, but nevertheless surely, some of the great prophets saw that there was something in the nature of God which overtopped _justice_ and which transcended the mighty principle of moral gravitation. Hosea and Jonah and the prophet of “the suffering servant” had swift glimpses and insights of a love and tenderness in God which is more like _grace_ than like _justice_. The difficulty, however, was to reconcile what seemed like opposing qualities of life. How could moral gravitation be a fact, an inevitable fact, if, in the last resort, love was to break in and tilt the scale by a sudden burst of grace and favoritism? How can tenderness and forgiving grace operate in a world that is eternally moral? Christ’s Gospel, His way of life, is the answer. There can be no _detour_ which goes around the moral structure of the world. There can be no compromise with the eternal nature of things. What is inherendy bad at one time and in one part of the universe cannot be fixed up and made to be good, or pronounced “good,” at another time or in another part of the universe. There can be no caprice, or variableness in the ethical sphere. Changes in latitude and longitude do not alter the direction of the moral compass.

<span id="p116"><sup><small>[ p. 116 ]</small></sup></span>

God, in Christ’s teaching, remains the God of the moral plumb lin e as unmis takably as in the messages of Amos and Isaiah.

This is the ground of that stem note which is everywhere present in the Gospels. There is a winnowing f an operating which separates wheat from chaff. The process of division between those on the right hand and those on the left is as inevitable as is the law of survival of the fittest in nature. The foolish virgins, by their foolishness, shape their own destiny and it stays unalterable. The sorting of the fit and the unfit, the separation of grain and tares, can allow no one to form false hopes that the laws of the universe are to be taken lightly. Saying “Lord, Lord” with pious, unctuous lips will never alter the real conditions of the inner life itself. One is, and one remains, what his choices and his attitudes of will have made him. As always, character settles destiny. There is nothing in the original story which holds out any encouragement for soft and easy optimism. The universe is a _moral order_ and every deed has moral consequences. The doom of Jerusalem is seen as clearly, and is pronounced as unequivocally, by this gentle, tender Christ as it would have been seen and pronounced by stem and relendess old Amos of Tekoa.

When we talk of “the heart of Christiani ty,” then, we must include in it the reality of the moral order of the world. There is no slackening of the insistence on <span id="p117"><sup><small>[ p. 117 ]</small></sup></span> righteousness. There is no dallying with moral consequences. Christianity began its mission as an ethical religion and it has remained ethical wherever its vitality has persisted. Elements of magic and traits of caprice have crept into Christianity at various stages of its history, but they do not belong to its substance. They are foreign importations. It carries in its central structure an overmastering respect for and confidence in the moral forces of the universe.

## V. _Law and Grace_

Somehow that rigid, moral structure which lies imbedded in Christianity must be harmonious with the unique message which Christ persistently proclaimed, the message that God is eternally tender, loving, forgiving, and full of grace. Both of these aspects are alike included in the heart of the original Christian message and way of life — the rugged moral note and the reality of grace as tender as a mother’s love.

We have here a much deeper question than the reconciliation of grace with the old Mosaic law. The latter can well be thought of as a temporary and imperfect stage of life which was preparatory to the higher one. The lower is annulled and fades away when the higher comes in and supplants it. But grace does not and cannot annul the eternal moral nature of <span id="p118"><sup><small>[ p. 118 ]</small></sup></span> things, nor is that reality ever supplanted or superseded. How can God be both the God of unswerving moral realities and at the same time a God of grace?

For Christ the answer to that seeming _impasse_ is as natural and simple as life itself is. Love is not confronted with the problem at all. The problem exists only for those who come at the issues of life from the lower level of legality, of calculation and contrivance. If God had the status of a sovereign standing on His dignity and insisting upon His feudal rights, then of course He could not forgive or pardon or be genuinely loving until His stern sense of governmental dignity and honor were satisfied. To be soft and easy and yielding — to say, “I will not _count_ this offense” — would endanger the whole structure of the legal, governmental system.

But it is exactly that entire legal conception which Christ wipes out and leaves behind. He leaps, by a supreme spiritual insight, to a wholly new revelation of the essential character of God and consequently of life itself. God is eternally _Father_. He does not become Father through some mysterious diange in His nature, or on account of some transaction that has occurred, nor does He ever cease to have the character traits of Father. Creation is as much an expression of Father-love as redemption is. Love is the one method of soul-making. Soul-making cannot be done by force or by compulsion. It cannot be accomplished alone by <span id="p119"><sup><small>[ p. 119 ]</small></sup></span> springs of fear or by the contrivances of discipline. The shift of approach from the legal level to that of grace is as momentous a change of level as is the shift from the stage of matter to that of life, or from the vegetable kingdom to that of the animal. Something that would have been unthinkable on the lower level emerges on the higher level and exhibits what now becomes a normal role of activity for that new level. It is as though one should pass from air-waves to radio-vibrations, or from molecular-processes to the inner processes of consciousness. In the world of matter ends are attained by the push and correlation of forces. In the realm of the Spirit progress and realization are achieved only by the suggestion and appeal of an end or goal that works by attraction. _The compulsion of a soul_ is as much a contradiction of terms as the persuasion of a stone wall by argument would be.

Jesus was the interpreter of this way of life to a degree beyond that reached or expressed by anyone who has lived on earth. It must be said further that in the person of Christ we pass beyond what is usually meant by an _interpreter_ of a way of life. His life has seemed to men in all generations to stand forth as a unique and attractive ideal of what life at its best and highest _should be_. St. Paul called Him “a new Adam,” a new Creation, a new type of humanity. In saying that St. Paul was thinking of Him primarily as the beginning of a new order of life-giving spirit, that is to say, as a <span id="p120"><sup><small>[ p. 120 ]</small></sup></span> typical incarnation of love and self-giving. He expected to see tie miracle of transformation through love work on sin-crippled men and women in every walk of life. This appeal of love called out the potential Cephas hidden and hardly suspected in the impulsive Simon. It raised a sinning woman, whose hope and expectation were gone, to a pure and radiant saint. It changed a self-despised tax-collector into an honest and self-respecting man. It was instantly recognized by responsive little children. It had an almost miraculous effect on demoniacs who had been rendered more insane by methods of terror and compulsion. It seemed to fail in Pilate’s Hall and at Golgotha. It did not soften the hate of crafty politicians or touch the quick of Roman soldiers. The jeer of the mob drowned out the gentle voice of forgiving love. To the onlookers the “defeat” appeared obvious. But somehow that Cross has touched the heart of the world as nothing else has ever done and it has through the ages been the most redemptive power of which history has any record. That mystery of an overwhelming “defeat” turned to victory and an unmitigated “disaster” changed into triumph must be considered more fully later, since it lies close to the very heart of Christianity itself.

The point to which we must now return is a consideration of the divine significance of this incarnation of love and tenderness in Christ and its bearing upon <span id="p121"><sup><small>[ p. 121 ]</small></sup></span> the nature of God. From the very first stages of His mission Christ identified this way of grace and selfgiving to which He was dedicated with the eternal character of God. His test of any quality of life was always to see whether it made the possessor of it more like God: “You are to love, even your enemies, so that you may be like God; you are to be _peacemakers_ so that you may be recognized as God’s children; you are to be perfect in your aspirations for goodness so that you may be like your Father in heaven; you are to be forgiving in spirit so that you can receive and appreciate God’s forgiveness toward you.” In other words, spiritual traits expressed here on earth through human life take on extraordinary significance and have a signal glory since they reveal in however humble a way the stupendous reality of what God is like. The sin against the holy Spirit consists in having a state of mind, a hardness of heart, that is unable to recognize love when it is manifested. It is a state of mind wholly unlike God. It is the loss of capacity to discriminate between spiritual light and darkness, between goodness and evil, between love and hate, and the inevitable doom that goes with it is that such a soul _cannot be forgiven_, because it cannot recognize love and forgiveness when they are bestowed upon it. To lose love is by an unescapable law of life to lose God.

<span id="p122"><sup><small>[ p. 122 ]</small></sup></span>

## VI. _Identity of God and Love_

The parables which interpret the heart of God with utmost naturalness and simplicity take for granted that love is the essential aspect of His character. Lilies in the field and mother birds brooding on their nests are symbols for Him of a divine care existing at the heart of things. The thoughtful gift of a cup of cold water to a little child in need stores up an increment of love in the spiritual world which is never lost nor wasted. The spirit of mercy is cumulative and adds to the total stock of mercy — mercy “obtains” mercy and grace begets grace.

Three unforgettable parables, which we owe to St. Luke, carry this identity of love with God to its highest possible expression in words. The shepherd seeking his lost sheep, the woman hunting for her lost coin, the father meeting his returning son who had gone wrong — utterly simple stories and yet immortal frescoes of reality — carry the mind of the reader unconsciously and irresistibly from incidents of village life in Palestine to an eternal quality in the heart of God. You find yourself absorbed in the peasant narrative and before you know it you are in the unseen realm and are contemplating the amazing grace of God. You pass without a break or a divide from a father out on a Galilean hillside meeting his ragged son returning stripped of <span id="p123"><sup><small>[ p. 123 ]</small></sup></span> his inheritance and with his chance for a life of goodness almost as completely squandered and suddenly you discover that you are hearing about the divine Father. “His father saw him a long way off, was filled with compassion and ran to meet him and fell on his neck and kissed him.” And then you hear him say: “Bring forth the best robe and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand and shoes on his feet and kill the fatted calf and let us eat and be happy, for this my son was dead and is alive again, he was lost and is found.”

One would expea that endless repetition of the story would have made it trite and commonplace, but somehow the opposite has happened. It grows all the time more awe-inspiring and wonderful. It inherendy possesses the power of stirring in the reader that unique quality which has been well called the “numinous” state of mind — the feeling of divine Presence. We finish the story with a hushed sense that _God is like that_.

The effett of the account of the crucifixion is to carry this “n umin ous” feeling to a still greater height. It is well-nigh impossible as one reads to separate earth and heaven in the unfolding stages of this event. The sufferer is all the time identified with more than Himself. The cry of “Abba” in the garden, with die words “not my will but thine,” is a loving commitment to the redemptive way of love, which is here discovered to be as deep as the heart of God Himself. One of the

<span id="p124"><sup><small>[ p. 124 ]</small></sup></span>

Italian Franciscan painters has pictured the crucifixion scene with the nails driven through Christ’s hands and through the beams of the cross into the hands of the Father behind the cross. It is crude and pictorial, as symbols must be, but one comes away from the event of the cross with the feeling that the suffering love, die grace and self-giving made vivid and vocal in that event through this gentle Figure on the cross do express as nothing else does the heart of God. The identity of this love, that goes the whole way and stops at nothing, with the deepest nature of God seems as natural as life itself. The two greatest interpreters of it that have yet lived, St. Paul and St. John, do not hesitate to make the identity complete and for them this grace and sacrificial love which suffers to the end and does not let go, is the world’s supreme revelation of the life and character of God.

The modem man feels a hesitation about building speculative theories or elaborate theological systems around such sacred events as that. He feels something here which moves the deepest levels of his being and which searches him through and through, but he wants to have it act upon him as the greatest things in nature do by their own inherent power. It seems to him a pity to stereotype it and turn it into a formula for cold, argumentative purposes. He prefers in a hushed and reverent way to contemplate the stupendous reality and to face the issues of life and the tragedy of sin in the <span id="p125"><sup><small>[ p. 125 ]</small></sup></span> light of it. But in matters of such moment there will be, and there should be, a variety of attitudes. For nineteen hundred years the best min ds of the world have labored to interpret the meaning and signifi can ce of that self-giving Love, symbolized by the cross. The interpretations have always taken on the temporal color of the age in which the interpreter lived. That is precisely as we should expea it would be. Men are moved by insights which are congruent with the thoughts and realities by which they shape their lives. The faa, however, which stands out most dearly is the never-ceasing transforming power of that central event itself. It outlives all the passing, changing interpretations of it. Its dynamic quality is as great at this moment as ever it was. It moves modern hearts as powerfully as it did antient or medieval ones, though one must reach beyond the _phrase_ to the reality it stands for, before the heart is stirred to-day. The only danger that could ever threaten to weaken that central event of Christ’s life would be the disintegration of the significance of love itself as an eternal reality.

It has always seemed to the profoundest interpreters of Christianity that one of its most central ideas at the heart of this unique religion is the discovery that in Christ God has revealed Himself through humanity, that here at a point in history eternity has been manifested within the temporal sphere. How it came to be, how it could be, the metaphysics of the event, the actual <span id="p126"><sup><small>[ p. 126 ]</small></sup></span> relation involved between the natural and the supernatural, have always been in debate — quite frequently, fruitless debate. If we stopped to analyze as curiously and as insistently how mind and will and spiritual insight and unselfish love and the domination of ideals emerge in any child born into the world by physical process, we should at once have a nest of insoluble problems on our hands. Instead of losing ourselves in the bottomless bog of speculation, we accept the facts of life and let the two worlds of matter and spirit reveal their possibilities through this mysterious reality, a self-conscious personality superposed on a physical base. Until we have solved this nearer problem which is with us every day we can perhaps allow that far one to rest in its fringe of mystery and thankfully accept the historical facts which seem evident and convincing.

## VII. _Only a Person Could Reveal the Heart of God_

There is only one way that a God of supreme significance for our lives could reveal His character to beings like us. The universe in the structure of its ordered framework is no doubt some kind of a revelation. The harmony, symmetry and beauty which break in on us through the things around us take us closer to the nature of the World within the world we see. But power, order, beauty are not enough to satisfy beings of our <span id="p127"><sup><small>[ p. 127 ]</small></sup></span> type. What we have been calling “the Heart of things” is still lacking. It could not come to light except where love and sympathy and gentleness and traits of endurance and self-giving find expression. There cannot be such a manifestation until there is an adequate personal organ of revelation. The most sensitive interpreters of such values of life find in Christ a revelation like that. They feel satisfied that in this Person of Galilee and Judea we see what the Heart of God is like.

It will always be possible, no doubt, for objectors to say that there is no way to pass over from the subjective experiences which Christ felt and from the deeds He did and the things He suffered to the objective reality of God. No, nor is it possible to convince a thorough-going subjectivist of the validity of any kind of objectivity, even the objectivity of the external world which science describes or which the lover of beauty interprets. It ought, however, to satisfy most earnest and sincere minds that here in Christ the universe has produced a Person who made the supremacy of love vivid and vocal and victorious, a Person whom multitudes of men and women have felt to be good enough and noble enough to express the highest human ideal of God’s nature. And the fact remains that Christ carries at least this indubitable testimony to objectivity that there must be something like Him at the heart of the eternal nature of things since the eternal nature of things has produced Him here in our world.

<span id="p128"><sup><small>[ p. 128 ]</small></sup></span>

The fact that God can be revealed in a personal life carries momentous implications. It means that the divine and the human are not so far sundered as had been persistently supposed. It means that human nature _can_ become an organ for the Life of God since it _has been_ such an organ. It means that God is nearer to us than we supposed; more truly an Emmanuel God than we had been wont to believe. It may well be that God is all along endeavoring to break through and reveal His presence and character, the only difficulty being that He finds such poor, self-filled instruments for any true revelation to break through.

Christianity has, beyond question, borne a testimony across the centuries that God and man belong together and that both suffer loss when they are sundered. A solitary God, living apart in Himself, with no interrelationships, with no intercourse of love, would at best be much less than we mean by “God.” So, too, the self-seeking man, absorbed alone in his own survival and acquisitions, achieving a life of only one dimension, without height or depth, without wonder or mystery, would be that ancient monstrosity known as “mere man.” There can be no _life_ worthy the name, no love, no joy, no radiance, until God and man find each other. This is the meaning of the “double search” which underlies all human history. And here in Christ the Above and the below unite. The double search culminates in the peace and joy of mutual and reciprocal fin di ng. Instead of being perplexed over the metaphysi- <span id="p129"><sup><small>[ p. 129 ]</small></sup></span> cal difficulties we ought to leap to the discovery that the Higher and the lower that _ought_ to be together in harmonious union, at least for once are together and both the divine and the human alike stand revealed in a single Person, in one harmonious life.

## VIII. _The Kingdom of God_

This revealing union of the divine and the h uman in a life of love and service and self-giving is the clue to another central idea which belongs in the heart of Christianity, namely, the way of life which Christ called “the Kingdom of God.” This phrase has had many meanings during the period of Christian history, and, as it stands expressed in the Gospels, it is open to more than a single interpretation. The first century, in which the New Testament came to birth, was an age of apocalyptic expectations and the despair of getting spiritual results by natural processes, which characterizes all apocalypses, is undoubtedly in evidence throughout the New Testament, as is also the fervid hope that a supernatural relief expedition was near at hand. That despair of what earth can do and that glowing expectation of what heaven can do, and will do, color all our accounts and make it easy and natural for the modem interpreter to find a large apocalyptic strand in the primitive narratives.

But the remarkable fact is that there is another far <span id="p130"><sup><small>[ p. 130 ]</small></sup></span> deeper and more unique strand there of a wholly different type. It is easy to see how the apocalyptic hope got its place in the story; it is not so easy to account for the amazing depth and originality of the central insight which constitutes here the heart of the message, which is the expectation of a new humanity engendered by the process of the coming of the Life of God into the lives of men. St. Paul, with his extraordinary genius for seeing those aspects in the original message which would appeal to the minds of the Graeco-Roman world, called Christ “a new Adam,” the begi n ni n g of a new order of humanity, and that note characterizes what may well be called “the JEge an Gospel” set forth in St. Paul’s Epistles. It is almost certainly a true and genuine interpretation of the original Gospel message. God revealed in and through humanity is the heart of the Gospel.

The great saying: “The Kingdom of God is in you,” has been called by a modern Hindu the greatest revelation that any person has ever made. But it is not a solitary saying, apart and alone, and out of keeping with the rest of the sayings. It is rather a key which opens the whole meaning of the unique conception of the Kingdom which forms the deepest and most original strand of the message of “good news,” which we call “Gospel.” The model prayer asks that God’s Kingdom may come, and it forthwith interprets the words with the clause, “Thy will be done on earth as it is done in <span id="p131"><sup><small>[ p. 131 ]</small></sup></span> heaven.” That would appear to be the nature of the Kingdom in its realized fullness, namely the complete sway of the Life of God in and over the lives of men — His will done here as it is done there.

A noted writer, William P. Du Bose, in a deservedly famous book not yet out of date. The Gospel in the Gospels, defined the Kingdom of God as “that permanent and eternal incarnation of God in humanity which we see not only realized in the individual person of Jesus Christ, but to be consummated in the universal humanity of which He is the head.” Dr. Du Bose rightly maintains that the Kingdom of God is “simply and literally God Himself in humanity,” and he adds that this was “the essence of Christ’s religion.” What this noble teacher called the essence of Christ’s religion is here being called the heart of Christianity.

The world has suffered serious loss by the constant assumption that the Kingdom of God is a _post mortem_ state instead of being a positive Christian ideal of life for the individual and for society here in this world where it is so desperately needed. The other-worldly emphasis in Christian teaching has accustomed us to postpone our holy cities and our rivers of the water of life to a realm beyond the grave and we have consequently lowered the tone of our hope and expectation for this poor heritage we call earth. We have leveled down when we should have leveled up. We have taken the Kingdom of God as a final “gift” when we should <span id="p132"><sup><small>[ p. 132 ]</small></sup></span> have thought of it as a present “task” — the citizenship of the new humanity according to the measure of “the new Adam,” its founder.

One reason for the postponement to another sphere has been the loss of that creative faith which Christ had in such high degree, that God is an Emmanuel God, here with us, the Life of our lives, the Ground of our hope and expectation. Heaven has been enhanced by the depreciation of earth. The Yonder has been glorified by the despair of the here and now. If God is “over there” and not “down here,” we can only wait and hope and postpone. But if on the other hand this is God’s world and He is with us in our supreme spiritual adventures, as Christ saw was the case, then the Kingdom becomes the cooperative task of God and ourselves throughout the ages.

Whatever else the Kingdom of God may be in its full meaning it is in its very nature a way of life which must begin first of all within the life of a person. Whatever more it may be, it is at least a kind of society in which that spirit of love and peace that ruled and controlled Christ’s life has become the inward law and nature of those who compose it. “The Kingdom of God,” as St. Paul saw, “is not meat and drink (that is, it is not a ceremonial performance) but love and peace and joy in the holy Spirit,” which is the Life of God, in the lives of men.,

The Beatitudes give the most perfect illustration of <span id="p133"><sup><small>[ p. 133 ]</small></sup></span> its inmost spirit. Consciousness of the unattained; hunger and thirst for an infinite goodness; quietness and gentleness of spirit; the discovery of the depth of life through suffering; the tenderness of grace; purity of heart which prepares for beatific vision; making love and peace prevail in the midst of the difficulties and noises of the world, and readiness to suffer for truth and love — these are the traits that make the Kingdom, and as their area widens will bring it into operation here among men. But there is no blinking of the fact in the Gospels that it is an adventure, and that too a _costly_ adventure. It may cost all that a person has and even the person’s life besides. It means going out into a world organized on a basis of self-seeking and calculation, and “conquering” it and transforming it into another kind of world by a confident method of love and grace. In a recurrent phrase the Book of Revelation expresses the idea of this conquering method with the words: “The Lamb made war against the beast and overcame it.”

Christ once, in a striking passage, called the method “going the second mile.” He saw how much of life and religion was “legal,” how many things were done because they were expected or required or compelled and when they were performed they were counted up and cashed in for merit. To Him this first mile of compulsion, this carefully measured mile, had almost no significance for real life as it ought to be. For Him life <span id="p134"><sup><small>[ p. 134 ]</small></sup></span> really began when one cut loose from convention and rule and system and started living toward some great goal of life for the sheer joy and thrill of it, no longer painfully counting milestones. When this second-mile spirit is born one is ready to cut off a right hand, or pluck out an eye, for the adventure, for the goal, without stopping to think of the loss. Even a Roman cross standing straight athwart the road would not turn the adventurer from His aim.

There are a number of impressive parables which vividly convey this spirit of the second mile, none certainly more impressive than that of the good Samaritan who unexpectedly does what the calculating Priest and Levite neglect to do. “The Parable of the great surprise,” as it has been called, shows the naive surprise and wonder of those who find themselves on the right hand in the Judgment and who had been so absorbed in their deeds of simple kindness and love that they had never counted them up or cashed them in for merit — “When saw we thee hungry?” The world is so accustomed to the methods of secular calculation and rationalization that this “other way” seems absurd and forbidding. It has never been tried on a large scale or in a bold, determined fashion. God’s poor little man of Assisi went all the way through with it as his method and the world reverently preserves the scenes of his life as its most sacred shrines, but it is one thing to canonize a thirteenth-century saint and another thing to take up, <span id="p135"><sup><small>[ p. 135 ]</small></sup></span> adapt and carry on his adventure in the twentieth century. John Woolman was a humble second-mile saint in the eighteenth century and once more he demonstrated the conquering power of love and grace — the lamb against the beast — but there is still much more territory to win. There can be little question that this spiritual adventure with the quiet force of love and cooperative good will lies at the very heart of the Gospel of Christ and is the main business of Christ’s men in the world.

There appears to be no way to separate ethics and religion. When they are cut apart the reality of each half comes to an end, as surely as would have been the case with the child which King Solomon proposed to divide. A religion which has only to do with a world beyond and above this world fades into an abstraction. An ethical way of life on the other hand which has no eternal significance, which does not rise above the finite and temporal, is like a Damascus river that ends in the sand and loses itself without finding itself. Finite goals are always inadequate for moral aims. One cannot draw a finite line around life and limit it to an empirical sphere without cutting its nerve of action and spoiling its adventure before it starts. All significant moral purposes reach beyond the skyline and presuppose a more yet that has no earthly terminus. The dynamic energy for the supreme adventures of the race comes into life from beyond it. There is a halo of mystery <span id="p136"><sup><small>[ p. 136 ]</small></sup></span> around all of man’s greatest undertakings. The highest creations of genius give the impression that God and man have worked together to produce it. It is not an accident that the civilization which is to bring at last a harmonized man and a harmonized society, each in cooperative accord, should be called “the Kingdom of God,” since, when it comes and in so far as it comes, it will be the creative work of God and man together, God revealed in and through humanity, man finding himself in and through the Life of God.

This message of life, this call to the task of building, as co-laborers with God, the harmonized society which is to reveal the will of God on earth ought to thrill men with an enthusiasm like that, though far greater than that, which has swept the heartstrings of the Russian youth. The dynamic is at least as real as the dynamic behind our immense electric power plants and the liberating force of this way of life when it _finds_ a man is the greatest that has ever broken into human history.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">III. THE TESTIMONY OF HUMAN EXPERIENCE</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Rufus_M_Jones/A_Preface_to_Christian_Faith_in_a_New_Age/5">
          <span class="pr-2">V. THE NATURE AND THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^1]: Hebrews XU. 27.