---
title: "Section CLXXI to CLXXV"
description: "The Kojiki"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:5:45Z
tags: Shinto, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:5:45Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Shintoism/The_Kojiki/Vol3_170">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Section CLXVI to CLXX</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Shintoism/The_Kojiki">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Shintoism/The_Kojiki/Vol3_180">
          <span class="pr-2">Section CLXXVI to CLXXX</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## SECT. CLXXI.—EMPEROR NIN-KEN.

 [^2406]

His Augustness Ohoke dwelt at the palace of Hirataka at Isono-kami, and ruled the Empire. The Heavenly Sovereign wedded Kasuga-no-oho-iratsume, the august daughter of the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-hatsuse-no-waka-take, and begot august children: Takaki-no-iratsume; next Takara-no-iratsume; next Kasubi-no-iratsume; next Tashiraka-no-iratsume; next His Grandeur Wo-hatsuse-no-waka-sazaki; next Prince Ma-waka. The child born to him by his next wife Naka-no-waku-go-no-iratsume, daughter of the Grandee Hitsuma (?) of \[338\] Wani, was: Kasuga-no-yamada-no-iratsume. The august children of this Heavenly Monarch numbered seven altogether. Of these His Augustness Wo-hatsuse-no-waka-sazaki \[was he who afterwards\] ruled the Empire.

## SECT. CLXXII—EMPEROR MU-RETSU.

His Grandeur Wo-hatsuse-no-waka-sazaki dwelt in the palace of Namiki at Hatsuse, and ruled the Empire for eight years. This Heavenly Monarch had no august children. So the Wo-hatsuse Tribe was established as <span id="p423"><sup><small>[ p. 423 ]</small></sup></span> his august proxy. His august mausoleum is on the mound of Ihatsuki at Karawoka. On the death of this Heavenly Monarch there was no prince to inherit the Empire, So His Augustness Ohodo, the fifth descendant of the Heavenly Monarch Homuda, was sent for down to the land of Afumi, and married to her Augustness Tashiraka, and presented with the Empire.

## SECT. CLXXIII.—EMPEROR KEI-TAI.

His Augustness Ohodo dwelt in the Palace of Tamaho at Ihare, and ruled the Empire. The (two) august children born to this Heavenly Monarch by Waka-hime, ancestress of the Dukes of Miwo, were: Oho-iratsuko, next Idzumo-no-iratsume. The (two) august children born to him by his next wife, Meko-no-iratsume, sister of the Chieftain Ofushi, ancestor of the Chieftains of Wohari, were: His Augustness Hiro-kuni-oshi-taka-kana-hi; next His Augustness Take-wo-hiro-kuni-oshi-tate. The (one) august child born to him by his next wife (the Great Empress) Her Augustness Tashiraka, the august daughter of the Heavenly Monarch Ohoke, was: His Augustness Ame-kuni-oshi-haruki-hiro-niha. The (one) august child born to him by his next wife Wo-kumi-no-iratsume, daughter of Prince Okinaga-no-mate, was: Sasage-no-iratsume. The three august children born to him by his next wife Kuro-hime, daughter of Prince Sakata-no-oho-mata, were: Kamu-saki-no-iratsume; next Mamuta-no-iratsume; next Uma-tsuta-no-iratsume. The (three) august children born to him by his next wife Seki-hime, daughter of Womochi Grandee of Mamuta were: Mamuta-no-oho-iratsume; next Shira-saka-no-iku-hi-no-iratsume; next Wo-nu-no-iratsume, another name for whom is Naga-me-hime. The (four) children born to him by his \[339\] <span id="p424"><sup><small>[ p. 424 ]</small></sup></span> next wife Yamato-hime, younger sister of Katabu Duke of Miwo, were: Oho-iratsume (?); next Prince Maroko; next Prince Mimi; next Aka-hime-no-iratsume. The (three) children born to him by his next wife Abe-no-haye-hime, were: Waka-ya-no-iratsume; next Tsubura-no-iratsume; next Prince Adzu. The august children of this Heavenly Monarch numbered nineteen in all (seven Kings and twelve Queens). Of these His Augustness Ame-kuni-oshi-haruki-hiro-niha \[was he who afterwards\] ruled the Empire; next His Augustness Hiro-kuni-oshi-take-kana-hi ruled the Empire; the next, Queen Sasage, presided at the temple of the Deity of Ise. In this august reign Ihawi, Lord of Tsukushi, was disobedient to the Imperial Decrees, and was exceedingly disrespectful. Soy the Great Chieftain Mononobe-no-arakawi and the Chieftain Ohotomo-no-kanamura were both sent to slay Ihawi. [^2407] The august years of this Heavenly Monarch were forty-three. His august mausoleum is at Awi in Mishima.


## SECT. CXXXIV.—EMPEROR KAN-AN.

His Augustness Hiro-kuni-oshi-take-_kana_\-hi dwelt in the Palace of Kanahashi at Magari, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Monarch had no august children. His august grave is at the village of Takaya in Furuchi in Kafuchi.

## SECT. CLXXV.—EMPEROR SEN-KUWA.

His Augustness Take-wo-hiro-kuni-oshi-tate dwelt in the Palace of Ihorinu at Hinokuma, and ruled the Empire. <span id="p425"><sup><small>[ p. 425 ]</small></sup></span> The august children born to this Heavenly Sovereign by his wife Her Augustness Tachi-bana-no-naka-tsu-hime, the august daughter of the Heavenly Sovereign Ohoke, were: Her Augustness Ishi-hime; next Her Augustness Wo-ishi-hime; next King Kura-no-waka-ye. The august children born to him by his next wife, Kafuchi-no-waku-go-hime, were: King Honoho; next King Weha. The august children of this Heavenly \[340\] Sovereign numbered altogether five (three Kings and two Queens). So King Honoho (was the ancestor of the Dukes Shihida.) Prince Weha (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Wina and of the Dukes of Tajihi.)

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Shintoism/The_Kojiki/Vol3_170">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Section CLXVI to CLXX</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Shintoism/The_Kojiki">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Shintoism/The_Kojiki/Vol3_180">
          <span class="pr-2">Section CLXXVI to CLXXX</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes


[^2411]: 422:1 p. 422 For the discontinuance of explanatory foot-notes in this concluding portion of the translation see Translator's Introduction, Sect. II. near the top of page [xv](../kj002.htm#pxv).

[^2412]: 424:1 Details of this. struggle and its causes are given in the “Chronicles of Japan,” and are discussed at length in Motowori's Commentary, Vol. XLIV, pp. 15-20. They are of no special interest.