---
title: "THE NEW RELIGIOUS REFORMATION"
description: "Adventurous Religion and Other Essays"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:28:55Z
tags: Theology, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:28:55Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Harry_Emerson_Fosdick/Adventurous_Religion_and_Other_Essays/The_Need_Of_Modern_Religious_Leadership">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">THE NEED OF MODERN RELIGIOUS LEADERSHIP</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Harry_Emerson_Fosdick/Adventurous_Religion_and_Other_Essays">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



<span id="p301">[<sup><small>p. 301</small></sup>]</span>

## I

PropaBty the first appropriate remark is that there is very little new about it. Religion, which in its vital origins is like a spring, is continually being cluttered with débris, stopped by its own sediment, impeded by accumulations from without, and the history of religion reveals the repeated necessity of clearing out the spring again and letting its waters flow freely. Christianity, for example, began with a few disciples keeping company with their Master and learning how to live. They recited no creeds, they enforced no sacraments, they belonged to no formal organization. Then the Master went away and the tremendous forces of history took hold on the movement which he so vitally had begun. Under pressure of necessity Christians built great organizations, elaborated formal creeds, symbolized their experience in impressive rituals; and as Christianity thus developed, a danger, little present <span id="p302">[<sup><small>p. 302</small></sup>]</span> at the first, grew imminent and menacing. Folk could now indulge in second-hand Christianity. They could join an organization, recite a creed, perform a ritual, take the secondary and derived expressions of Christian experience without partaking of the experience itself. They could substitute the outward symbol for the inward life, the formula for the fact. All through Christian history, therefore, the gist of every vital reformation has been the endeavor to recover the freshness of spiritual experience again, regain the spontaneity and vigor of the soul’s immediate awareness of the divine Presence, brush through the accumulated débris of conventionalized religion to the living fountains of the spirit from which all true religion comes.

If, then, we need a religious reformation today, there is essentially nothing new about it. It is the same kind of reformation which the Master brought into the formal and stereotyped religion of his time. One immediate problem in the Master’s ministry was the contrast between vital Judaism as he had doubtless found it in his home in Nazareth, and conventional Judaism as it was exhibited in the official <span id="p303">[<sup><small>p. 303</small></sup>]</span> religion of his generation. The pattern of formal Judaism in Jesus’ time is easily summarized: the Jews are the true people of God; to be a son of Abraham, to be circumcised, and to keep the law are the assurance of salvation; the rabbis have the Scriptures, which are inspired, and, as well, the traditions of the elders which explain what the Scriptures mean; if a man believes what the rabbis teach and does what the law commands, he is a faithful Jew, and in the good time coming when God will punish his enemies and reward his friends those who are saved will be in paradise while the rest are damned. That was conventionalized Judaism. It was far from the vital religion of the great prophets crying, like Micah, ““What doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with thy God?’ It was the saddest of all sights, religion grown cold and congealed into rigid forms. There is, however, nothing in such conventionalized religion which should sound unfamiliar to a Christian. We are surrounded by it on every side. Put church for synagogue, baptism for circumcision, New Testament for Old, the creeds of the church for the traditions <span id="p304">[<sup><small>p. 304</small></sup>]</span> of the elders, the clergy for the rabbis, heaven for paradise and hell for Sheol, and you have conventionalized Christianity. They have changed the cloth, but it is cut to the same old pattern. Yet it was against such stereotyped religion, with its lack of human sympathy, its exclusiveness and its hypocrisy, that Jesus hurled his most terrific denunciations, and the struggle against it led his footsteps by inevitable paths to Calvary.

This perennial necessity of recovering liberty and movement in religion, of thawing out its frozen forms, restoring spontaneity and creativeness again and so replacing static rigidity, which is death, by freedom and progress, which are life, is the clear lesson of all religious history whether in Christendom or out of it. The process always is disturbing, but a religion which lacks the vitality to attempt it, which no longer has creative powers strong enough to grow impatient of old formulations and to cast them off when they are obsolete, is already as good as dead. The power of reformation is to religion what the power of recuperation is to health.

<span id="p305">[<sup><small>p. 305</small></sup>]</span>

## II

There are many ways in which the new reformation might be described, but in this essay it will be presented in a single contrast: the religion of Jesus as distinguished from the religion about Jesus. No dilemma is intended here, as though a Christian, choosing one, must give up the other, but a clear contrast is intended without which some of the most distinctive elements in contemporary religious thought cannot be understood.

There are two types of Christianity. One is the religion which Jesus Christ himself possessed and by which he lived, his filial fellowship with God, his purity, unselfishness, sincerity, sacrifice, his exaltation of spiritual values, and his love for men—the religion of Jesus. The other consists of things said of and believed concerning Jesus, theories to account for him, accumulated explanations and interpretations of him—the religion about Jesus.

The religion of Jesus wells up in beautiful souls from St. John to Whittier, in strong souls like Savonarola or Hugh Latimer; and in multitudes of obscure but lovely people his <span id="p306">[<sup><small>p. 306</small></sup>]</span> spirit, his life of trust in God and love for men, his courage and his kindliness return, and the Master’s religion itself comes back again. But always woven with this first kind of Christianity is the religion about Jesus. It consists of theories concerning his preéxistence, birth, miracles, physical resurrection and return, theologies concerning his metaphysical relationship with God, his atonement on the Cross, his presence in the sacraments.

The Christianity of any generation is a blend of these two interwoven strands, and one of the most readily distinguishable and most influential movements of our time springs from the desire somehow to escape from the too-great dominance of an inherited religion about Jesus and to recover for our modern life the major meanings of the religion which he himself pos- | sessed.

Let us once for all guard ourselves here against misunderstanding. One does not mean that to a Christian who adores Jesus theories about him are avoidable or valueless. We inevitably seek intelligible explanations of anything that interests us deeply. The important matter in the sun’s relationship to us is its <span id="p307">[<sup><small>p. 307</small></sup>]</span> light and heat. These blessed men before there were any theories about them. They blessed men when folk looked up in ignorant wonder at the sky or thought the sun a chariot driven by a god. But, for all that, we value our astronomical explanations. They do clear matters up. We rightly wish to understand anything that shines on us like the sun.

So, too, a thoughtful Christian who falls under the spell of the Master’s life, feels his radiance and surrenders to his influence, will wish to understand him, will try to set him in intelligible relationship with the rest of his knowledge, and so inevitably will have a religion about him. History, however, makes obvious the danger lurking in this process. The legitimate desire for intelligible explanations can deteriorate into contentment with conventional formulas. Interpretations of Jesus, cut to pattern, can become stereotyped, can be inherited, learned by rote, and required by orthodoxy, until an official religion about Jesus covers, smothers, and all but destroys the religion of Jesus. That obviously is happening to-day. Statisticians tell us that there are 576,000,000 Christians on this planet—commenting <span id="p308">[<sup><small>p. 308</small></sup>]</span> on which a secular journal recently remarked that we sometimes have our hours of depression when we wonder where they live. What explains this discrepancy in Christendom between the number of Christians on the one side and on the other the inefficiency of Christianity to transform society and save the world? Surely, the explanation centers in this crucial fact: multitudes of so-called Christians have not the religion of Jesus, not his spirit, his inner fellowship with the Unseen, his reverence for personality, his magnanimity, his sincerity, his courage, and his love. They do not even think of Christianity in terms of the religion of Jesus. They have a religion about Jesus. They suppose that that is Christianity. Asa matter of fact, one cannot so have a religion about Jesus that by itself it will make him a Christian. A man is vitally and inwardly a Christian only to the degree in which he himself possesses the kind of religion which Jesus Christ possessed.

## III

The contrast between these two types of Christianity throws instructive light on the <span id="p309">[<sup><small>p. 309</small></sup>]</span> restless spirit now abroad in the churches, The present disturbed condition of America's religious life presents a serious problem. The failure of Old restraints and the impotence of Old dogmatisms, the obvious futility of sectarian alignments to represent contemporary issues, the aggressiveness of impatient radicals, the defensive militancy of reactionaries, and the general confusion and bewilderment, are symptoms of inevitable change. Many factors conspire to cause this situation. Many influences are seeking to guide and use it. There is no neat formula that Will explain it all and no facile solution that Will resolve its dificulties. One element in it, however, is full of promise. There is a wide-spread, deep-seated, positive desire on the part of many Christians in all the churches to recover for our modern life, for its personal character and its social relationships, the religion of Jesus as distinguished from the accumulated, conventionalized, largely inadequate and sometimes grossly false religion about Jesus.

Such a phrasing of the reformatory movement in the churches puts the matter in positive terms. It needs to be put that way. Too much <span id="p310">[<sup><small>p. 310</small></sup>]</span> so-called liberalism has been negative. It has been conceived in the spirit of protest and has expressed itself in denials and attacks. So futile and so perilous to real reform is this negative spirit that those who are deeply concerned for a revitalized and powerful Christian movement in this country may divide their fear equally between obscurantists on one side and unspiritual liberals on the other.

The destructive approach to reform which deliberately sets out to clear the ground of the obsolete as preparatory to establishing the new is sometimes explicitly defended. A religious reformation is conceived in terms of a building program where an old brownstone front must be torn down before a modern apartment house can be erected. The whole figure is false. Rather, let a man go out in April to the woods and see the scrub-oak leaves still clinging to the boughs. The bitter cold has fallen, but the leaves still clng. The tempestuous winds have blown, but the leaves are still there. They are old, brown, wizened, dead, but they will not let go. If aman says that there never can be a green and blooming oak until these old leaves are gone, that is true, but the way out is not <span id="p311">[<sup><small>p. 311</small></sup>]</span> destruction. Pick every dead leaf off; you still will have no green and blooming oak. Let the spring come, however, the sun grow warm and the sap rise, and the emergent vitality will push the obsolete away and bring in the new summer so gloriously that destruction will be lost sight of in creation.

That is a true figure of a vital spiritual reformation. It must come from the emergence of an inward, conquering life. Its sloughing off of the old must be incidental to its triumphant creation of the new. Where, then, in this present situation shall we look for that vital Christianity whose emergence shall push the outworn aside and usher the churches into a new day of spiritual power? History answers that question. All the vital reformations in the Christian church have had one common element: the religion of Jesus has pushed its way up through the obscurities and formalities of an accumulated religion concerning him and has taken once more the center of the scene.

That proposition is important enough to deserve illustration.

St. Francis of Assisi represented a real reformation <span id="p312">[<sup><small>p. 312</small></sup>]</span> of spiritual life within the Roman Church. Did not he have a religion about Jesus? Of course he did, but it was not that which distinguished him. His religion about Jesus was identical with that which was held and had been held for centuries by his fellow Catholics. What distinguished him, so.that his name shines brightly yet across the centuries, was the reémergence in him of the life that once was lived in Galilee. In him, afresh, the religion of Jesus appeared—his purity, his care for people, his unpurchasable devotion, his magnanimity, his preference for poverty with spiritual freedom to luxury without it. Folk touching St. Francis felt again the spirit of the Man of Nazareth.

Multitudes, therefore, who knew all that the ehurches taught about their Lord, eagerly thronged around St. Francis saying, like the © Greeks to Philip, the disciple, “Sir, we would see Jesus.”

This same proposition holds true about Martin Luther, different from St. Francis though he was. He had a religion about Jesus, but it was not that which distinguished him. His theology about Christ differed little from the <span id="p313">[<sup><small>p. 313</small></sup>]</span> classic formulations which had come down out of the great creeds of the fourth century. What distinguished Luther was something much more dynamic, as one must see who reads his tract on Christian Liberty. It is one of the few primary works of the Reformation, and two propositions are presented in it: First, “A Christian man is the most free lord of all, and subject to none.” How Luther trumpeted that! Second, “A Christian man is the most dutiful servant of all, and subject to every one.” ‘That is the gist of the Christian’s attitude as Luther saw it: free from all men, unafraid of the face of mortal clay, that he may be servant of all men and at the disposal of everyone. That, however, is not primarily a religion about Jesus: that is the way in which Jesus himself actually lived, and it was the vital upthrust of that free, creative spirit which put dynamic power into the Reformation. The same principle holds true of John Wesley’s reformation within Protestantism. The visitor still can see in Bristol, England, the chapel where Wesley first organized his work, the bare boarded rooms where his first theological disciples lived and studied, the small <span id="p314">[<sup><small>p. 314</small></sup>]</span> window through which he used to watch the gathering congregation to see how many vehement antagonists he must expect that night, the pulpit from which he poured out his soul, and the trapdoor through which, it is said, he escaped into a secret passage-way when the mob came in to seize him. Once more, in his case, the religion about Jesus which he stoutly held differed in no wise from that which was stoutly held by millions of his fellow Christians. What distinguished Wesley was something else. In him the religion of Jesus came back again, especially his care for the wayward, neglected, forgotten masses of the people. It was the accent of the Man of Nazareth which the Kingswood colliers heard when they gathered, thousands strong, upon the open hillsides and listened to Wesley until one could see the white lines down their cheeks where the tears chased one another through the grime. All vital reforms have been thus creative, not negative, and so far as Christianity is concerned, no truer description can easily be found of that force whose emergence again and again has sloughed off the obsolete and welled up in transformed personal character and redeemed <span id="p315">[<sup><small>p. 315</small></sup>]</span> social life than to call it the religion of Jesus. That this process is needed in our churches now seems obvious. They do have a religion about Jesus. They often bristle with that. They often grow bitter and obdurate about that. They often are divided and plunged into controversies by that. And all the time the religion of Jesus suffers loss. One wishes that from every housetop in America one could say in the words of the New Testament, “If any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.”

## IV

It is clear that the new reformation thus understood becomes something more than a matter of changed theological formulations. It needs to be more than that. ‘The unwillingness of reactionary minds to translate the abiding spiritual values of the Christian Gospel out of mental settings no longer tenable by well-instructed thought into categories congenial with the rest of our knowledge is exceedingly perilous to the Christian faith. 'Those who care most about the continuance of Christianity as <span id="p316">[<sup><small>p. 316</small></sup>]</span> a vital influence in the new generation and who see most clearly the intellectual obstacles now embarrassing our youth when they try to consent to current Christianity will be most eager to achieve this restating of Christian faith in understandable terms. But the new reformation is much more than this challenge to our minds; it is a searching challenge to our consciences. It means the creative living of the principles of Jesus.

Why is it that so many of our ordination councils, where young men entering the ministry are put on trial for heresy before they have begun, seem so utterly to miss the point? Why do they so commonly leave the impression of having failed to get at a young man’s real Christianity? An experienced minister recently exclaimed that, just as a bandit holding up a passer-by secures only his small change, the chance possessions carried on his person, and not his bank account, so our ordination councils, holding up young men at the theological pistol point, succeed in getting only their theological small change and miss entirely their real gospel.

The reason for this is clear: many questions <span id="p317">[<sup><small>p. 317</small></sup>]</span> go deeper than any inquiries about conventional orthodoxy can ever go. One often wishes that he could turn on the inquisitors at a heresy trial or an ordination council with questions such as these:

> How much of our own Christianity is the religion about Jesus? Where did you get it? You were taught it, were you not? ‘These statements about Jesus you learned from others. They are historic interpretations, have long been written down, can be inherited, learned by rote and recited, so that if you had been born in Japan and not in America you might have been taught to say similar things about Buddha, and your religion then would have been a creed about Buddha instead of a creed about Christ. How much of your Christianity is of that sort— second-hand, derived, the recitation of what others have thought about the Lord? And how much is not of that sort? How much of your Christianity is the vital emergence in you of the spirit of Jesus himself—his life with his own soul, with his fellows, with his God—-so that the religion which he possessed you do now by God’s grace in some measure inwardly and vitally possess yourself, and know in consequence what Paul meant by his reiterated and glowing theme, “Christ in you”? How much of your Christianity is of that quality and power, and if this young man possesses that inward fire are you sure that you would have Christ’s sanction in testing him <span id="p318">[<sup><small>p. 318</small></sup>]</span> by matters which Christ never mentioned and which | are alien from anything he ever taught?

It is probably an idle dream, but one wonders if even theological inquisitors might not be moved by such an appeal from formulations about Jesus to the spirit of Jesus.

At any rate, whatever may be the attitude of theological reactionaries toward this appeal, there is no doubt of the challenge which it presents to liberals. If the reformatory movement means this deep and searching matter, it is not an easy enterprise to undertake. Too much liberalism has been easy. It has accepted a change of opinion, but it has not girded itself for a creative spiritual task. Retreating from the austere demands and solemn dedications of an old-fashioned religion, men have fallen back on a cheap and superficial modernity whereby they have tried to escape the rigors, while keeping the comforts, of the faith. “A feather-bed to catch falling Christians” is no caricature of a certain type of liberalism discoverable in our churches.

But this appeal which we are making here allows no such easy-going relaxation of moral vigor and spiritual earnestness to masquerade <span id="p319">[<sup><small>p. 319</small></sup>]</span> as a religious reformation. ‘The fact is that nothing is simpler and less expensive than accepting a religion about Jesus. That can be done by rote. But to enter even a little into the possession of the religion of Jesus, to make that real in personal character and social relationships, is the most searching adventure of the human soul.

## V

Indeed, appeal to the religion of Jesus is not intellectually so simple as might at first appear. Literalism and legalism even here ean do their deadly work. Jesus himself can be given the kind of verbal authoritativeness against which he fought throughout his ministry. His principles can be made into rules; the forms of thinking of his generation which he shared, such as the explanation of diseases by demonic possession, can be regarded as infallible because he used them; and once more the letter can slay the spirit in his case as it has done with every spiritual leader in history. When one appeals across the centuries to the religion of Jesus, one does not mean to ascribe finality even to that, as though God had not <span id="p320">[<sup><small>p. 320</small></sup>]</span> spoken since, as though no new light had broken on the world. If God is not speaking now he never has spoken at all. But one does mean that the Master’s way of living is central in Christianity, and that involved in it are convictions, motives, ideals and principles so supreme that Christianity must always regain its strength and refresh its purity at the place where it started—the Master, namely, saying to his disciples, “Follow me.”

While, therefore, the appeal to the religion of Jesus does present intellectual problems, questions of historic scholarship not always easy to answer, its chief effect should be mentally clarifying. What happens when a new founder of religion appears in history is evident. He comes with his personality and his gospel, and around the magnetism of his influence his disciples gather. ‘Then he goes away and his followers across the generations formulate his teachings, run them into the molds of successive philosophies and world-views, build up theologies to explain him and weave legends to account for him, until, were he to return, no one would be so surprised at things said and believed concerning him as the founder himself would be.

<span id="p321">[<sup><small>p. 321</small></sup>]</span>

That happened to Gautama Buddha. His own religion left even the existence of a personal God out of account. His was a deep, inward, and noble religion of self-renunciation, but the existence and availability of God played no part in it. If, therefore, Gautama could walk through China and Japan to-day and see the temples built to his glory, the mythologies rehearsed concerning him, the theologies believed about him, the rituals performed before him—if he who took no account of the existence of God could see himself worshiped as a god, while the religion by which he actually lived is smothered under the accumulated religion about him, his constant plaint would be, “If this is Buddhism, then I am no Buddhist.”

A like fate has befallen the Master. Wide areas of his church have left behind them the religion by which he lived and have substituted another kind of religion altogether. An American preacher recently was asked whether a man who perfectly incarnated the principles of the Sermon on the Mount, its inward companionship with God, its unsullied integrity of soul, its unstinted magnanimity and boundless love, would thereby be a Christian, and he emphatically <span id="p322">[<sup><small>p. 322</small></sup>]</span> said ““No!” Christlikeness, that is, so far as some groups in our churches are concerned, no longer is the criterion of Christianity. Something else has been substituted. A religion about Jesus has crowded aside the religion of Jesus, and so far has this gone that one of our well-known theological professors recently declared with unashamed candor that Jesus Christ himself was not a Christian.

A truth is there which that professor did not intend. For if Jesus should come back again to see the things done in his name, hear the creeds rehearsed about him and watch the rituals performed to his glory, his continual cry about much of it would be, “If this is Christianity, then I am no Christian!”

Many of the new generation, therefore, determined to be honest about religion, certain that religion is indispensable and in its deepest meanings true, are rediscovering their Christianity at the very point where the theological professor lost sight of his—in the Master himself. ‘They go to church and listen to the things said, sung, and recited about Jesus. How unreal much of it is! It is derived Christianity twice and thrice removed from its vital origins. But Jesus Christ himself is not unreal. <span id="p323">[<sup><small>p. 323</small></sup>]</span> His fellowship with God, his Good Samaritan, his Golden Rule, his Sermon on the Mount, his law of finding life by losing it, his sincerity, his courage, his kindliness, his Cross—they are not unreal. There one touches directly the supreme exhibition of spiritual life in human history.

If, then, an objector says that any one so adoring Jesus and wishing to share his spirit must have high thoughts about him, that is true. For my part, I have a theology about Jesus, am sure that if one does not find the Divine in that transcendent and crystalline life one will not be likely to find the Divine anywhere, and as the years pass I see more clearly, not less, the light of the knowledge of God’s glory in his face. The development of Christian thought across the centuries has its justification in this fact—that one way or another, in terms of congenial thought and current category, the mind is bound not only to adore Jesus, but to interpret him. Wherever the religion of Jesus grows vivid and strong in thoughtful men, it will express itself in a religion about him. But this derived element must not play usurper. Man’s thoughts about the Master must not smother the influence <span id="p324">[<sup><small>p. 324</small></sup>]</span> of the Master himself. The obscurantisms and perversions which have cursed and still do curse official Christianity over wide areas of Christendom spring largely from this fatal source.

After all, Christlikeness is the central criterion of Christianity, and to substitute anything else is to ruin Christianity.

In the nation, on a festival like Washington’s Birthday, one sees the same process afoot which to-day is forcing the church either to reform or to disintegrate. Thousands of eloquent orations concerning Washington! Multitudes of people easily and glibly patriotic about Washington! One does not desire that the American people should cease to be patriotic about Washington, but the urgent need which, unmet, may yet despoil America of her true glory lies elsewhere. The patriotism of Washington—that is another matter, and it is much more difficult to find.

## VI

This emphasis upon the centrality of the spirit of Jesus in Christianity is crucially important, if our modern problems are to be <span id="p325">[<sup><small>p. 325</small></sup>]</span> successfully met. Here is a new generation needing as much as any generation in human history a vital and dynamic faith, but a mere religion about Jesus does not get within reaching distance of our major problems. A man can have a religion about Jesus and harbor bitter racial prejudice; he can have a religion about Jesus and be a rampant militarist, a narrow nationalist, a hard-handed industrial autocrat; he can have a religion about Jesus and be unfit to live with in a home. But no one can have the religion of Jesus and be that.

To be sure, this appeal from inherited formulas to spiritual realities will seem to many revolutionary. Nevertheless, while no movement as radical and spiritual as this can fail to be disturbing, its major and ultimate effect should be uniting. What common ground is there on which the varied sects and churches of Christendom can stand together except this—they all start with and include the religion of Jesus? It is not that which has divided them until their wars and controversies have made Christian history the opposite of Christian and to-day makes their testimony so often weak and fatuous. What has wrought havoc is the insistence on this or that item in <span id="p326">[<sup><small>p. 326</small></sup>]</span> the religion about Jesus as though it were central and indispensable. 'The Master’s spirit has not divided Christians, but insistence on official creeds and sacramental theories and ecclesiastical institutions concerned with Jesus has wrought the sorry work. To recover, therefore, the original centrality of Christian discipleship is not a schismatic and destructive task. It is the only hope of reuniting Christians. At one place only do we stand together —where the religion of Jesus wells up in men of many creeds and churches so that, differing widely in every other respect, they exhibit a like quality of life and are manifestly baptized by the one Spirit. Christlikeness as the criterion of Christianity is not divisive; it is unifying. The more it is made central the more Christians, with all their different formulations of thought and institutions, can worship and work together.

At any rate, the new reformation is quietly but pervasively on its way. Fear it, all those who do not wish Jesus Christ taken in earnest! But no one else need fear it. One of the greatest hours in Christian history wil! have struck when once more the religion of Jesus takes the center of the scene.



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Harry_Emerson_Fosdick/Adventurous_Religion_and_Other_Essays/The_Need_Of_Modern_Religious_Leadership">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">THE NEED OF MODERN RELIGIOUS LEADERSHIP</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Harry_Emerson_Fosdick/Adventurous_Religion_and_Other_Essays">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
