---
title: "Workbook V — Theology of The Urantia Book — 13. Local Universe Creative Spirit"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: theology, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1959 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/12">12. The Creator Sons</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/14">14. The Power Directors</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

## I. Personalization Of The Creative Spirit  

1. **Proposition**. Concomitant with the creation of a Creator Son, the Infinite Spirit individualizes a new and unique representation of himself to become the companion of the Creator Son.
	> “When a Creator Son is personalized by the Universal Father and the Eternal Son, then does the Infinite Spirit individualize a new and unique representation of himself to accompany this Creator Son to the realms of space, there to be his companion, first, in physical organization and, later, in creation and ministry to the creatures of the newly projected universe.” [UB 34:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p0_1)

2. **Proposition**. Upon the completion of physical creation, the Master Spirit of the superuniverse initiates the personalization of the local Universe Mother Spirit
	> “. . . when the Deity-embraced Master Spirit emerges to the recognition of his fellows, there occurs what is known as a ‘primary eruption.’ This is a tremendous spiritual flash, a phenomenon clearly discernible as far away as the headquarters of the superuniverse concerned; and simultaneously with this little-understood Trinity manifestation there occurs a marked change in the nature of the creative spirit presence and power of the Infinite Spirit resident in the local universe concerned. In response to these Paradise phenomena there immediately personalizes, in the very presence of the Creator Son, a new personal representation of the Infinite Spirit. This is the Divine Minister. The individualized Creative Spirit helper of the Creator Son has become his personal creative associate, the local universe Mother Spirit.” [UB 34:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p1_1)

3. **Proposition**. During physical creation the Creative Spirit is incompletely differentiated from the Infinite Spirit, but after the divine embrace of the Master Spirit, she changes to the personal likeness of this Master Spirit.
	> “. . . The Spirit presence in the local universe during the time of purely physical creation or organization was incompletely differentiated from the spirit of the Paradise Infinite Spirit; whereas, after the reappearance of the supervising Master Spirit from the secret embrace of the Gods and following the flash of spiritual energy, the local universe manifestation of the Infinite Spirit suddenly and completely changes to the personal likeness of that Master Spirit who was in transmuting liaison with the Infinite Spirit. The local universe Mother Spirit thus acquires a personal nature tinged by that of the Master Spirit of the superuniverse of astronomic jurisdiction.” [UB 34:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p1_3)

4. **Proposition**. The Universe Spirit of Nebadon is of the sixth group of Supreme Spirits, No. 611,121.
	> “The Universe Mother Spirit of Salvington, the associate of Michael in the control and administration of Nebadon, is of the sixth group of Supreme Spirits, being the 611,121st of that order. She volunteered to accompany Michael on the occasion of his liberation from Paradise obligations and has ever since functioned with him in creating and governing his universe.” [UB 33:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/33#p3_2)

## II. Nature Of The Divine Minister

1. **Proposition**. The Universe Mother Spirit possesses all of the Later, she also has complete control of mind gravity.
	> “From the earliest association with the Creator Son the Universe Spirit possesses all the physical-control attributes of the Infinite Spirit, including the full endowment of antigravity. Upon the attainment of personal status the Universe Spirit exerts just as full and complete control of mind gravity, in the local universe, as would the Infinite Spirit if personally present.” [UB 34:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p2_2)

2. **Proposition**. The Creative Spirit is coresponsible with the Creator Son for the creation and fostering of their universe.
	> “The Creative Spirit is coresponsible with the Creator Son in producing the creatures of the worlds and never fails the Son in all efforts to uphold and conserve these creations. Life is ministered and maintained through the agency of the Creative Spirit. ‘You send forth your Spirit, and they are created. You renew the face of the earth.’” [UB 34:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p2_4)

## III. Universe Son And Creative Spirit

1. **Proposition**. Both the Son and the Spirit react to both physical and spiritual realities.
	> “A Creative Spirit reacts to both physical and spiritual realities; so does a Creator Son; and thus are they co-ordinate and associate in the administration of a local universe of time and space.” [UB 34:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p0_2)

2. **Proposition**. While the Mother Spirit acknowledges the Son as sovereign, the Son accords the Spirit co-ordinate position and equality of authority.
	> “The Master Creator Son is the personal sovereign of his universe, but in all the details of its management the Universe Spirit is codirector with the Son. While the Spirit ever acknowledges the Son as sovereign and ruler, the Son always accords the Spirit a coordinate position and equality of authority in all the affairs of the realm. In all his work of love and life bestowal the Creator Son is always and ever perfectly sustained and ably assisted by the all-wise and ever-faithful Universe Spirit and by all of her diversified retinue of angelic personalities. Such a Divine Minister is in reality the mother of spirits and spirit personalities, the ever-present and all-wise adviser of the Creator Son, a faithful and true manifestation of the Paradise Infinite Spirit.” [UB 33:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/33#p3_3)

3. **Proposition**. The Creative Spirit is limited by time; the Creator Son is not. Working together, they function independently of both time and space.
	> “Only as regards the element of time is a Creative Spirit ever limited in her universe ministrations. A Creator Son acts instantaneously throughout his universe; but the Creative Spirit must reckon with time in the ministration of the universal mind except as she consciously and designedly avails herself of the personal prerogatives of the Universe Son. . . .” [UB 34:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p3_4)

4. **Proposition**. The Mother Spirit never leaves the universe headquarters. The Creator Son may come and go.
	> “The Universe Mother Spirit, however, never leaves the local universe headquarters world. The spirit of the Creator Son may and does function independently of the personal presence of the Son, but not so with her personal spirit. The Holy Spirit of the Divine Minister would become nonfunctional if her personal presence should be removed from Salvington. . . .” [UB 34:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p4_7)

## IV. The Ministry Of The Spirit

1. **Proposition**. In the universe, the Son functions as a father, the Spirit as a mother.
	> “The Son functions as a father in his local universe. The Spirit, as mortal creatures would understand, enacts the role of a mother, always assisting the Son and being everlastingly indispensable to the administration of the universe. . . .” [UB 33:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/33#p3_4)

2. **Proposition**. The Creative Spirit is independent of space, but not of time. She is equally and diffusely present throughout her entire local universe.
	> “In personal prerogatives a Creative Spirit is wholly and entirely independent of space, but not of time. There is no specialized personal presence of such a Universe Spirit on either the constellation or system headquarters. She is equally and diffusely present throughout her entire local universe and is, therefore, just as literally and personally present on one world as on any other.” [UB 34:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p3_3)

3. **Proposition**. The local universe has three spirit circuits.
	> “There are three distinct spirit circuits in the local universe of Nebadon:
	> “1. The bestowal spirit of the Creator Son, the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth.
	> “2. The spirit circuit of the Divine Minister, the Holy Spirit.
	> “3. The intelligence-ministry circuit, including the more or less unified activities but diverse functioning of the seven adjutant mind-spirits.” [UB 34:4.1-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p4_1)

4. **Proposition**. The Creative Spirit functions with the Son in producing a vast array of Sons extending from Gabriel to the Material Sons.
	> “In the creation of a universe of intelligent creatures the Creative Mother Spirit functions first in the sphere of universe perfection, collaborating with the Son in the production of the Bright and Morning Star. Subsequently the offspring of the Spirit increasingly approach the order of created beings on the planets, even as the Sons grade downward from the Melchizedeks to the Material Sons, who actually contact with the mortals of the realms. . . .” [UB 34:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p2_5)

5. **Proposition**. When Life Carriers fabricate mortal bodies the Creative Spirit contributes the “breath of life.
	> “. . . In the later evolution of mortal creatures the Life Carrier Sons provide the physical body, fabricated out of the existing organized material of the realm, while the Universe Spirit contributes the ‘breath of life.’” [UB 34:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p2_5)

## V. The Spirit As Related To Man

1. **Proposition**. It is the purpose of spirit ministry to provide strength for the “inner man.” Those “who are led by the spirit of God are the sons of God.”
	> “The purpose of all this ministration is, ‘That you may be strengthened with power through His spirit in the inner man.’ And all this represents but the preliminary steps to the final attainment of the perfection of faith and service, that experience wherein you shall be ‘filled with all the fullness of God, ‘for all those who are led by the spirit of God are the sons of God.’” [UB 34:6.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p6_10)

2. **Proposition**. The presence of the divine spirit is the “water of life” which prevents the consuming thirst of mortal discontent.
	> “It is the presence of the divine Spirit, the water of life, that prevents the consuming thirst of mortal discontent and that indescribable hunger of the unspiritualized human mind. Spirit-motivated beings ‘never thirst, for this spiritual water shall be in them a well of satisfaction springing up into life everlasting.’. . .” [UB 34:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p6_8)

3. **Proposition**. Such divinely refreshed souls are all but independent of mortal environment.
	> “. . . Such divinely watered souls are all but independent of material environment as regards the joys of living and the satisfactions of earthly existence. They are spiritually illuminated and refreshed, morally strengthened and endowed.” [UB 34:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p6_8)

4. **Proposition**. Man’s power and achievement is “according to his mercy, through the renewing of the Spirit.” Spiritual effort results in spiritual exhaustion. “The Spirit gives life.”
	> “The divine Spirit is the source of continual ministry and encouragement to the children of men. Your power and achievement is ‘according to his mercy, through the renewing of the Spirit.’ Spiritual life, like physical energy, is consumed. Spiritual effort results in relative spiritual exhaustion. The whole ascendant experience is real as well as spiritual; therefore, it is truly written, ‘It is the Spirit that quickens.’ ‘The Spirit gives life.’” [UB 34:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p6_5)

5. **Proposition**. The spirit of the Divine Minister and the Spirit of Truth work with mortals as one presence.
	> “. . . The Spirit of Truth works as one with the presence of the spirit of the Divine Minister. This dual spirit liaison hovers over the worlds, seeking to teach truth and to spiritually enlighten the minds of men, to inspire the souls of the creatures of the ascending races, and to lead the peoples dwelling on the evolutionary planets ever towards their Paradise goal of divine destiny.” [UB 34:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p5_4)

6. **Proposition**. The Spirit never drives, only leads. The domination of the Spirit is never tainted with coercion nor compromised by compulsion.
	> “The Spirit never _drives_, only leads. If you are a willing learner, if you want to attain spirit levels and reach divine heights, if you sincerely desire to reach the eternal goal, then the divine Spirit will gently and lovingly lead you along the pathway of sonship and spiritual progress. Every step you take must be one of willingness, intelligent and cheerful co-operation. The domination of the Spirit is never tainted with coercion nor compromised by compulsion.” [UB 34:6.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p6_11)

7. **Proposition**. Theory cannot transform human character. Theoretical truth is dead unless the Spirit breathes upon the forms and formulas of righteousness.
	> “The dead theory of even the highest religious doctrines is powerless to transform human character or to control mortal behavior. What the world of today needs is the truth which your teacher of old declared: ‘Not in word only but also in power and in the Holy Spirit.’ The seed of theoretical truth is dead, the highest moral concepts without effect, unless and until the divine Spirit breathes upon the forms of truth and quickens the formulas of righteousness.” [UB 34:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p6_6)

8. **Proposition**. Spirit domination of a human life yields the fruits of the spirit: Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance.
	> “The consciousness of the spirit domination of a human life is presently attended by an increasing exhibition of the characteristics of the Spirit in the life reactions of such a spiritled mortal, ‘for the fruits of the spirit are love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance.’ Such spirit-guided and divinely illuminated mortals, while they yet tread the lowly paths of toil and in human faithfulness perform the duties of their earthly assignments, have already begun to discern the lights of eternal life as they glimmer on the faraway shores of another world; already have they begun to comprehend the reality of that inspiring and comforting truth, ‘The kingdom of God is not meat and drink but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.’” [UB 34:6.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p6_13)

9. **Proposition**. Mind, before capacity to learn from experience, is the domain of the Master Physical Controllers. Before worship and wisdom, mind is the domain of the adjutant spirits. When spiritual response is established, mind becomes encircuited with the universe Mother Spirit.
	> “Living mind, prior to the appearance of capacity to learn from experience, is the ministry domain of the Master Physical Controllers. Creature mind, before acquiring the ability to recognize divinity and worship Deity, is the exclusive domain of the adjutant spirits. With the appearance of the spiritual response of the creature intellect, such created minds at once become supeminded, being instantly, encircuited in the spirit cycles of the local universe Mother Spirit.” [UB 36:5.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p5_15)

## VI. Seven Stages Of Development

1. **Proposition**. There are seven stages to the career of a local universe Mother Spirit:
	> 1. Initial Paradise Differentiation.
	> 2. Preliminary Greatorship Training.
	> 3. Stage of Physical Creation.
	> 4. Life-Creation Era.
	> 5. Postbestowal Ages.
	> 6. Ages of Light and Life.
	> 7. Unrevealed Career. See: [UB 17:6.3-5,7-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p6_3)

2. **Proposition**. After the pledge of subordination, the Creator Son constituted the Spirit coruler of the universe.
	> “After this pledge of subordination by the Creative Mother Spirit, Michael of Nebadon nobly acknowledged his eternal dependence on his Spirit companion, constituting the Spirit coruler of his universe domains and requiring all their creatures to pledge themselves in loyalty to the Spirit as they had to the Son; and there issued and went forth the final ‘Proclamation of Equality.’ . . .” [UB 33:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/33#p3_6)

3. **Proposition**. The postbestowal stage of the Divine Minister becomes settled and secure.
	> “Upon the completion of the Creator Son’s seventh and final creature bestowal, the uncertainties of periodic isolation terminate for the Divine Minister, and the Son’s universe helper becomes forever settled in surety and control. It is at the enthronement of the Creator Son as a Master Son, at the jubilee of jubilees, that the Universe Spirit, before the assembled hosts, first makes public and universal acknowledgment of subordination to the Son, pledging fidelity and obedience. This event occurred in Nebadon at the time of Michael’s return to Salvington after the Urantian bestowal. . . .” [UB 33:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/33#p3_5)

## VII. Seven Adjutant Mind-Spirits

1. **Proposition**. These spirits function in the human mind in accordance with its capacity of receptivity.
	> The seven adjutant mind-spirits are called by names which are the equivalents of the following designations: intuition, understanding, courage, knowledge, counsel, worship, and wisdom. These mind-spirits send forth their influence into all the inhabited worlds as a differential urge, each seeking receptivity capacity for manifestation quite apart from the degree to which its fellows may find reception and opportunity for function.” [UB 36:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p5_2)

2. **Proposition**. These adjutant spirits were known to the prophet Isaiah. [(Isaiah 11:2,3)](/en/Bible/Isaiah/11#v2)
	> “These are the ‘seven spirits of God,’ ‘like lamps burning before the throne,’ which the prophet saw in the symbols of vision. . . .” [UB 34:4.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p4_11)

3. **Proposition**. Description of the seven adjutant spirits.
	> “We are handicapped for words adequately to designate these seven adjutant mind-spirits. They are ministers of the lower levels of experiential mind, and they may be described, in the order of evolutionary attainment, as follows:
	> “1. _The spirit of intuition_—quick perception, the primitive physical and inherent reflex instincts, the directional and other self-preservative endowments of all mind creations; the only one of the adjutants to function so largely in the lower orders of animal life and the only one to make extensive functional contact with the nonteachable levels of mechanical mind.
	> “2. _The spirit of understanding_—the impulse of co-ordination, the spontaneous and apparently automatic association of ideas. This is the gift of the co-ordination of acquired knowledge, the phenomenon of quick reasoning, rapid judgment, and prompt decision.
	> “3. _The spirit of courage_—the fidelity endowment—in personal beings, the basis of character acquirement and the intellectual root of moral stamina and spiritual bravery. When enlightened by facts and inspired by truth, this becomes the secret of the urge of evolutionary ascension by the channels of intelligent and conscientious self-direction.
	> “4. _The spirit of knowledge_—the curiosity-mother of adventure and discovery, the scientific spirit; the guide and faithful associate of the spirits of courage and counsel; the urge to direct the endowments of courage into useful and progressive paths of growth.
	> “5. _The spirit of counsel_—the social urge, the endowment of species co-operation; the ability of will creatures to harmonize with their fellows; the origin of the gregarious instinct among the more lowly creatures.
	> “6. _The spirit of worship_—the religious impulse, the first differential urge separating mind creatures into the two basic classes of mortal existence. The spirit of worship forever distinguishes the animal of its association from the soulless creatures of mind endowment. Worship is the badge of spiritual-ascension candidacy.
	> “7. _The spirit of wisdom_—the inherent tendency of all moral creatures towards orderly and progressive evolutionary advancement. This is the highest of the adjutants, the spirit co-ordinator and articulator of the work of all the others. This spirit is the secret of that inborn urge of mind creatures which initiates and maintains the practical and effective program of the ascending scale of existence; that gift of living things which accounts for their inexplicable ability to survive and, in survival, to utilize the co-ordination of all their past experience and present opportunities for the acquisition of all of everything that all of the other six mental ministers can mobilize in the mind of the organism concerned. Wisdom is the acme of intellectual performance. Wisdom is the goal of a purely mental and moral existence.” [UB 36:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p5_5)

4. **Proposition**. The adjutants operate from the Life Carrier worlds. The Life Carriers observe their function on any world and in any mind.
	> “The central lodgments of the adjutant spirits on the Life Carrier headquarters world indicate to the Life Carrier supervisors the extent and quality of the mind function of the adjutants on any world and in any given living organism of intellect status. . . .” [UB 36:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p5_3)


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/12">12. The Creator Sons</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/14">14. The Power Directors</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>