---
title: "Workbook V — Theology of The Urantia Book — 35. Christianity"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: theology, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1959 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/34">34. The Spirit of Truth</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology#index">Index</a></td>
			<td></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>


## I. Beginnings Of The Christian Church


1. **Proposition**.** On the day of Pentecost Peter proposed that they begin the proclamation of the new message.
	> "About one o'clock, as the one hundred and twenty believers were engaged in prayer, they all became aware of a strange presence in the room. At the same time these disciples all became conscious of a new and profound sense of spiritual joy, security, and confidence. This new consciousness of spiritual strength was immediately followed by a strong urge to go out and publicly proclaim the gospel of the kingdom and the good news that Jesus had risen from the dead.
	> "Peter stood up and declared that this must be the coming of the Spirit of Truth which the Master had promised them and proposed that they go to the temple and begin the proclamation of the good news committed to their hands. And they did just what Peter suggested." <a id="s32_270"></a>[UB 194:0.1-2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p0_1)

2. **Proposition.** Unintentionally, some facts of the gospel were substituted for the gospel message.
	> “These men had been trained and instructed that the gospel which they should preach was the fatherhood of God and the sonship of man, but at just this moment of spiritual ecstasy and personal triumph, the best tidings, the greatest news, these men could think of was the _fact_ of the risen Master. And so they went forth, endowed with power from on high, preaching glad tidings to the people — even salvation through Jesus — but they unintentionally stumbled into the error of substituting some of the facts associated with the gospel for the gospel message itself. Peter unwittingly led off in this mistake, and others followed after him on down to Paul, who created a new religion out of the new version of the good news." <a id="s35_729"></a>[UB 194:0.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p0_3)

3. **Proposition.** The gospel is: the fact of the fatherhood of God, coupled with the truth of the sonship-brotherhood of men.
	> ”The gospel of the kingdom is: the fact of the fatherhood of God, coupled with the resultant truth of the sonship-brotherhood of men. Christianity, as it developed from that day, is: the fact of God as the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, in association with the experience of believer-fellowship with the risen and glorified Christ." <a id="s38_338"></a>[UB 194:0.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p0_4)

4. **Proposition.** Only baptism was required for admission to the Jesus brotherhood.
	> “At first they baptized in the name of Jesus; it was almost twenty years before they began to baptize in "the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit." Baptism was all that was required for admission into the fellowship of believers. They had no organization as yet; it was simply the Jesus brotherhood." <a id="s41_317"></a>[UB 194:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p4_9)

5. **Proposition.** The Lord's Supper was celebrated at the end of a fellowship meal.
	> "In these days they celebrated the Lord's Supper after the manner of its establishment; that is, they assembled for a social meal of good fellowship and partook of the sacrament at the end of the meal.“ <a id="s44_206"></a>[UB 194:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p4_8)

6. **Proposition.** At Pentecost, Peter really founded the Christian church.
	> "The results of Peter's preaching on the day of Pentecost were such as to decide the future policies, and to determine the plans, of the majority of the apostles in their efforts to proclaim the gospel of the kingdom. Peter was the real founder of the Christian church; Paul carried the Christian message to the gentiles, and the Greek believers carried it to the whole Roman Empire." <a id="s47_388"></a>[UB 195:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p0_1)

7. **Proposition.** Even after Paul's adaptations, Christianity was far superior to the mysteries.
	> "Paul, in an effort to utilize the widespread adherence to the better types of the mystery religions, made certain adaptations of the teachings of Jesus so as to render them more acceptable to a larger number of prospective converts. But even Paul's compromise of Jesus' teachings (Christianity) was superior to the best in the mysteries in that:
	> "1. Paul taught a moral redemption, an ethical salvation. Christianity pointed to a new life and proclaimed a new ideal. Paul forsook magic rites and ceremonial enchantments.
	> "2. Christianity presented a religion which grappled with final solutions of the human problem, for it not only offered salvation from sorrow and even from death, but it also promised deliverance from sin followed by the endowment of a righteous character of eternal survival qualities.
	> "3. The mysteries were built upon myths. Christianity, as Paul preached it, was founded upon a historic fact: the bestowal of Michael, the Son of God, upon mankind.” <a id="s53_169"></a>[UB 121:5.13-16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/121#p5_13)

8. **Proposition.** Philo's teaching had considerable influence on Paul.
	> "Many, but not all, of Philo's inconsistencies resulting from an effort to combine Greek mystical philosophy and Roman Stoic doctrines with the legalistic theology of the Hebrews, Paul recognized and wisely eliminated from his pre-Christian basic theology. Philo led the way for Paul more fully to restore the concept of the Paradise Trinity, which had long been dormant in Jewish theology. In only one matter did Paul fail to keep pace with Philo or to transcend the teachings of this wealthy and educated Jew of Alexandria, and that was the doctrine of the atonement; Philo taught deliverance from the doctrine of forgiveness only by the shedding of blood. He also possibly glimpsed the reality and presence of the Thought Adjusters more clearly than did Paul. But Paul's theory of original sin, the doctrines of hereditary guilt and innate evil and redemption therefrom, was partially Mithraic in origin, having little in common with Hebrew theology, Philo's philosophy, or Jesus' teachings. Some phases of Paul's teachings regarding original sin and the atonement were original with himself." <a id="s56_1100"></a>[UB 121:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/121#p6_5)

9. **Proposition.** Christianity presented a new order of human society to the Roman world.
	> Upon such a stage of human society the teachings of Jesus, embraced in the Christian message, were suddenly thrust. A new order of living was thus presented to the hungry hearts of these Western peoples. This situation meant immediate conflict between the older religious practices and the new Christianized version of Jesus' message to the world. Such a conflict must result in either decided victory for the new or for the old or in some degree of _compromise_. History shows that the struggle ended in compromise. Christianity presumed to embrace too much for any one people to assimilate in one or two generations. It was not a simple spiritual appeal, such as Jesus had presented to the souls of men; it early struck a decided attitude on religious rituals, education, magic, medicine, art, literature, law, government, morals, sex regulation, polygamy, and, in limited degree, even slavery. Christianity came not merely as a new religion — something all the Roman Empire and all the Orient were waiting for — but as a new order of human society. And as such a pretension it quickly precipitated the social-moral clash of the ages. The ideals of Jesus, as they were reinterpreted by Greek philosophy and socialized in Christianity, now boldly challenged the traditions of the human race embodied in the ethics, morality, and religions of Western civilization. <a id="s59_1368"></a>[UB 195:0.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p0_3)

10. **Proposition.** It was the second century before Greco-Roman culture turned to Christianity.
	>At first, Christianity won as converts only the lower social and economic strata. But by the beginning of the second century the very best of Greco-Roman culture was increasingly turning to this new order of Christian belief, this new concept of the purpose of living and the goal of existence. <a id="s62_297"></a>[UB 195:0.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p0_4)

11. **Proposition.** The triumph of Christianity was due to five factors.
	> How did this new message of Jewish origin, which had almost failed in the land of its birth, so quickly and effectively capture the very best minds of the Roman Empire? The triumph of Christianity over the philosophic religions and the mystery cults was due to:
	> 1. Organization. Paul was a great organizer and his successors kept up the pace he set.
	> 2. Christianity was thoroughly Hellenized. It embraced the best in Greek philosophy as well as the cream of Hebrew theology.
	> 3. But best of all, it contained a new and great ideal, the echo of the life bestowal of Jesus and the reflection of his message of salvation for all mankind.
	> 4. The Christian leaders were willing to make such compromises with Mithraism that the better half of its adherents were won over to the Antioch cult.
	> 5. Likewise did the next and later generations of Christian leaders make such further compromises with paganism that even the Roman emperor Constantine was won to the new religion." <a id="s70_185"></a>[UB 195:0.5-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p0_5)

12. **Proposition.** In the pagan compromises, the Christians gained four points.
	> By this paganization of Christianity the old order won many minor victories of a ritualistic nature, but the Christians gained the ascendancy in that:
	> 1. A new and enormously higher note in human morals was struck.
	> 2. A new and greatly enlarged concept of God was given to the world.
	> 3. The hope of immortality became a part of the assurance of a recognized religion.
	> 4. Jesus of Nazareth was given to man's hungry soul." <a id="s77_57"></a>[UB 195:0.13-17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p0_13)

13. **Proposition.** The Christians made shrewd bargains with the pagans, but did not do so well with the Mithraics.
	> “But the Christians made a shrewd bargain with the pagans in that they adopted the ritualistic pageantry of the pagan while compelling the pagan to accept the Hellenized version of Pauline Christianity. They made a better bargain with the pagans than they did with the Mithraic cult, but even in that earlier compromise they came off more than conquerors in that they succeeded in eliminating the gross immoralities and also numerous other reprehensible practices of the Persian mystery.“<a id="s80_491"></a>[UB 195:0.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p0_11)

14. **Proposition.** There were two major factors in the triumph of Christianity.
	> Christianity came into existence and triumphed over all contending religions primarily because of two things:
	> 1. The Greek mind was willing to borrow new and good ideas even from the Jews.
	> 2. Paul and his successors were willing but shrewd and sagacious compromisers; they were keen theologic traders.” <a id="s85_117"></a>[UB 195:1.2-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p1_2)

15. **Proposition.** The early plan of Christian worship followed the synagogue and Mithraic rituals.
	> The early plan of Christian worship was largely taken over from the Jewish synagogue, modified by the Mithraic ritual; later on, much pagan pageantry was added. The backbone of the early Christian church consisted of Christianized Greek proselytes to Judaism. <a id="s88_263"></a>[UB 195:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p3_6)

16. **Proposition.** The second century after Christ was the best time in world history for a new religion to make progress.
	> The second century after Christ was the best time in all the world's history for a good religion to make progress in the Western world. During the first century Christianity had prepared itself, by struggle and compromise, to take root and rapidly spread. Christianity adopted the emperor; later, he adopted Christianity. This was a great age for the spread of a new religion. There was religious liberty; travel was universal and thought was untrammeled. <a id="s91_459"></a>[UB 195:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p3_7)

## II. Content Of The Christian Message

1. **Proposition.** The Christian concept of God combines three ideas.
	> “The Christian concept of God is an attempt to combine three separate teachings:
	> 1. The Hebrew concept— God as a vindicator of moral values, a righteous God.
	> 2. The Greek concept— God as a unifier, a God of wisdom.
	> 3. Jesus' concept— God as a living friend, a loving Father, the divine presence.” <a id="s99_85"></a>[UB 5:4.10-13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p4_10)

2. **Proposition.** Christianity is a religion about Jesus, modified by much theology.
	> The Christian religion is the religion about the life and teachings of Christ based upon the theology of Judaism, modified further through the assimilation of certain Zoroastrian teachings and Greek philosophy, and formulated primarily by three individuals: Philo, Peter, and Paul. It has passed through many phases of evolution since the time of Paul and has become so thoroughly Occidentalized that many non-European peoples very naturally look upon Christianity as a strange revelation of a strange God and for strangers. <a id="s102_528"></a>[UB 92:6.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/92#p6_18)

3. **Proposition.** Early Christianity and Mithraism had many things in common.
	> Always had it been the practice of Mithraic worshipers, on entering the temple, to dip their fingers in holy water. And since in some districts there were those who at one time belonged to both religions, they introduced this custom into the majority of the Christian churches in the vicinity of Rome. Both religions employed baptism and partook of the sacrament of bread and wine. The one great difference between Mithraism and Christianity, aside from the characters of Mithras and Jesus, was that the one encouraged militarism while the other was ultrapacific. Mithraism's tolerance for other religions (except later Christianity) led to its final undoing. But the deciding factor in the struggle between the two was the admission of women into the full fellowship of the Christian faith. <a id="s105_795"></a>[UB 98:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/98#p6_4)

4. **Proposition.** Christianity embraces seven major factors.
	> “The Christian religion, as a Urantian system of belief, arose through the compounding of the following teachings, influences, beliefs, cults, and personal individual attitudes:
	> 1. The Melchizedek teachings, which are a basic factor in all the religions of Occident and Orient that have arisen in the last four thousand years.
	> 2. The Hebraic system of morality, ethics, theology, and belief in both Providence and the supreme Yahweh.
	> 3. The Zoroastrian conception of the struggle between cosmic good and evil, which had already left its imprint on both Judaism and Mithraism. Through prolonged contact attendant upon the struggles between Mithraism and Christianity, the doctrines of the Iranian prophet became a potent factor in determining the theologic and philosophic cast and structure of the dogmas, tenets, and cosmology of the Hellenized and Latinized versions of the teachings of Jesus.
	> 4. The mystery cults, especially Mithraism but also the worship of the Great Mother in the Phrygian cult. Even the legends of the birth of Jesus on Urantia became tainted with the Roman version of the miraculous birth of the Iranian savior-hero, Mithras, whose advent on earth was supposed to have been witnessed by only a handful of gift-bearing shepherds who had been informed of this impending event by angels.
	> 5. The historic fact of the human life of Joshua ben Joseph, the reality of Jesus of Nazareth as the glorified Christ, the Son of God.
	> 6. The personal viewpoint of Paul of Tarsus. And it should be recorded that Mithraism was the dominant religion of Tarsus during his adolescence. Paul little dreamed that his well-intentioned letters to his converts would someday be regarded by still later Christians as the "word of God." Such well-meaning teachers must not be held accountable for the use made of their writings by later-day successors.
	> 7. The philosophic thought of the Hellenistic peoples, from Alexandria and Antioch through Greece to Syracuse and Rome. The philosophy of the Greeks was more in harmony with Paul's version of Christianity than with any other current religious system and became an important factor in the success of Christianity in the Occident. Greek philosophy, coupled with Paul's theology, still forms the basis of European ethics." <a id="s115_423"></a>[UB 98:7.3-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/98#p7_3)

5. **Proposition.** Paul’s theology was based on Jesus' life, but was also influenced by the Greeks and the Stoics.
	> Paul's cult of Christianity exhibited its morality as a Jewish birthmark. The Jews viewed history as the providence of God — Yahweh at work. The Greeks brought to the new teaching clearer concepts of the eternal life. Paul's doctrines were influenced in theology and philosophy not only by Jesus' teachings but also by Plato and Philo. In ethics he was inspired not only by Christ but also by the Stoics.” <a id="s118_409"></a>[UB 121:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/121#p7_7)

6. **Proposition.** Paul's cult embodied three systems.
	> "The gospel of Jesus, as it was embodied in Paul's cult of Antioch Christianity, became blended with the following teachings:
	> 1. The philosophic reasoning of the Greek proselytes to Judaism, including some of their concepts of the eternal life.
	> 2. The appealing teachings of the prevailing mystery cults, especially the Mithraic doctrines of redemption, atonement, and salvation by the sacrifice made by some god.
	> 3. The sturdy morality of the established Jewish religion.” <a id="s124_63"></a>[UB 121:7.8-11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/121#p7_8)

7. **Proposition.** Christ becomes the creed of the new fellowship.
	> “The gospel of the kingdom, the message of Jesus, had been suddenly changed into the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. They now proclaimed the facts of his life, death, and resurrection and preached the hope of his speedy return to this world to finish the work he began. Thus the message of the early believers had to do with preaching about the facts of his first coming and with teaching the hope of his second coming, an event which they deemed to be very near at hand.
	> Christ was about to become the creed of the rapidly forming church. Jesus lives; he died for men; he gave the spirit; he is coming again. Jesus filled all their thoughts and determined all their new concept of God and everything else. They were too much enthused over the new doctrine that "God is the Father of the Lord Jesus" to be concerned with the old message that "God is the loving Father of all men," even of every single individual. True, a marvelous manifestation of brotherly love and unexampled good will did spring up in these early communities of believers. But it was a fellowship of believers in Jesus, not a fellowship of brothers in the family kingdom of the Father in heaven. Their good will arose from the love born of the concept of Jesus' bestowal and not from the recognition of the brotherhood of mortal man. Nevertheless, they were filled with joy, and they lived such new and unique lives that all men were attracted to their teachings about Jesus. They made the great mistake of using the living and illustrative commentary on the gospel of the kingdom for that gospel, but even that represented the greatest religion mankind had ever known. <a id="s128_1172"></a>[UB 194:4.5-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p4_5)

8. **Proposition.** Abner's more authentic version of the gospel made little progress.
	> The Eastern version of the message of Jesus, notwithstanding that it remained more true to his teachings, continued to follow the uncompromising attitude of Abner. It never progressed as did the Hellenized version and was eventually lost in the Islamic movement.” <a id="s131_267"></a>[UB 195:1.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p1_1)

## III. Influence Of The Greeks

1. **Proposition.** The Greek Stephen's death led to the organization of the first church at Jerusalem.
	> “Stephen, the leader of the Greek colony of Jesus' believers in Jerusalem, thus became the first martyr to the new faith and the specific cause for the formal organization of the early Christian church. This new crisis was met by the recognition that believers could not longer go on as a sect within the Jewish faith. They all agreed that they must separate themselves from unbelievers; and within one month from the death of Stephen the church at Jerusalem had been organized under the leadership of Peter, and James the brother of Jesus had been installed as its titular head.“ <a id="s136_584"></a>[UB 194:4.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p4_12)

2. **Proposition.** Greek culture was quick to embrace Christianity as a new and better religion.
	> The Greek revered beauty, the Jew holiness, but both peoples loved truth. For centuries the Greek had seriously thought and earnestly debated about all human problems — social, economic, political, and philosophic — except religion. Few Greeks had paid much attention to religion; they did not take even their own religion very seriously. For centuries the Jews had neglected these other fields of thought while they devoted their minds to religion. They took their religion very seriously, too seriously. As illuminated by the content of Jesus' message, the united product of the centuries of the thought of these two peoples now became the driving power of a new order of human society and, to a certain extent, of a new order of human religious belief and practice. <a id="s139_772"></a>[UB 195:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p1_6)

## IV. Roman Influence

1. **Proposition.** At the end of the "kingdom” persecutions, Rome became tolerant of Christianity.
	> "Much of the early persecution of Christians in Rome was due solely to their unfortunate use of the term "kingdom" in their preaching. The Romans were tolerant of any and all religions but very resentful of anything that savored of political rivalry. And so, when these early persecutions, due so largely to misunderstanding, died out, the field for religious propaganda was wide open. The Roman was interested in political administration; he cared little for either art or religion, but he was unusually tolerant of both.“ <a id="s144_527"></a>[UB 195:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p2_2)

2. **Proposition.** Christians accepted the Roman empire; the empire adopted Christianity.
	> “ After the consolidation of Roman political rule and after the dissemination of Christianity, the Christians found themselves with one God, a great religious concept, but without empire. The Greco-Romans found themselves with a great empire but without a God to serve as the suitable religious concept for empire worship and spiritual unification. The Christians accepted the empire; the empire adopted Christianity. The Roman provided a unity of political rule; the Greek, a unity of culture and learning; Christianity, a unity of religious thought and practice." <a id="s147_569"></a>[UB 195:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p3_1)

3. **Proposition.** Conditions at Rome were favorable for the adoption of a new religion.
	> ”Rome overcame the tradition of nationalism by imperial universalism and for the first time in history made it possible for different races and nations at least nominally to accept one religion.
	> "Christianity came into favor in Rome at a time when there was great contention between the vigorous teachings of the Stoics and the salvation promises of the mystery cults. Christianity came with refreshing comfort and liberating power to a spiritually hungry people whose language had no word for 'unselfishness.' " <a id="s151_321"></a>[UB 195:3.2-3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p3_2)

4. **Proposition.** Christianity spread because of the way believers lived and died - and because they loved children.
	> "That which gave greatest power to Christianity was the way its believers lived lives of service and even the way they died for their faith during the earlier times of drastic persecution.
	> "The teaching regarding Christ's love for children soon put an end to the widespread practice of exposing children to death when they were not wanted, particularly girl babies." <a id="s155_181"></a>[UB 195:3.4-5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p3_4)

## V. The Dark Ages

1. **Proposition.** The church, being an adjunct of society and an ally of politics, was doomed to suffer during the ”dark ages."
	> “The church, being an adjunct to society and the ally of politics, was doomed to share in the intellectual and spiritual decline of the so-called European "dark ages." During this time, religion became more and more monasticized, asceticized, and legalized. In a spiritual sense, Christianity was hibernating. Throughout this period there existed, alongside this slumbering and secularized religion, a continuous stream of mysticism, a fantastic spiritual experience bordering on unreality and philosophically akin to pantheism.“ <a id="s160_533"></a>[UB 195:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p4_1)

## VI. The Modern Problem

1. **Proposition.** Viewing what Christianity has endured indicates great inherent vitality.
	> “Christianity exhibits a history of having originated out of the unintended transformation of the religion of Jesus into a religion about Jesus. It further presents the history of having experienced Hellenization, paganization, secularization, institutionalization, intellectual deterioration, spiritual decadence, moral hibernation, threatened extinction, later rejuvenation, fragmentation, and more recent relative rehabilitation. Such a pedigree is indicative of inherent vitality and the possession of vast recuperative resources. And this same Christianity is now present in the civilized world of Occidental peoples and stands face to face with a struggle for existence which is even more ominous than those eventful crises which have characterized its past battles for dominance.“ <a id="s165_791"></a>[UB 195:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p4_4)

2. **Proposition.** Christianity now faces the gigantic struggle between the secular and the spiritual.
	> ”Religion is now confronted by the challenge of a new age of scientific minds and materialistic tendencies. In this gigantic struggle between the secular and the spiritual, the religion of Jesus will eventually triumph." <a id="s168_224"></a>[UB 195:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p4_5)

3. **Proposition.** Christianity needs a new contact with the uncompromised teachings of Jesus.
	> "But paganized and socialized Christianity stands in need of new contact with the uncompromised teachings of Jesus; it languishes for lack of a new vision of the Master's life on earth. A new and fuller revelation of the religion of Jesus is destined to conquer an empire of materialistic secularism and to overthrow a world sway of mechanistic naturalism. Urantia is now quivering on the very brink of one of its most amazing and enthralling epochs of social readjustment, moral quickening, and spiritual enlightenment.” <a id="s171_525"></a>[UB 195:9.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p9_2)

4. **Proposition.** Religion needs new leaders - men who will depend solely on the incomparable teachings of Jesus.
	> "Religion does need new leaders, spiritual men and women who will dare to depend solely on Jesus and his incomparable teachings. If Christianity persists in neglecting its spiritual mission while it continues to busy itself with social and material problems, the spiritual renaissance must await the coming of these new teachers of Jesus' religion who will be exclusively devoted to the spiritual regeneration of men. And then will these spirit-born souls quickly supply the leadership and inspiration requisite for the social, moral, economic, and political reorganization of the world.” <a id="s174_592"></a>[UB 195:9.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p9_4)

5. **Proposition.** The hour is striking for a rediscovery of the original foundations of Christianity.
	> "The modern age will refuse to accept a religion which is inconsistent with facts and out of harmony with its highest conceptions of truth, beauty, and goodness. The hour is striking for a rediscovery of the true and original foundations of present-day distorted and compromised Christianity — the real life and teachings of Jesus.” <a id="s177_336"></a>[UB 195:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p9_5)

6. **Proposition.** Christianity is threatened by slow death from formalism and overorganization.
	> ”Christianity is threatened by slow death from formalism, overorganization, intellectualism, and other nonspiritual trends. The modern Christian church is not such a brotherhood of dynamic believers as Jesus commissioned continuously to effect the spiritual transformation of successive generations of mankind." <a id="s180_315"></a>[UB 195:9.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p9_10)

7. **Proposition**. Christianity has become a social and cultural movement as well as a religion.
	> "So-called Christianity has become a social and cultural movement as well as a religious belief and practice. The stream of modern Christianity drains many an ancient pagan swamp and many a barbarian morass; many olden cultural watersheds drain into this present-day cultural stream as well as the high Galilean tablelands which are supposed to be its exclusive source.” <a id="s183_374"></a>[UB 195:9.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p9_11)

8. **Proposition.** The world needs more firsthand religion.
	> "The world needs more firsthand religion. Even Christianity — the best of the religions of the twentieth century — is not only a religion _about_ Jesus, but it is so largely one which men experience secondhand. They take their religion wholly as handed down by their accepted religious teachers. What an awakening the world would experience if it could only see Jesus as he really lived on earth and know, firsthand, his life-giving teachings! Descriptive words of things beautiful cannot thrill like the sight thereof, neither can creedal words inspire men's souls like the experience of knowing the presence of God. But expectant faith will ever keep the hope-door of man's soul open for the entrance of the eternal spiritual realities of the divine values of the worlds beyond." <a id="s186_785"></a>[UB 195:9.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p9_8)

9. **Proposition.** Christianity still contrives to move the minds of reflective men with mighty moral emotions.
	> "But the Christianity of even the twentieth century must not be despised. It is the product of the combined moral genius of the God-knowing men of many races during many ages, and it has truly been one of the greatest powers for good on earth, and therefore no man should lightly regard it, notwithstanding its inherent and acquired defects. Christianity still contrives to move the minds of reflective men with mighty moral emotions." <a id="s189_439"></a>[UB 195:10.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_12)

10. **Proposition.** Christianity is handicapped because it sponsors a society which staggers under a tremendous overload of materialism.
	> ”If Christianity could only grasp more of Jesus' teachings, it could do so much more in helping modern man to solve his new and increasingly complex problems.
	> "Christianity suffers under a great handicap because it has become identified in the minds of all the world as a part of the social system, the industrial life, and the moral standards of Western civilization; and thus has Christianity unwittingly seemed to sponsor a society which staggers under the guilt of tolerating science without idealism, politics without principles, wealth without work, pleasure without restraint, knowledge without character, power without conscience, and industry without morality." <a id="s193_515"></a>[UB 195:10.19-20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_19)

11. **Proposition.** Christianity is threatened by the doom of one of its own slogans: ”A house divided against itself cannot stand."
	> “Christianity is seriously confronted with the doom embodied in one of its own slogans: 'A house divided against itself cannot stand.' The non-Christian world will hardly capitulate to a sect-divided Christendom. The living Jesus is the only hope of a possible unification of Christianity. The true church — the Jesus brotherhood — is invisible, spiritual, and is characterized by _unity_, not necessarily by _uniformity_. Uniformity is the earmark of the physical world of mechanistic nature. Spiritual unity is the fruit of faith union with the living Jesus. The visible church should refuse longer to handicap the progress of the invisible and spiritual brotherhood of the kingdom of God. And this brotherhood is destined to become a _living organism_ in contrast to an institutionalized social organization. It may well utilize such social organizations, but it must not be supplanted by them." <a id="s196_902"></a>[UB 195:10.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_11)

12. **Proposition.** Christianity contains enough of Jesus' teachings to immortalize it.
	> "Christianity is an extemporized religion, and therefore must it operate in low gear. High-gear spiritual performances must await the new revelation and the more general acceptance of the real religion of Jesus. But Christianity is a mighty religion, seeing that the commonplace disciples of a crucified carpenter set in motion those teachings which conquered the Roman world in three hundred years and then went on to triumph over the barbarians who overthrew Rome. This same Christianity conquered — absorbed and exalted — the whole stream of Hebrew theology and Greek philosophy. And then, when this Christian religion became comatose for more than a thousand years as a result of an overdose of mysteries and paganism, it resurrected itself and virtually reconquered the whole Western world. Christianity contains enough of Jesus' teachings to immortalize it." <a id="s199_868"></a>[UB 195:10.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_18)

13. **Proposition.** Christian missionaries should avoid overriding the native mores.
	> ”When Christian missionaries go into the heart of Africa, where sons and daughters are supposed to remain under the control and direction of their parents throughout the lifetime of the parents, they only bring about confusion and the breakdown of all authority when they seek, in a single generation, to supplant this practice by teaching that these children should be free from all parental restraint after they have attained the age of twenty-one.” <a id="s202_455"></a>[UB 66:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/66#p6_7)

14. **Proposition.** Times of great testing and threatened defeat are always times of great revelation.
	> "The teachings of Jesus, even though greatly modified, survived the mystery cults of their birthtime, the ignorance and superstition of the dark ages, and are even now slowly triumphing over the materialism, mechanism, and secularism of the twentieth century. And such times of great testing and threatened defeat are always times of great revelation.” <a id="s205_356"></a>[UB 195:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p9_3)

15. **Proposition.** The hope of Christianity is that it shall learn anew the greatest of all truths - the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man.
	> “The hope of modern Christianity is that it should cease to sponsor the social systems and industrial policies of Western civilization while it humbly bows itself before the cross it so valiantly extols, there to learn anew from Jesus of Nazareth the greatest truths mortal man can ever hear — the living gospel of the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man.“ <a id="s208_369"></a>[UB 195:10.21](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_21)



## VII. Materialism


1. **Proposition.** If man were only a machine, he could not formulate his materialistic concepts.
	> ”The inconsistency of the modern mechanist is: If this were merely a material universe and man only a machine, such a man would be wholly unable to recognize himself as such a machine, and likewise would such a machine-man be wholly unconscious of the fact of the existence of such a material universe. The materialistic dismay and despair of a mechanistic science has failed to recognize the fact of the spirit-indwelt mind of the scientist whose very supermaterial insight formulates these mistaken and self-contradictory concepts of a materialistic universe." <a id="s216_566"></a>[UB 195:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p7_3)

2. **Proposition.** Machines do not struggle to find God nor strive to be like him. Machines are never intellectual, emotional, ethical, or spiritual.
	> ”The very claim of materialism implies a supermaterial consciousness of the mind which presumes to assert such dogmas. A mechanism might deteriorate, but it could never progress. Machines do not think, create, dream, aspire, idealize, hunger for truth, or thirst for righteousness. They do not motivate their lives with the passion to serve other machines and to choose as their goal of eternal progression the sublime task of finding God and striving to be like him. Machines are never intellectual, emotional, aesthetic, ethical, moral, or spiritual." <a id="s219_557"></a>[UB 195:7.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p7_14)

3. **Proposition.** Man exhibits the control attributes of mind and the creative qualities of spirit.
	> "A mechanistic philosophy of life and the universe cannot be scientific because science recognizes and deals only with materials and facts. Philosophy is inevitably superscientific. Man is a material fact of nature, but his _life_ is a phenomenon which transcends the material levels of nature in that it exhibits the control attributes of mind and the creative qualities of spirit.
	> "The sincere effort of man to become a mechanist represents the tragic phenomenon of that man's futile effort to commit intellectual and moral suicide. But he cannot do it.“ <a id="s223_177"></a>[UB 195:7.9-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p7_9)

4. **Proposition.** Religion has no quarrel with science; but it is supremely concerned with the scientist.
	> "No matter what the apparent conflict between materialism and the teachings of Jesus may be, you can rest assured that, in the ages to come, the teachings of the Master will fully triumph. In reality, true religion cannot become involved in any controversy with science; it is in no way concerned with material things. Religion is simply indifferent to, but sympathetic with, science, while it supremely concerns itself with the _scientist._" <a id="s226_446"></a>[UB 195:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p6_2)

5. **Proposition.** The worst of the materialistic age is over. Science has destroyed the childish illusions of life.
	> "At the time of this writing the worst of the materialistic age is over; the day of a better understanding is already beginning to dawn. The higher minds of the scientific world are no longer wholly materialistic in their philosophy, but the rank and file of the people still lean in that direction as a result of former teachings. But this age of physical realism is only a passing episode in man's life on earth. Modern science has left true religion — the teachings of Jesus as translated in the lives of his believers — untouched. All science has done is to destroy the childlike illusions of the misinterpretations of life.” <a id="s229_633"></a>[UB 195:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p6_4)

6. **Proposition.** Religion validates the conservation of men’s souls - spiritual realities and eternal values.
	> "Materialism reduces man to a soulless automaton and constitutes him merely an arithmetical symbol finding a helpless place in the mathematical formula of an unromantic and mechanistic universe. But whence comes all this vast universe of mathematics without a Master Mathematician? Science may expatiate on the conservation of matter, but religion validates the conservation of men's souls — it concerns their experience with spiritual realities and eternal values." <a id="s232_470"></a>[UB 195:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p6_8)

7. **Proposition.** Religion must provide itself with new and up-to-date slogans.
	> “But religious leaders are making a great mistake when they try to call modern man to spiritual battle with the trumpet blasts of the Middle Ages. Religion must provide itself with new and up-to-date slogans. Neither democracy nor any other political panacea will take the place of spiritual progress. False religions may represent an evasion of reality, but Jesus in his gospel introduced mortal man to the very entrance upon an eternal reality of spiritual progression.” <a id="s235_476"></a>[UB 195:6.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p6_10)

8. **Proposition.** Religion is not so much concerned with science, morality, and philosophy - as it is with the scientist, the moralist, and the philosopher.
	> "Any scientific interpretation of the material universe is valueless unless it provides due recognition for the _scientist_. No appreciation of art is genuine unless it accords recognition to the _artist_. No evaluation of morals is worth while unless it includes the _moralist_. No recognition of philosophy is edifying if it ignores the _philosopher_, and religion cannot exist without the real experience of the _religionist_ who, in and through this very experience, is seeking to find God and to know him. Likewise is the universe of universes without significance apart from the I AM, the infinite God who made it and unceasingly manages it." <a id="s238_652"></a>[UB 195:7.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p7_18)

9. **Proposition**. In spite of the secular panic, the spiritual bank of the kingdom will be paying out faith, hope, and security.
	> "Scientists have unintentionally precipitated mankind into a materialistic panic; they have started an unthinking run on the moral bank of the ages, but this bank of human experience has vast spiritual resources; it can stand the demands being made upon it. Only unthinking men become panicky about the spiritual assets of the human race. When the materialistic-secular panic is over, the religion of Jesus will not be found bankrupt. The spiritual bank of the kingdom of heaven will be paying out faith, hope, and moral security to all who draw upon it 'in His name.' <a id="s241_572"></a>[UB 195:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p6_1)

## VIII. Secular Totalitarianism

1. **Proposition.** Secularism broke the bonds of church control, and now threatens to establish a new and godless control of men.
	> "It required a great power, a mighty influence, to free the thinking and living of the Western peoples from the withering grasp of a totalitarian ecclesiastical domination. Secularism did break the bonds of church control, and now in turn it threatens to establish a new and godless type of mastery over the hearts and minds of modern man. The tyrannical and dictatorial political state is the direct offspring of scientific materialism and philosophic secularism. Secularism no sooner frees man from the domination of the institutionalized church than it sells him into slavish bondage to the totalitarian state. Secularism frees man from ecclesiastical slavery only to betray him into the tyranny of political and economic slavery.” <a id="s246_738"></a>[UB 195:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p8_4)

2. **Proposition.** World wars are the result of overdoing the secularistic revolt.
	> To the secularistic revolt you owe the amazing creativity of American industrialism and the unprecedented material progress of Western civilization. And because the secularistic revolt went too far and lost sight of God and _true_ religion, there also followed the unlooked-for harvest of world wars and international unsettledness.” <a id="s249_337"></a>[UB 195:8.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p8_7)

3. **Proposition.** Secularism discards ethics and religion for politics and power.
	> ”The inherent weakness of secularism is that it discards ethics and religion for politics and power. You simply cannot establish the brotherhood of men while ignoring or denying the fatherhood of God.
	> "Secular social and political optimism is an illusion. Without God, neither freedom and liberty, nor property and wealth will lead to peace.” <a id="s253_145"></a>[UB 195:8.11-12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p8_11)

4. **Proposition.** Materialism denies God, secularism simply ignores him.
	> "Materialism denies God, secularism simply ignores him; at least that was the earlier attitude. More recently, secularism has assumed a more militant attitude, assuming to take the place of the religion whose totalitarian bondage it onetime resisted. Twentieth-century secularism tends to affirm that man does not need God. But beware! this godless philosophy of human society will lead only to unrest, animosity, unhappiness, war, and world-wide disaster.” <a id="s256_461"></a>[UB 195:8.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p8_5)

5. **Proposition.** Secularization of science, education, and industry can lead only to disaster.
	> "The complete secularization of science, education, industry, and society can lead only to disaster. During the first third of the twentieth century Urantians killed more human beings than were killed during the whole of the Christian dispensation up to that time. And this is only the beginning of the dire harvest of materialism and secularism; still more terrible destruction is yet to come.” <a id="s259_399"></a>[UB 195:8.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p8_13)

6. **Proposition.** The majority of Christians are unwittingly actual secularists.
	> "At the time of this revelation, the prevailing intellectual and philosophical climate of both European and American life is decidedly secular — humanistic. For three hundred years Western thinking has been progressively secularized. Religion has become more and more a nominal influence, largely a ritualistic exercise. The majority of professed Christians of Western civilization are unwittingly actual secularists." <a id="s262_422"></a>[UB 195:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p8_3)
## IX. The Religion Of Jesus


1. **Proposition.** Religion must be distinguished from man’s other high forms of thought.
	> “Religion is the revelation to man of his divine and eternal destiny. Religion is a purely personal and spiritual experience and must forever be distinguished from man's other high forms of thought, such as:
	> 1. Man's logical attitude toward the things of material reality.
	> 2. Man's aesthetic appreciation of beauty contrasted with ugliness.
	> 3. Man's ethical recognition of social obligations and political duty.
	> 4. Even man's sense of human morality is not, in and of itself, religious." <a id="s271_79"></a>[UB 195:5.3-7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p5_3)

2. **Proposition.** Ever bear in mind: God and men need each other - and the kingdom of God is within you.
	> Ever bear in mind — God and men need each other. They are mutually necessary to the full and final attainment of eternal personality experience in the divine destiny of universe finality.
	> The kingdom of God is within you' was probably the greatest pronouncement Jesus ever made, next to the declaration that his Father is a living and loving spirit. <a id="s275_165"></a>[UB 195:10.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_3)

3. **Proposition.** Jesus met life in all its terrible reality and mastered it - even in death.
	> “To Jesus, mortal life had dealt its hardest, cruelest, and bitterest blows; and this man met these ministrations of despair with faith, courage, and the unswerving determination to do his Father's will. Jesus met life in all its terrible reality and mastered it — even in death. He did not use religion as a release from life. The religion of Jesus does not seek to escape this life in order to enjoy the waiting bliss of another existence. The religion of Jesus provides the joy and peace of another and spiritual existence to enhance and ennoble the life which men now live in the flesh." <a id="s278_595"></a>[UB 194:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p3_3)

4. **Proposition.** Jesus is the new and living way whereby man comes into his divine inheritance.
	> Through the appropriation of the faith of Jesus, mortal man can foretaste in time the realities of eternity. Jesus made the discovery, in human experience, of the Final Father, and his brothers in the flesh of mortal life can follow him along this same experience of Father discovery. They can even attain, as they are, the same satisfaction in this experience with the Father as did Jesus as he was. New potentials were actualized in the universe of Nebadon consequent upon the terminal bestowal of Michael, and one of these was the new illumination of the path of eternity that leads to the Father of all, and which can be traversed even by the mortals of material flesh and blood in the initial life on the planets of space. Jesus was and is the new and living way whereby man can come into the divine inheritance which the Father has decreed shall be his for but the asking. In Jesus there is abundantly demonstrated both the beginnings and endings of the faith experience of humanity, even of divine humanity. <a id="s281_1018"></a>[UB 101:6.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/101#p6_17)

5. **Proposition.** Man evades the religion of Jesus for fear of what it will do to him and with him.
	> . . . Modern men and women of intelligence evade the religion of Jesus because of their fears of what it will do _to_ them — and _with_ them. And all such fears are well founded. The religion of Jesus does, indeed, dominate and transform its believers, demanding that men dedicate their lives to seeking for a knowledge of the will of the Father in heaven and requiring that the energies of living be consecrated to the unselfish service of the brotherhood of man. <a id="s284_468"></a>[UB 195:9.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p9_6)

6. **Proposition.** The apostles were demoralized by the Master's death - he could hardly be the Messiah they had hoped for.
	> When Jesus was so suddenly seized by his enemies and so quickly crucified between two thieves, his apostles and disciples were completely demoralized. The thought of the Master, arrested, bound, scourged, and crucified, was too much for even the apostles. They forgot his teachings and his warnings. He might, indeed, have been 'a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people,' but he could hardly be the Messiah they had hoped would restore the kingdom of Israel. <a id="s287_485"></a>[UB 194:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p4_1)

7. **Proposition.** Comes the resurrection - God is not a doctrine in their minds; he has become a living presence in their souls.
	> “Then comes the resurrection, with its deliverance from despair and the return of their faith in the Master's divinity. Again and again they see him and talk with him, and he takes them out on Olivet, where he bids them farewell and tells them he is going back to the Father. He has told them to tarry in Jerusalem until they are endowed with power — until the Spirit of Truth shall come. And on the day of Pentecost this new teacher comes, and they go out at once to preach their gospel with new power. They are the bold and courageous followers of a living Lord, not a dead and defeated leader. The Master lives in the hearts of these evangelists; God is not a doctrine in their minds; he has become a living presence in their souls.” <a id="s290_740"></a>[UB 194:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p4_2)

8. **Proposition.** They were all filled with the spirit - and they had all things in common.
	> Day by day they continued steadfastly and with one accord in the temple and breaking bread at home. They took their food with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God and having favor with all the people. They were all filled with the spirit, and they spoke the word of God with boldness. And the multitudes of those who believed were of one heart and soul; and not one of them said that aught of the things which he possessed was his own, and they had all things in common. <a id="s293_484"></a>[UB 194:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p4_3)

9. **Proposition.** Paul's Christianity made sure of the divine Christ, but almost wholly lost sight of the human Jesus.
	> But the greatest mistake was made in that, while the human Jesus was recognized as _having_ a religion, the divine Jesus (Christ) almost overnight became a religion. Paul's Christianity made sure of the adoration of the divine Christ, but it almost wholly lost sight of the struggling and valiant human Jesus of Galilee, who, by the valor of his personal religious faith and the heroism of his indwelling Adjuster, ascended from the lowly levels of humanity to become one with divinity, thus becoming the new and living way whereby all mortals may so ascend from humanity to divinity. Mortals in all stages of spirituality and on all worlds may find in the personal life of Jesus that which will strengthen and inspire them as they progress from the lowest spirit levels up to the highest divine values, from the beginning to the end of all personal religious experience. <a id="s296_875"></a>[UB 196:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p2_4)

10. **Proposition.** Jesus founded a religion of personal experience in doing the will of God; Paul founded a religion for the worship of the glorified and risen Christ.
	> Jesus founded the religion of personal experience in doing the will of God and serving the human brotherhood; Paul founded a religion in which the glorified Jesus became the object of worship and the brotherhood consisted of fellow believers in the divine Christ. In the bestowal of Jesus these two concepts were potential in his divine-human life, and it is indeed a pity that his followers failed to create a unified religion which might have given proper recognition to both the human and the divine natures of the Master as they were inseparably bound up in his earth life and so gloriously set forth in the original gospel of the kingdom. <a id="s299_647"></a>[UB 196:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p2_6)

11. **Proposition.** The whole Christian movement tended away from the human Jesus toward the exaltation of the risen Christ.
	> “At the time of the writing of the New Testament, the authors not only most profoundly believed in the divinity of the risen Christ, but they also devotedly and sincerely believed in his immediate return to earth to consummate the heavenly kingdom. This strong faith in the Lord's immediate return had much to do with the tendency to omit from the record those references which portrayed the purely human experiences and attributes of the Master. The whole Christian movement tended away from the human picture of Jesus of Nazareth toward the exaltation of the risen Christ, the glorified and soon-returning Lord Jesus Christ." <a id="s302_631"></a>[UB 196:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p2_5)

## X. The Future

1. **Proposition.** Jesus did not found the Christian church, but he has fostered it.
	> “Many earnest persons who would gladly yield loyalty to the Christ of the gospel find it very difficult enthusiastically to support a church which exhibits so little of the spirit of his life and teachings, and which they have been erroneously taught he founded. Jesus did not found the so-called Christian church, but he has, in every manner consistent with his nature, _fostered_ it as the best existent exponent of his lifework on earth.“ <a id="s307_445"></a>[UB 195:10.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_9)

2. **Proposition.** The Oriental peoples do not know that there is a religion of Jesus as well as a religion about Jesus.
	> “These various groupings of Christians may serve to accommodate numerous different types of would-be believers among the various peoples of Western civilization, but such division of Christendom presents a grave weakness when it attempts to carry the gospel of Jesus to Oriental peoples. These races do not yet understand that there is a _religion of Jesus_ separate, and somewhat apart, from Christianity, which has more and more become a _religion about Jesus_.” <a id="s310_468"></a>[UB 195:10.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_15)

3. **Proposition.** The great hope is a new revelation that could unite the present-day followers of Jesus.
	> “The great hope of Urantia lies in the possibility of a new revelation of Jesus with a new and enlarged presentation of his saving message which would spiritually unite in loving service the numerous families of his present-day professed followers." <a id="s313_253"></a>[UB 195:10.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_16)

4. **Proposition.** Subdivided and secularized Christianity is the great obstacle to its further advancement.
	> “No social system or political regime which denies the reality of God can contribute in any constructive and lasting manner to the advancement of human civilization. But Christianity, as it is subdivided and secularized today, presents the greatest single obstacle to its further advancement; especially is this true concerning the Orient.” <a id="s316_344"></a>[UB 195:10.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_7)

5. **Proposition.** Does institutional Christianity fear for its ecclesiastical authority if the Jesus of Galilee is reinstated in the souls of men?
	> . . . Do professed Christians fear the exposure of a self-sufficient and unconsecrated fellowship of social respectability and selfish economic maladjustment? Does institutional Christianity fear the possible jeopardy, or even the overthrow, of traditional ecclesiastical authority if the Jesus of Galilee is reinstated in the minds and souls of mortal men as the ideal of personal religious living? Indeed, the social readjustments, the economic transformations, the moral rejuvenations, and the religious revisions of Christian civilization would be drastic and revolutionary if the living religion of Jesus should suddenly supplant the theologic religion about Jesus. <a id="s319_674"></a>[UB 196:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p1_2)

6. **Proposition.** The time is ripe for the figurative resurrection of the human Jesus from the burial tomb of theologic traditions and religious dogmas.
	> “The time is ripe to witness the figurative resurrection of the human Jesus from his burial tomb amidst the theological traditions and the religious dogmas of nineteen centuries. Jesus of Nazareth must not be longer sacrificed to even the splendid concept of the glorified Christ. What a transcendent service if, through this revelation, the Son of Man should be recovered from the tomb of traditional theology and be presented as the living Jesus to the church that bears his name, and to all other religions! Surely the Christian fellowship of believers will not hesitate to make such adjustments of faith and of practices of living as will enable it to "follow after" the Master in the demonstration of his real life of religious devotion to the doing of his Father's will and of consecration to the unselfish service of man. . . ." <a id="s322_839"></a>[UB 196:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p1_2)

7. **Proposition.** You can preach a religion about Jesus, but you must live the religion of Jesus.
	> “Some day a reformation in the Christian church may strike deep enough to get back to the unadulterated religious teachings of Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith. You may _preach_ a religion _about_ Jesus, but, perforce, you must _live_ the religion of Jesus. In the enthusiasm of Pentecost, Peter unintentionally inaugurated a new religion, the religion of the risen and glorified Christ. The Apostle Paul later on transformed this new gospel into Christianity, a religion embodying his own theologic views and portraying his own _personal experience_ with the Jesus of the Damascus road. . . .” <a id="s325_609"></a>[UB 196:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p2_1)

8. **Proposition.** The New Testament is a superb Christian document, but it is only meagerly Jesusonian.
	> ". . . The gospel of the kingdom is founded on the personal religious experience of the Jesus of Galilee; Christianity is founded almost exclusively on the personal religious experience of the Apostle Paul. Almost the whole of the New Testament is devoted, not to the portrayal of the significant and inspiring religious life of Jesus, but to a discussion of Paul's religious experience and to a portrayal of his personal religious convictions. The only notable exceptions to this statement, aside from certain parts of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, are the Book of Hebrews and the Epistle of James. Even Peter, in his writing, only once reverted to the personal religious life of his Master. The New Testament is a superb Christian document, but it is only meagerly Jesusonian.” <a id="s328_778"></a>[UB 196:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p2_1)


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology/34">34. The Spirit of Truth</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_5_Theology#index">Index</a></td>
			<td></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>