---
title: "The Principles of Jesus' Teaching"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Jesus, Jesus teachings, The Spiritual Fellowship Journal, Spiritual Fellowship, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1999 Richard I. Bain<br>© 1999 The Christian Fellowship of Students of <i>The Urantia Book</i></p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Spiritual_Fellowship_Journal/A_Clarification">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">A Clarification</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_spiritual_fellowship_journal#fall-1999">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Fall 1999 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>




It is a great privilege to be a teacher, especially to be a teacher of _The Urantia Book_. But it is also an awesome responsibility to teach about a book whose authors identify as the Fifth Epochal Revelation. Quite often the initial impression of this book will be determined by what we say and how we say it. Can we measure up to such a responsibility? I believe that we can, with the assistance of the Spirit of Truth, become worthy teachers. We can do this because we have one of the greatest teachers of all time as our example and mentor. We who aspire to be teachers of _The Urantia Book_ would do well to consider and adapt the principles used by Jesus in his teaching for he was a consummate teacher. In a sense, his whole life was a series of lessons in which he taught the world not only through what he said, but what he did. His role as teacher is especially notable during his time with Gonod and Ganid, the Indian merchant and his son, as well as his time with the apostles and disciples during his three year public ministry. In fact, the very principles he used in teaching were those he taught to his apostles and disciples.

Even if we never expect to be a teacher, if we talk to others about _The Urantia Book_, then we can be sure that sooner or later some spiritually hungry soul will pepper us with questions about this book and then we will suddenly be thrust into the role of teacher. Are we prepared to function in this role? Only a few of us can hope to be the master teacher that Jesus was, but I believe we can all function acceptably if we adopt and incorporate Jesus' principles of teaching into our teaching.

By principles, Imean the way Jesus approached teaching and the philosophy behind his methods, as opposed to the methods themselves or the content of his teaching. But it is sometimes difficult to separate the principles from the methods. The following list is my attempt to point out many of the principles that guided Jesus' teaching.

## Teaching Principles of Jesus

1. Respect and be sensitive to a person's beliefs and the customs associated with their religion. On page 1655, the authors tell us that Jesus dealt with the Jewish traditions in a positive manner. He pointed out that which was good in the Jewish teachings of his day, but he did not compromise truth to win souls for the kingdom. Jesus used the best of Jewish scripture to teach the truths he wished to convey. (<a id="a43_413"></a>[UB 149:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/149#p5_2), <a id="a43_458"></a>[UB 159:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p4_1), <a id="a43_503"></a>[UB 159:5.1-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p5_1)) He advised his apostles to avoid attacking existing older teachings. (<a id="a43_620"></a>[UB 140:8.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/140#p8_20), <a id="a43_667"></a>[UB 132:0.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p0_4)) For instance, Jesus pointed out to his apostles when he first taught them, that he did not denounce the teachings of Moses and the prophets. (<a id="a43_854"></a>[UB 141:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p6_2))
2. Add something of value to a person's religion; don't try to take away from a person's system of beliefs. (<a id="a44_109"></a>[UB 141:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p6_2)) Emphasize what is good in a person's belief system; ignore the undesirable; let the good crowd it out. This is the method Jesus used in working with the leaders of various religious groups in Rome. (<a id="a44_353"></a>[UB 132:0.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p0_4)) There may be those times when something you say will undermine an incorrect belief. When this happens, be sure to offer something of greater value for that which is no longer credible. (<a id="a44_584"></a>[UB 149:2.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/149#p2_11))
3. Never use fear as a motivator; rather, accentuate the positive. All too often religious teachers have relied on guilt and fear to bring people into the fold. True, Jesus did warn that the unfruitful vines would be destroyed, but more importantly he taught that our Father loves us and we should love one another as spiritual brothers and sisters. (<a id="a45_351"></a>[UB 141:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p4_1))
4. Adapt the content and level to the pupil. (<a id="a46_46"></a>[UB 151:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/151#p3_6)) Consider the comprehension capacity of the students. (<a id="a46_145"></a>[UB 137:7.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/137#p7_14)) Note that Jesus did not expect the same level of understanding of the Alpheus twins as he did of his other apostles. Jesus also counseled his apostles and disciples to begin with the simple and progress to the more advanced truths. He told them to bring people into the temple before explaining all the details of the temple. (<a id="a46_519"></a>[UB 141:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p6_4))
5. Be humble. We are separated from our pupils only by our accumulated knowledge and, hopefully, evolved wisdom. One day some of them may be better teachers than we are. Even Jesus said, when addressed as “Good Teacher,” “Why do you call me good?” (<a id="a47_249"></a>[UB 196:0.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p0_9)) He reminded his apostles that, “It is not your kingdom; you are only ambassadors.” (<a id="a47_378"></a>[UB 141:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p6_4)) Lest we think that because we have _The Urantia Book_ we somehow have a monopoly on truth, let us remember that a portion of the book is a restatement of eternal truths that have been taught to mortals through many books and many teachers. We are privileged to have the clearest restatement of these truths available since the time of Jesus, but our possession of the book does not make us in any way chosen or special.
6. Use examples and ideas from everyday life to teach deep spiritual truths. (<a id="a48_78"></a>[UB 151:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/151#p3_7)) Jesus did just this with his parables. Consider his parables concerning new wine in old wineskins, or sewing an unshrunk patch on a garment. He used many different sorts of illustrations from the everyday life of the Jewish people. He used illustrations familiar to bakers, carpenters, farmers, herders, tailors, and those of many other professions. He used illustrations familiar to the everyday lives of both men and women.
7. Be flexible and adaptable. When Jesus was teaching his apostles, they might ask a question somewhat off the subject Jesus was teaching about, but Jesus would seize upon this opportunity to teach a valuable lesson on the new subject. While Jesus did do some structured teaching, his lessons were more often spontaneous, arising from the situations in which he and his apostles and disciples were involved. As the authors of the Jesus papers express it, “Jesus was a teacher who taught as the occasion served; he was not a systematic teacher.” (<a id="a49_546"></a>[UB 149:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/149#p3_1))
8. Live what you teach.This is perhaps the most difficult principle to follow. Jesus said in reference to himself that whoever has seen the Son has seen the Father. He not only taught about the Father but he acted as our Father would in his interactions with others. Jesus lived what he taught. (<a id="a50_296"></a>[UB 157:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/157#p6_4)) But we aren't Jesus — can we really expect to live up to his level? Perhaps not, but can we expect people to believe our words if our lives are a poor example of the truths we try to teach? As Jesus told his apostles, “Of the teacher more is expected than of the pupil.” (<a id="a50_613"></a>[UB 140:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/140#p3_1)) It is difficult to hold up truth, beauty, and goodness as supreme values if they don't shine forth in our lives. Jesus spoke to this issue when he said, “The measure wherewith truth seekers are drawn to you represents the measure of your truth endowment, your righteousness. The extent to which you have to go with your message to the people is, in a way, the measure of your failure to live the whole or righteous life, the truth-co-ordinated life.” (<a id="a50_1110"></a>[UB 155:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/155#p1_5)) If we are spiritually fragrant, then we will attract people to us.
9. Do what you love. If teaching others doesn't inspire you, then perhaps you should consider another role in the Urantia community. Many hands are needed for innumerable tasks that don't entail teaching. Be an Andrew or a David Zebedee. Nevertheless, if you are called upon to be a teacher because no one else is available, give it your best effort. If you feel intimidated, consider all the spiritual forces that are aligned with you: the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Spirit, your guardian angel, your Thought Adjuster, and the other person's Thought Adjuster. If there is any spiritual receptivity in the other person's soul, how can you fail with such a great team on your side?
10. Don't isolate yourself from life. Jesus often went off to pray and commune with the Father, but it was usually to pray for his apostles and the work he commissioned them to do. He participated in life fully. He worked at many different professions and did them all well. He spent time learning how people of many different cultures live and worship. He taught and fraternized with the poorest of the poor and the most wealthy of his culture. He was a versatile and well rounded person.
	There are many other books besides _The Urantia Book_, and many other spiritual communities besides our Urantia community. How can you compare _The Urantia Book_ with the Bible to a Christian inquirer if you know very little about the Bible? What would you say to a Baha'i or a Muslim about _The Urantia Book_? It is good to have a support group and friends within the Urantia community, but do you have friends who are not students of the book?
11. Expect some disappointment and you won't be overly discouraged. When Jesus and the apostles visited Chorazin, they were not well received; the apostles were very discouraged about this. (<a id="a54_191"></a>[UB 146:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p4_6)) At another time, James and John wanted Jesus to call down fire on the village of Samaritans who would not let them stay in the village overnight . (<a id="a54_384"></a>[UB 139:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/139#p3_5)) Obviously, James and John had a bit to learn about dealing with disappointment.
	Surely, few of us will have to suffer as much disappointment as Jesus did. His family misunderstood him and, except for Ruth and later his brother James, did not fully accept his mission and teachings. The Jewish hierarchy almost unanimously rejected his teachings and even plotted to kill him. After the feeding of the 5,000, most of Jesus' followers turned away from him. And finally, he was executed on the cross as a common criminal. Many of those we would like to introduce to the book will reject it. It will be a real test of our character to see if we can accept this rejection but still be friends with that person. Like the Havona pilgrims, we must “feast upon uncertainty, fatten upon disappointment.” <a id="a55_714"></a>[UB 26:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p5_3))
12. Don't rely on a strictly emotional approach in teaching truth. (<a id="a56_68"></a>[UB 159:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p3_2)) The authors advise us that strong emotions are not necessarily a sign of spiritual experience. (<a id="a56_209"></a>[UB 159:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p3_6)) While we should not rely on highly emotional appeals, we can use them to gain attention when appropriate. Jesus taught the apostles that they can use emotions as a key to open the door to the mind, then appeal to the soul through the mind. (<a id="a56_495"></a>[UB 155:5.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/155#p5_15))
13. Don't do for others the things that they can do for themselves. Jesus several times told his apostles that they had to make decisions themselves; Jesus would not take that learning experience from them. (<a id="a57_208"></a>[UB 149:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/149#p0_2)) Also recall that when Rodan came seeking counsel with Jesus, the Master declined and assigned Nathaniel and Thomas to confer with Rodan. Jesus knew that Nathaniel and Thomas were capable of helping Rodan integrate his philosophy with his new found faith; and Jesus' faith in them was justified. This principle is certainly an apt one for teaching our children independence.
14. Be patient with everyone, including yourself. (<a id="a58_51"></a>[UB 141:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p6_4), <a id="a58_96"></a>[UB 141:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p3_4),<a id="a58_140"></a>[UB 149:2.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/149#p2_13), <a id="a58_187"></a>[UB 156:5.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/156#p5_8)) Jesus had every reason to be disappointed with his apostles. They were forever debating about who would be greatest in the coming kingdom. Even at the last supper, after all the times Jesus had admonished them about the last being first, they were vying for the seats of honor close to Jesus and once again debating about their positions in the coming kingdom. But Jesus dealt patiently with their human failings until the end.
	Tact and tolerance are the handmaidens of patience. Jesus counseled his apostles that these are necessary virtues when dealing with people. (<a id="a59_142"></a>[UB 156:5.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/156#p5_18)) Patience, tact, and tolerance are the lubricants for the wheels of progress.
15. Every good teacher is also a good student. The human Jesus wasn't born with inherent knowledge. As a child and as a young man, he had to learn new ideas as we do-at least until he was able to contact his divine nature. (<a id="a60_224"></a>[UB 132:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_1)) I have often been surprised at the insights a new student with a fresh point of view can bring to a study of _The Urantia Book_. This book is such a treasure trove of information and ideas that we can hardly exhaust them even after studying the book all our lives. I admire people such as the late Dr. Jim Mills, who went back to school, obtained his Master's degree, and then his Ph.D., long after he retired so that he could attempt to bring _The Urantia Book_ to the notice of academia.
16. Be genuine and natural. (<a id="a61_29"></a>[UB 159:5.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p5_17)) Nothing will alienate people more quickly than discovering that a teacher is not what he or she pretends to be. The authors instruct us that Jesus was unaffected and natural in his dealings with people. (<a id="a61_280"></a>[UB 141:7.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p7_12))
17. Don't dogmatize. (<a id="a62_22"></a>[UB 141:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p5_4)) The authors of _The Urantia Book_ tell us quite plainly that the book has some flaws and that it is only one of a continuing series of revelations. If we hold this book up as perfect truth, we are bound to be embarrassed at some point as those we seek to teach find and point out the flaws. The authors point out that attempting to crystallize truth is a sure way to kill it. As Jesus told his disciples, “You are not given truth to crystallize into settled, safe and honored forms.” (<a id="a62_552"></a>[UB 176:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p3_7))
18. Be a good listener as Jesus was. (<a id="a63_38"></a>[UB 171:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/171#p7_5)) Sometimes we are so anxious to tell the story of _The Urantia Book_ that we forget to pause to get the reaction of our listeners. One of the greatest gifts we can give someone is to listen sympathetically to them. But sometimes being a good listener requires priming the pump to get the words flowing. Jesus knew how to draw people out. Sometimes he used a startling saying such as telling someone that they had to be “born again.” Or he would often ask a question to get the mind of the other person activated.
19. Respect the personality of the individual you are teaching. Don't use physical force or overpowering arguments to coerce men and women into the kingdom. (<a id="a64_158"></a>[UB 159:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p3_2)) As Jesus taught his apostles, “ allow each soul to develop in its own way.” (<a id="a64_280"></a>[UB 140:8.26](/en/The_Urantia_Book/140#p8_26))
20. Use humor as an effective teaching tool. (<a id="a65_46"></a>[UB 48:4.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p4_18), <a id="a65_91"></a>[UB 171:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/171#p7_1)) The authors mention how Jesus could have good naturedly handled the unruly crowd at the synagogue in Nazareth if the apostles hadn't stirred them up. (<a id="a65_287"></a>[UB 150:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/150#p9_3)) On page 1736 we are informed that Jesus appreciated humor. Unfortunately, much of Jesus' humor is lost in the Bible and even in _The Urantia Book_. It may be in part because his humor was subtle and related to the Jewish culture of his day. Also, much of it may be lost when his words are translated into English. We do know that he referred to James and John humorously as the “Sons of Thunder” after they wanted to call down lightning on some Samaritans. (<a id="a65_790"></a>[UB 139:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/139#p3_1)) Also, his giving the name Peter to Simon Peter apparently had humorous overtones. (<a id="a65_918"></a>[UB 139:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/139#p2_2)) A number of years ago, I read a book by Elton Trueblood called _The Humor of Christ_, in which he points out the types of humor found in Jesus' words in the Bible. The humor is there, if you look for it.
	The authors of _The Urantia Book_ devote a significant amount of space to humor when describing life on the mansion worlds. One of the great advantages of humor as a teaching aide is that it helps us to achieve insight into new truths or facts. (<a id="a66_247"></a>[UB 48:4.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p4_18))
21. Don't overteach. One of the illustrations of human philosophy used in teaching morontia mota states in part, “a pint can never hold a quart.” (<a id="a67_147"></a>[UB 48:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p7_5)) Jesus knew the capacity of his apostles; he didn't overteach them. The authors warn us that overteaching can precipitate confusion. (<a id="a67_323"></a>[UB 137:7.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/137#p7_14)) The authors also remind us, “While light dispels darkness, it can also be so 'blinding' as to confuse and frustrate.” (<a id="a67_489"></a>[UB 140:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/140#p4_5))
22. If you wish to be a teacher of religious values, it would be wise to ignore the civic, social, and economic realms in your teaching. (<a id="a68_138"></a>[UB 138:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/138#p5_4)) It is no secret that certain conservative religious groups have tried to gain control of the United States congress. This attempt seems to have backfired, and some are now calling for a return to attaining spiritual ends through changing individuals. And it has been to the detriment of some of the liberal Christian churches that they have focused on social action while neglecting spiritual issues.

Jesus refrained from commenting on scientific issues, social concerns, economic policies, and political problems. When pressed on the issue of the rule of Rome over the Jews, he wisely said, “Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's and to God the things which are God's.” (<a id="a70_280"></a>[UB 140:8.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/140#p8_9), <a id="a70_325"></a>[UB 174:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/174#p2_2))

I believe that in an age to come, _The Urantia Book_ may achieve a status approaching that of the Bible in Western Civilization today. There will be many with a great hunger to know what the book has to say on numerous questions. There are those who will be so awed by the size and complexity of this book that they will seek out teachers to help them understand the deeper concepts. There will be others who lack the patience or time for an in-depth study of the book who will look to teachers to give them the essence of the book. The time for such a teaching corps has not arrived yet, but the hour for preparing for such a time is upon us.

I believe that today we are in the phase of the Urantia community's evolution of teaching teachers. We need to give them the tools to successfully introduce the book to many different sorts of people in many different situations. With what better tools could we equip them than the teaching

> _Richard Bain is an electrical engineer and an editor of Innerface International. He is a long time student of_ The Urantia Book.
{.is-info}

> _Some day a reformation in the Christian church may strike deep enough to get back to the unadulterated religion of Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith._ (<a id="a79_165"></a>[UB 196:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p2_1))





<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Spiritual_Fellowship_Journal/A_Clarification">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">A Clarification</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_spiritual_fellowship_journal#fall-1999">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Fall 1999 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
