---
title: "HYMN CI. — CIV."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_7_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XCI. — C.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_8_Index">
          <span class="pr-2">Rig-Veda, Book 8</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h101"></span>

## HYMN CI. Parjanya.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SPEAK forth three words, the words which light precedeth, which milk this udder that produceth nectar.
Quickly made manifest, the Bull hath bellowed, engendering the germ of plants, the Infant.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Giver of growth to plants, the God who ruleth over the waters and all moving creatures,
Vouchsafe us triple shelter for our refuge, and threefold light to succour and befriend us.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Now he is sterile, now begetteth offspring, even as he willeth doth he change his figure.
The Father's genial flow bedews the Mother; therewith the Sire, therewith the son is nourished.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  In him all living creatures have their being, and the three heavens with triply-flowing waters.
Three reservoirs that sprinkle down their treasure shed their sweet streams around him with a murmur.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  May this my song to Sovran Lord Parjanya come near unto his heart and give him pleasure.
May we obtain the showers that bring enjoyment, and God-protected plants with goodly fruitage.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  He is the Bull of all, and their impregner: he holds the life of all things fixed and moving.
May this rite save me till my hundredth autumn. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

<span id="h102"></span>

## HYMN CII Parjanya.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SING forth and laud Parjanya, son of Heaven, who sends the gift of rain
May he provide our pasturage.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Parjanya is the God who forms in kine, in mares, in plants of earth,
And womankind, the germ of life.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Offer and pour into his mouth oblation rich in savoury juice:
May he for ever give us food.

<span id="h103"></span>

## HYMN CIII. Frogs.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THEY who lay quiet for a year, the Brahmans who fulfil their vows,
The Frogs have lifted up their voice, the voice Parjanya hath inspired.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  What time on these, as on a dry skin lying in the pool's bed, the floods of heaven descended,
The music of the Frogs comes forth in concert like the cows lowing with their calves beside them.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  When at the coming of the Rains the water has poured upon them as they yearned and thirsted,
One seeks another as he talks and greets him with cries of pleasure as a son his father.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Each of these twain receives the other kindly, while they are revelling in the flow of waters,
When the Frog moistened by the rain springs forward, and Green and Spotty both combine their voices.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  When one of these repeats the other's language, as he who learns the lesson of the teacher,
Your every limb seems to be growing larger as ye converse with eloquence on the waters.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Onc is Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat the other, one Frog is Green and one of them is Spotty.
They bear one common name, and yet they vary, and, talking, modulate the voice diversely.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  As Brahmans, sitting round the brimful vessel, talk at the Soma-rite of Atiratra,
So, Frogs, ye gather round the pool to honour this day of all the year, the first of Rain-time.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  These Brahmans with the Soma juice, performing their year-long rite, have lifted up their voices;
And these Adhvaryus, sweating with their kettles, come forth and show themselves, and none are hidden.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  They keep the twelve month's God-appointed order, and never do the men neglect the season.
Soon as the Rain-time in the year returneth, these who were heated kettles gain their freedom.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Cow-bellow and Goat-bleat have granted riches, and Green and Spotty have vouchsafed us treasure.
The Frogs who give us cows in hundreds lengthen our lives in this most fertilizing season.

<span id="h104"></span>

## HYMN CIV. Indra-Soma.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  INDRA and Soma, burn, destroy the demon foe, send downward, O ye Bulls, those who add gloom to gloom.
Annihilate the fools, slay them and burn them up: chase them away from us, pierce the voracious ones.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Indra and Soma, let sin round the wicked boil like as a caldron set amid the flames of fire.
Against the foe of prayer, devourer of raw flesh, the vile fiend fierce of eye, keep ye perpetual hate.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Indra and Soma, plunge the wicked in the depth, yea, cast them into darkness that hath no support,
So that not one of them may ever thence return: so may your wrathful might prevail and conquer them.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Indra and Soma, hurl your deadly crushing bolt down on the wicked fiend from heaven and from the earth.
Yea, forge out of the mountains your celestial dart wherewith ye burn to death the waxing demon race.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Indra and Soma, cast ye downward out of heaven your deadly darts of stone burning with fiery flame,
Eternal, scorching darts; plunge the voracious ones within the depth, and let them sink without a sound.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Indra and Soma, let this hymn control you both, even as the girth encompasses two vigorous steeds-
The song of praise which I with wisdom offer you: do ye, as Lords of men, animate these my prayers.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  In your impetuous manner think ye both thereon: destroy these evil beings, slay the treacherous fiends.
Indra and Soma, let the wicked have no bliss who evermore assails us with malignity.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Whoso accuses me with words of falsehood when I pursue my way with guileless spirit,
May he, the speaker of untruth, be, Indra, like water which the hollowed hand compresses.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Those who destroy, as is their wont, the simple, and with their evil natures barm the righteous,
May Soma give them over to the serpent, or to the lap of Nirrti consign them.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  The fiend, O Agni, who designs to injure the essence of our food, kine, steeds, or bodies,
May he, the adversary, thief, and robber, sink to destruction, both himself and offipring.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  May he be swept away, himself and children: may all the three earths press him down beneath them.
May his fair glory, O ye Gods, be blighted, who in the day or night would fain destroy us.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  The prudent finds it easy to distinguish the true and false: their words oppose each other.
Of these two that which is the true and honest, Soma protects, and brings the false to nothing.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Never doth Soma aid and guide the wicked or him who falsely claims the Warrior's title.
He slays the fiend and him who speaks untruly: both lie entangled in the noose of Indra.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  As if I worshipped deities of falsehood, or thought vain thoughts about the Gods, O Agni.
Why art thou angry with us, Jātavedas? Destruction fall on those who lie against thee!
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  So may I die this day if I have harassed any man's life or if I be a demon.
Yea, may he lose all his ten sons together who with false tongue hath called me Yātudhāna.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  May Indra slay him with a mighty weapon, and let the vilest of all creatures perish,
The fiend who says that he is pure, who calls me a demon though devoid of demon nature.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  She too who wanders like an owl at night-time, hiding her body in her guile and malice,
May she fall downward into endless caverns. May press-stones with loud ring destroy the demons.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Spread out, ye Maruts, search among the people: seize ye and grind the Rākṣasas to pieces,
Who fly abroad, transformed to birds, at night-time, or sully and pollute our holy worship.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Hurl down from heaven thy bolt of stone, O Indra: sharpen it, Maghavan, made keen by Soma.
Forward, behind, and from above and under, smite down the demons with thy rocky weapon.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  They fly, the demon dogs, and, bent on mischief, fain would they harm indomitable Indra.
Śakra makes sharp his weapon for the wicked: now, let him cast his bolt at fiendish wizards.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Indra hath ever been the fiends’ destroyer who spoil oblations of the Gods’ invokers:
Yea, Śakra, like an axe that splits the timber, attacks and smashes them like earthen vessels.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  Destroy the fiend shaped like an owl or owlet, destroy him in the form of dog or cuckoo.
Destroy him shaped as eagle or as vulture as with a stone, O Indra, crush the demon.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  Let not the fiend of witchcraft-workers reach us: may Dawn drive off the couples of Kimīdins.
Earth keep us safe from earthly woe and trouble: from grief that comes from heaven mid-air preserve us.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  Slay the male demon, Indra! slay the female, joying and triumphing in arts of magic.
Let the fools' gods with bent necks fall and perish, and see no more the Sun when he arises.
<p id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup>  Look each one hither, look around Indra and Soma, watch ye well.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_7_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XCI. — C.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_8_Index">
          <span class="pr-2">Rig-Veda, Book 8</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
