---
title: "HYMN CLXXXI. Aśvins"
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_180">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CLXXI. — CLXXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_200">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXCI.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN CLXXXI. Aśvins

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WHAT, dearest Pair, is this in strength and riches that ye as Priests are bring from the waters?
This sacrifice is your glorification, ye who protect mankind and give them treasures.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  May your pure steeds, rain-drinkers, bring you hither, swift as the tempest, your celestial coursers,
Rapid as thought, with fair backs, full of vigour, resplendent in their native light, O Aśvins.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Your car is like a torrent rushing downward: may it come nigh, broad-seated, for our welfare,—
Car holy, strong, that ever would be foremost, thought-swift, which ye, for whom we long, have mounted.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Here sprung to life, they both have sung together, with bodies free from stain, with signs that mark them;
One of you Prince of Sacrifice, the Victor, the other counts as Heaven's auspicious offspring.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  May your car-seat, down-gliding, golden-coloured, according to your wish approach our dwellings.
Men shall feed full the bay steeds of the other, and, Aśvins they with roars shall stir the regions.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Forth comes your strong Bull like a cloud of autumn, sending abundant food of liquid sweetness.
Let them feed with the other's ways and vigour: the upper streams have come and do us service.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Your constant song hath been sent forth, Disposers! that flows threefold in mighty strength, O Aśvins.
Thus lauded, give the suppliant protection moving or resting hear mine invocation.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  This song of bright contents for you is swelling in the men's hall where three-fold grass is ready.
Your strong rain-cloud, ye Mighty Ones, hath swollen, honouring men as ’twere with milk's outpouring.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  The prudent worshipper, like Pūṣan, Aśvins! praises you as he praises Dawn and Agni,
When, singing with devotion, he invokes you. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CLXXXII. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THIS was the task. Appear promptly, ye prudent Ones. Here is the chariot drawn by strong steeds: be ye glad.
Heart-stirring, longed for, succourers of Viśpalā, here are Heaven's Sons whose sway blesses the pious man.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Longed for, most Indra-like, mighty, most Marut-like, most wonderful in deed, car-borne, best charioteers,
Bring your full chariot hither heaped with liquid sweet: thereon, ye Aśvins, come to him who offers gifts.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  What make ye there, ye Mighty? Wherefore linger ye with folk who, offering not, are held in high esteem?
Pass over them; make ye the niggard's life decay: give light unto the singer eloquent in praise.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Crunch up on. every side the dogs who bark at us: slay ye our foes, O Aśvins this ye understand.
Make wealthy every word of him who praises you: accept with favour, both Nāsatyas, this my laud.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Ye made for Tugra's son amid the water-floods that animated ship with wings to fly withal,
Whereon with God-devoted mind ye brought him forth, and fled with easy flight from out the mighty surge.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Four ships most welcome in the midst of ocean, urged by the Aśvins, save the son of Tugra,
Him who was cast down headlong in the waters, plunged in the thick inevitable darkness.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  What tree was that which stood fixed in surrounding sea to which the son of Tugra supplicating clung?
Like twigs, of which some winged creature may take hold, ye, Aśvins, bore him off safely to your renown.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Welcome to you be this the hymn of praises uttered by Mānas, O Nāsatyas, Heroes,
From this our gathering where we offer Soma. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CLXXXIII. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAKE ready that which passes thought in swiftness, that hath three wheels and triple seat, ye Mighty,
Whereon ye seek the dwelling of the pious, whereon, threefold, ye fly like birds with pinions.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Light rolls your easy chariot faring earthward, what time, for food, ye, full of wisdom, mount it.
May this song, wondrous fair, attend your glory: ye, as ye travel, wait on Dawn Heaven's Daughter.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Ascend your lightly rolling car, approaching the worshipper who turns him to his duties,—
Whereon ye come unto the house to quicken man and his offspring, O Nāsatyas, Heroes.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Let not the wolf, let not the she-wolf harm you. Forsake me not, nor pass me by or others.
Here stands your share, here is your hymn, ye Mighty: yours are these vessels, full of pleasant juices.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Gotama, Purumīlha, Atri bringing oblations all invoke you for protection.
Like one who goes straight to the point directed, ye Nāsatyas, to mine invocation.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  We have passed o’er the limit of this darkness: our praise hath been bestowed on you, O Aśvins.
Come hitherward by paths which Gods have travelled. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CLXXXIV. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  LET us invoke you both this day and after the priest is here with lauds when morn is breaking:
Nāsatyas, wheresoe’er ye be, Heaven's Children, for him who is more liberal than the godless.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  With us, ye Mighty, let yourselves be joyful, glad in our stream of Soma slay the niggards.
Graciously hear my hymns and invitations, marking, O Heroes, with your cars my longing.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Nāsatyas, Pūṣans, ye as Gods for glory arranged and set in order Sūrya's bridal.
Your giant steeds move on, sprung from the waters, like ancient times of Varuṇa the Mighty.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Your grace be with us, ye who love sweet juices: further the hymn sung by the poet Māna,
When men are joyful in your glorious actions, to win heroic strength, ye Bounteous Givers.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  This praise was made, O liberal Lords, O Aśvins, for you with fair adornment by the Mānas.
Come to our house for us and for our children, rejoicing, O Nāsatyas, in Agastya.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  We have passed o’er the limit of this darkness: our praise hath been bestowed on you, O Aśvins.
Come hitherward by paths which Gods have travelled. may we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CLXXXV. Heaven and Earth.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WHETHER of these is elder, whether later? How were they born? Who knoweth it, ye sages?
These of themselves support all things existing: as on a car the Day and Night roll onward.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The Twain uphold, though motionless and footless, a widespread offspring having feet and moving.
Like your own son upon his parents’ bosom, protect us, Heaven and earth, from fearful danger.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  I call for Aditi's unrivalled bounty, perfect, celestial, deathless, meet for worship.
Produce this, ye Twain Worlds, for him who lauds you. Protect us, Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  May we be close to both the Worlds who suffer no pain, Parents of Gods, who aid with favour,
Both mid the Gods, with Day and Night alternate. Protect us, Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Faring together, young, with meeting limits, Twin Sisters lying in their Parents’ bosom,
Kissing the centre of the world together. Protect us, Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Duly I call the two wide seats, the mighty, the general Parents, with the God's protection.
Who, beautiful to look on, make the nectar. Protect us, Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Wide, vast, and manifold, whose bounds are distant,—these, reverent, I address at this our worship,
The blessed Pair, victorious, all-sustaining. Protect us, Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  What sin we have at any time committed against the Gods, our friend, our house's chieftain,
Thereof may this our hymn be expiation. Protect us, Heaven and Earth, from fearful danger.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  May both these Friends of man, who bless, preserve me, may they attend me with their help and favour.
Enrich the man more liberal than the godless. May we, ye Gods, be strong with food rejoicing.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Endowed with understanding, I have uttered this truth, for all to hear, to Earth and Heaven.
Be near us, keep us from reproach and trouble. Father and Mother, with your help preserve us.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Be this my prayer fulfilled, O Earth and Heaven, wherewith, Father and Mother, I address you.
Nearest of Gods be ye with your protection. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CLXXXVI. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  LOVED of all men, may Savitar, through praises offered as sacred food, come to our synod,
That you too, through-our hymn, ye ever-youthful, may gladden, at your visit, all our people.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  To us may all the Gods come trooped together, Aryaman, Mitra, Varuṇa concordant,
That all may be promoters of our welfare, and with great might preserve our strength from slackness.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Agni I sing, the guest you love most dearly: the Conqueror through our lauds is friendly-minded.
That he may be our Varuṇa rich in glory and send food like a prince praised by the godly.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  To you I seek with reverence, Night and Morning, like a cow good to milk, with hope to conquer,
Preparing on a common day the praise. song with milk of various hues within this udder.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  May the great Dragon of the Deep rejoice us: as one who nourishes her young comes Sindhu,
With whom we will incite the Child of Waters whom vigorous course swift as thought bring hither.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Moreover Tvaṣṭar also shall approach us, one-minded with the princes at his visit.
Hither shall come the Vṛtra-slayer Indra, Ruler of men, as strongest of the Heroes.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Him too our hymns delight, that yoke swift horses, like mother cows who lick their tender youngling.
To him our songs shall yield themselves like spouses, to him the most delightful of the Heroes.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  So may the Maruts, armed with mighty weapons, rest here on heaven and earth with hearts in concord,
As Gods whose cars have dappled steeds like torrents, destroyers of the foe allies of Mitra.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  They hasten on to happy termination their orders when they are made known by
glory.
As on a fair bright day the arrow flieth o’er all the barren soil their missiles sparkle.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Incline the Aśvins to show grace, and Pūṣan, for power and might have they, their own possession.
Friendly are Viṣṇu, Vāta, and Ṛbhukṣan so may I bring the Gods to make us happy.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  This is my reverent thought of you, ye Holy; may it inspire you, make you dwell among us,—
Thought, toiling for the Gods and seeking treasure. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CLXXXVII. Praise of Food.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Now will I glorify Food that upholds great strength,
By whose invigorating power Trita rent Vṛtra limb from limb.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  O pleasant Food, O Food of meath, thee have we chosen for our own,
So be our kind protector thou.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Come hitherward to us, O Food, auspicious with auspicious help,
Health-bringing, not unkind, a dear and guileless friend.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  These juices which, O Food, are thine throughout the regions are diffused.
like winds they have their place in heaven.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  These gifts of thine, O Food, O Food most sweet to taste,
These savours of thy juices work like creatures that have mighty necks.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  In thee, O Food, is set the spirit of great Gods.
Under thy flag brave deeds were done he slew the Dragon with thy help.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  If thou be gone unto the splendour of the clouds,
Even from thence, O Food of meath, prepared for our enjoyment, come.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Whatever morsel we consume from waters or from plants of earth, O Soma, wax thou fat thereby.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  What Soma, we enjoy from thee in milky food or barley-brew, Vātāpi, grow thou fat thereby.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  O Vegetable, Cake of meal, he wholesome, firm, and strengthening: Vātāpi, grow thou fat thereby.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  O Food, from thee as such have we drawn forth with lauds, like cows, our sacrificial gifts,
From thee who banquetest with Gods, from thee who banquetest with us.

## HYMN CLXXXVIII. Āprīs.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WINNER of thousands, kindled, thou shinest a God with Gods to-day.
Bear out oblations, envoy, Sage.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Child of Thyself the sacrifice is for the righteous blent with meath,
Presenting viands thousandfold.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Invoked and worthy of our praise bring Gods whose due is sacrifice:
Thou, Agni, givest countless gifts.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  To seat a thousand Heroes they eastward have strewn the grass with might,
Whereon, Ādityas, ye shine forth.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The sovran all-imperial Doors, wide, good, many and manifold,
Have poured their streams of holy oil.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  With gay adornment, fair to see, in glorious beauty shine they forth:
Let Night and Morning rest them here.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Let these two Sages first of all, heralds divine and eloquent,
Perform for us this sacrifice.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  You I address, Sarasvatī, and Bhāratī, and Iḷā, all:
Urge ye us on to glorious fame.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Tvaṣṭar the Lord hath made all forms and all the cattle of the field
Cause them to multiply for us.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Send to the Gods, Vanaspati, thyself, the sacrificial draught:
Let Agni make the oblations sweet.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Agni, preceder of the Gods, is honoured with the sacred song:
He glows at offerings blest with Hail!

## HYMN CLXXXIX. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  BY goodly paths lead us to riches, Agni, God who knowest every sacred duty.
Remove the sin that makes us stray and wander. most ample adoration will we bring thee.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Lead us anew to happiness, O Agni; lead us beyond all danger and affliction.
Be unto us a wide broad ample castle bless, prosper on their way our sons and offspring.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Far from us, Agni, put thou all diseases let them strike lauds that have no saving Agni.
God, make our home again to be a blessing, with all the Immortal Deities, O Holy.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Preserve us, Agni, with perpetual succour, refulgent in the dwelling which thou lovest.
O Conqueror, most youthful, let no danger touch him who praises thee to-day or after.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Give not us up a prey to sin, O Agni, the greedy enemy that brings us trouble;
Not to the fanged that bites, not to the toothless: give not us up, thou Conqueror, to the spoiler.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Such as thou art, born after Law, O Agni when lauded give protection to our bodies,
From whosoever would reproach or injure: for thou, God, rescuest from all oppression.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Thou, well discerning both these classes, comest to men at early morn, O holy Agni.
Be thou obedient unto man at evening, to be adorned, as keen, by eager suitors.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  To him have we addressed our pious speeches, I, Māna's son, to him victorious Agni.
May we gain countless riches with the sages. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CXC. Bṛhaspati.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  GLORIFY thou Bṛhaspati, the scatheless, who must be praised with hymns, sweet-tongued and mighty,
To whom as leader of the song, resplendent, worthy of lauds, both Gods and mortals listen.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  On him wait songs according to the season even as a stream of pious men set moving.
Bṛhaspati—for he laid out the expanses—was, at the sacrifice, vast Mātariśvan.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The praise, the verse that offers adoration, may he bring forth, as the Sun sends his arms out,
He who gives daily light through this God's wisdom, strong as a dread wild beast, and inoffensive.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  His song of praise pervades the earth and heaven: let the wise worshipper draw it, like a courser.
These of Bṛhaspati, like hunters' arrows, go to the skies that change their hue like serpents.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Those, God, who count thee as a worthless bullock, and, wealthy sinners, live on thee the Bounteous,—
On fools like these no blessing thou bestowest: Bṛhaspati, thou punishest the spiteful.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Like a fair path is he, where grass is pleasant, though hard to win, a Friend beloved most early.
Those who unharmed by enemies behold us, while they would make them bare, stood closely compassed.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  He to whom songs of praise go forth like torrents, as rivers eddying under banks flow sea-ward—
Bṛhaspati the wise, the eager, closely looks upon both, the waters and the vessel.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  So hath Bṛhaspati, great, strong and mighty, the God exceeding powerful, been brought hither.
May he thus lauded give us kine and horses. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_180">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CLXXI. — CLXXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_200">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXCI.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
