---
title: "HYMN CLI. — CLX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_150">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CXLI. — CL.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_170">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLXI. — CLXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN CLI. Faith.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  By Faith is Agni kindled, through Faith is oblation offered up.
We celebrate with praises Faith upon the height of happiness.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Bless thou the man who gives, O Faith; Faith, bless the man who fain would give.
Bless thou the liberal worshippers: bless thou the word that I have said.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Even as the Deities maintained Faith in the mighty Asuras,
So make this uttered wish of mine true for the liberal worshippers.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Guarded by Vāyu, Gods and men who sacrifice draw near to Faith.
Man winneth Faith by yearnings of the heart, and opulence by Faith.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Faith in the early morning, Faith at noonday will we invocate,
Faith at the setting of the Sun. O Faith, endow us with belief.

## HYMN CLII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  A MIGHTY Governor art thou, Wondrous, Destroyer of the foe,
Whose friend is never done to death, and never, never overcome.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Lord of the clan, who brings us bliss, Strong, Warrior, Slayer of the fiend,
May India, Soma-drinker, go before us, Bull who gives us peace.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Drive Rākṣasas and foes away, break thou in pieces Vṛtra'sjaws:
O Vṛtra-slaying Indra, quell the foeman's wrath who threatens us.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  O Indra, beat our foes away, humble the men who challenge us:
Send down to nether darkness him who seeks to do us injury.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Baffle the foeman's plan, ward off his weapon who would conquer us.
Give shelter from his furious wrath, and keep his murdering dart afar.

## HYMN CLIII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SWAYING about, the Active Ones came nigh to Indra at his birth,
And shared his great heroic might.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Based upon strength and victory and power, O Indra is thy birth:
Thou, Mighty One, art strong indeed.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Thou art the Vṛtra-slayer, thou, Indra, hast spread the firmament:
Thou hast with might upheld the heavens.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Thou, Indra, bearest in thine arms the lightning that accords with thee,
Whetting thy thunderbolt with might.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Thou, Indra, art preeminent over all creatures in thy might:
Thou hast pervaded every place.

## HYMN CLIV. New Life.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FOR some is Soma purified, some sit by sacrificial oil:
To those for whom the meath flows forth, even to those let him depart.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Invincible through Fervour, those whom Fervour hath advanced to heaven,
Who showed great Fervour in their lives, -even to those let him depart.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The heroes who contend in war and boldly cast their lives away,
Or who give guerdon thousandfold, -even to those let him depart.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Yea, the first followers of Law, Law's pure and holy strengtheners,
The Fathers, Yama! Fervour-moved,even to those let him depart.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Skilled in a thousand ways and means, the sages who protect the Sun,
The Ṛṣis, Yama! Fervour-moved,—even to those let him depart.

## HYMN CLV. Various.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  ARAYI, one-eyed limping hag, fly, ever-screeching, to the hill.
We frighten thee away with these, the heroes of Sirimbitha.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Scared from this place and that is she, destroyer of each germ unborn.
Go, sharp-horned Brāhmaṇaspti and drive Arayi far away.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Yon log that floats without a man to guide it on the river's edge,—
Seize it, thou thing with hideous jaws, and go thou far away thereon.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  When, foul with secret stain and spot, ye hastened onward to the breast,
All Indra's enemies were slain and passed away like froth and foam.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  These men have led about the cow, have duly carried Agni round,
And raised their glory tg the Gods. Who will attack them with success?

## HYMN CLVI. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  LET songs of ours speed Agni forth like a fleet courser in the race,
And we will win each prize through him.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Agni the dart whereby we gain kine for ourselves with help from thee,—
That send us for the gain of wealth.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  O Agni, bring us wealth secure, vast wealth in horses and in kine:
Oil thou the socket, turn the wheel.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  O Agni, thou hast made the Sun, Eternal Star, to mount the sky,
Bestowing light on living men.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Thou, Agni, art the people's light, best, dearest, seated in thy shrine:
Watch for the singer, give him life.

## HYMN CLVII. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WE will, with Indra and all Gods to aid us, bring these existing worlds into subjection.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Our sacrifice, our bodies, and our offspr. let Indra form together with Ādityas.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  With the Ādityas, with the band of Maruts, may Indra be Protector of our bodies.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  As when the Gods came, after they had slaughtered the Asuras, keeping safe their Godlike nature,
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Brought the Sun hitherward with mighty powers, and looked about them on their vigorous Godhead.

## HYMN CLVIII. Sūrya.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY Sūrya guard us out of heaven, and Vāta from the firmament,
And Agni from terrestrial spots.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou Savitar whose flame deserves hundred libations, be thou pleased:
From failing lightning keep us safe.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  May Savitar the God, and may Parvata also give us sight;
May the Creator give us sight.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Give sight unto our eye, give thou our bodies sight that they may see:
May we survey, discern this world.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Thus, Sūrya, may we look on thee, on thee most lovely to behold,
See clearly with the eyes of men.

## HYMN CLIX. Saci Paulomi.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  YON Sun hath mounted up, and this my happy fate hate mounted high.
I knowing this, as conqueror have won my husband for mine own.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  I am the banner and the head, a mighty arbitress am I:
I am victorious, and my Lord shall be submissive to my will.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  My Sons are slayers of the foe, my Daughter is a ruling Queen:
I am victorious: o’er my Lord my song of triumph is supreme.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Oblation, that which Indra gave and thus grew glorious and most high,—
This have I offered, O ye Gods, and rid me of each rival wife.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Destroyer of the rival wife, Sole Spouse, victorious, conqueror,
The others' glory have I seized as ’twere the wealth of weaker Dames.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  I have subdued as conqueror these rivals, these my fellow-wives,
That I may hold imperial sway over this Hero and the folk.

## HYMN CLX. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  TASTE this strong draught enriched with offered viands: with all thy chariot here unyoke thy Coursers.
Let not those other sacrificers stay thee, Indra: these juices shed for thee are ready.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thine is the juice effused, thine are the juices yet to be pressed: our resonant songs invite thee.
O Indra, pleased to-day with this libation, come, thou who knowest all and drink the Soma.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Whoso, devoted to the God, effuses Soma for him with yearning heart and spirit,—
Never doth Indra give away his cattle: for him he makes the lovely Soma famous.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  He looks with Ioving favour on the mortal who, like a rich man, pours for him the Soma.
Maghavan in his bended arm supports him: he slays, unasked, the men who hate devotion.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  We call on thee to come to us, desirous of goods and spoil, of cattle, and of horses.
For thy new love and favour are we present: let us invoke thee, Indra, as our welfare.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_150">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CXLI. — CL.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_170">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLXI. — CLXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
