---
title: "HYMN CXXXI. — CXL."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_130">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CXXI. — CXXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_150">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXLI. — CL.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h130"></span>

## HYMN CXXXI. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  DRIVE all our enemies away, O Indra, the western, mighty Conqueror, and the eastern.
Hero, drive off our northern foes and southern, that we in thy wide shelter may be joyful.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  What then? As men whose fields are full of barley reap the ripe corn removing it in order,
So bring the food of those men, bring it hither, who went not to prepare the grass for worship.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Men come not with one horse at sacred seasons; thus they obtain no honour in assemblies.
Sages desiring herds of kine and horses strengthen the mighty Indra for his friendship.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Ye, Aśvins, Lords of Splendour, drank full draughts of grateful Soma juice,
And aided Indra in his work with Namuci of Asura birth.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  As parents aid a son, both Aśvins, Indra, aided thee with their wondrous Powers and wisdom.
When thou, with might. hadst drunk the draught that gladdens, Sarasvatī, O Maghavan, refreshed thee.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Indra is strong to save, rich in assistance may he, possessing all, be kind and gracious.
May he disperse our foes and give us safety, and may we be the lords of hero vigou r.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  May we enjoy his favour, his the Holy may we enjoy his blessed loving kindness.
May this rich Indra, as our good Protector, drive off and keep afar all those who hate us.

<span id="h132"></span>

## HYMN CXXXII. Mitra. Varuṇa.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY Dyaus the Lord of lauded wealth, and Earth stand by the man who offers sacrifice,
And may the Aśvins, both the Gods, strengthen the worshipper with bliss.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  As such we honour you, Mitra and Varuṇa, with hasty zeal, most blest, you who sustain the folk.
So may we, through your friendship for the worshipper, subdue the fiends.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  And when we seek to win your love and friendship, weẉho have precious wealth in our possession,
Or when the worshipper augments his riches let not his treasures be shut up
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  That other, Asura! too was born of Heaven. thou art, O Varuṇa, the King of all men.
The chariot's Lord was well content, forbearing to anger Death by sin so great.
This sin hath Sakaputa here committed. Heroes who fled to their dear friend he slayeth,
When the Steed bringeth down your grace and favour in bodies dear and worshipful.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Your Mother Aditi, ye wise, was purified with water even as earth is purified from heaven.
Show love and kindness here below: wash her in rays of heavenly light.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Ye Twain have seated you as Lords of Wealth, as one who mounts a car to him who sits upon the pole, upon the wood.
These our disheartened tribes Nrmedhas saved from woe, Sumedhas saved from Woe.

<span id="h133"></span>

## HYMN CXXXIII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SING strength to Indra that shall set his chariot in the foremost place.
Giver of room in closest fight, slayer of foes in shock of war, be thou our great encourager. Let the weak bowstrings break upon the bows of feeble enemies.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou didst destroy the Dragon: thou sentest the rivers down to earth.
Foeless, O Indra, wast thou born. Thou tendest well each choicest thing. Therefore we draw us close to thee. Let the weak bowstrings break upon the bows of feeble enemies.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Destroyed be all malignities and all our enemy's designs.
Thy bolt thou castest, at the foe, O Indra, who would srnite us dead: thy liberal bounty gives us wealth.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The robber people round about, Indra, who watch and aim at us,—
Trample them down beneath thy foot; a conquering scatterer art thou.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Whoso assails us, Indra, be the man a stranger or akin,
Bring down, thyself, his strength although it be as vast as are the heavens.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Close to thy friendship do we cling, O Indra, and depend, or, thee.
Lead us beyond all pain and grief along the path of holy Law.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Do thou bestow upon us her, O Indra, who yields according to the singer's longing,
That the great Cow may, with exhaustless udder, pouring a thousand streams, give milk to feed us.

<span id="h134"></span>

## HYMN CXXXIV. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  As, like the Morning, thou hast filled, O Indra, both the earth and heaven.
So as the Mighty One, great King of all the mighty world of men, the Goddess Mother brought thee forth, the Blessed Mother gave thee life.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Relax that mortal's stubborn strength whose heart is bent on wickedness.
Trample him down beneath thy feet who watches for and aims at us. The Goddess Mother brought thee forth, the Blessed Mother gave thee life.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Shake down, O Slayer of the foe, those great all splendid enemies.
With all thy powers, O Śakra, all thine helps, O Indra, shake them down:
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  As thou, O Śatakratu, thou, O Indrv, shakest all things down
As wealth for him who sheds the juice, with thine assistance thousandfold.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Around, on every side like drops of sweat let lightning-flashes fall.
Let all malevolence pass away from us like threads of Darva grass.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Thou bearest in thine hand a lance like a long hook, great Counsellor!
As with his foremost foot a goat, draw down the branch, O Maghavan.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Never, O Gods, do we offend, nor are we ever obstinate: we walk as holy texts command.
Closely we clasp and cling to you, cling to your sides, beneath your arms.

<span id="h135"></span>

## HYMN CXXXV. Yama.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  IN the Tree clothed with goodly leaves where Yama drinketh with the Gods,
The Father, Master of the house, tendeth with love our ancient Sires.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  I looked reluctantly on him who cherishes those men of old,
On him who treads that evil path, and then I yearned for this again.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Thou mountest, though thou dost not see, O Child, the new and wheel-less car
Which thou hast fashioned mentally, onepoled but turning every way.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The car which thou hast made to roll hitherward from the Sages, Child!
This hath the Sāman followed close, hence, laid together on a ship.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Who was the father of the child? Who made the chariot roll away?
Who will this day declare to us how the funeral gift was made?
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  When the funeral gift was placed, straightway the point of flame appeared.
A depth extended in the front: a passage out was made behind.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Here is the seat where Yama dwells, that which is called the Home of Gods:
Here minstrels blow the flute for him here he is glorified with songs.

<span id="h136"></span>

## HYMN CXXXVI. Kesins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  HE with the long loose locks supports Agni, and moisture, heaven, and earth:
He is all sky to look upon: he with long hair is called this light.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The Munis, girdled with the wind, wear garments soiled of yellow hue.
They, following the wind's swift course go where the Gods have gone before.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Transported with our Munihood we have pressed on into the winds:
You therefore, mortal men. behold our natural bodies and no more.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The Muni, made associate in the holy work of every God,
Looking upon all varied forms flies through the region of the air.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The Steed of Vāta, Vāyu's friend, the Muni, by the Gods impelled,
In both the oceans hath his home, in eastern and in western sea.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Treading the path of sylvan beasts, Gandharvas, and Apsarases,
He with long locks, who knows the wish, is a sweet most delightful friend
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Vāyu hath churned for him: for him he poundeth things most hard to bend,
When he with long loose locks hath drunk, with Rudra, water from the cup.

<span id="h137"></span>

## HYMN CXXXVII Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  YE Gods, raise up once more the man whom ye have humbled and brought low.
O Gods, restore to life again the man who hatb committed sin.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Two several winds are blowing here, from Sindhu, from a distant land.
May one breathe energy to thee, the other blow disease away.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Hither, O Wind, blow healing balm, blow all disease away, thou Wind;
For thou who hast all medicine comest as envoy of the Gods.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  I am come nigh to thee with balms to give thee rest and keep thee safe.
I bring thee blessed strength, I drive thy weakening malady away.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Here let the Gods deliver him, the Maruts’ band deliver him:
All things that be deliver him that he be freed from his disease.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The Waters have their healing power, the Waters drive disease away.
The Waters have a balm for all: let them make medicine for thee.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The tongue that leads the voice precedes. Then with our ten-fold branching hands,
With these two chasers of disease we stroke thee with a gentle touch.

<span id="h138"></span>

## HYMN CXXXVIII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  ALLIED with thee in friendship, Indra, these, thy priests, remembering Holy Law, rent Vṛtra limb from limb,
When they bestowed the Dawns and let the waters flow, and when thou didst chastise dragons at Kutsa's call.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou sentest forth productive powers, clavest the hills, thou dravest forth the kine, thou drankest pleasant meath.
Thou gavest increase through this Tree's surpassing might. The Sun shone by the hymn that sprang from Holy Law.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  In the mid-way of heaven the Sun unyoked his car: the Ārya found a match to meet his Dam foe.
Associate with Ṛjiśvan Indra overthrew the solid forts of Pipru, conjuring Asura.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  He boldly cast down forts which none had e’er assailed: unwearied he destroycd the godless treasure-stores.
Like Sun and Moon he took the stronghold's wealth away, and, praised in song, demolished foes with flashing dart.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Armed with resistless weapons, with vast power to cleave, the Vṛtra-slayer whets his darts and deals fordi wounds.
Bright Uṣas was afraid of Indra's slaughtering bolt: she went upon her way and left her chariot there.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  These are thy famous exploits, only thine, when thou alone hast left the other reft of sacrifice.
Thou in the heavens hast set the ordering of the Moons: the Father bears the felly portioned out by thee.

<span id="h139"></span>

## HYMN CXXXIX. Savitar.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SAVITAR, golden-haired, hath lifted eastward, bright With the sunbeams, his eternal lustre;
He in whose energy wise Pūṣan marches, surveying all existence like a herdsman.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Beholding men he sits amid the heaven filling the two world-halves and air's wide region.
He looks upon the rich far-spreading pastures between the eastern and the western limit.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  He, root of wealth, the gatherer-up of treasures, looks with his might on every form and figure.
Savitar, like a Godẉhose Law is constant, stands in the battle for the spoil like Indra.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Waters from sacrifice came to the Gandharva Visvavasu, O Soma, when they saw him.
Indra, approaching quickly, marked their going, and looked around upon the Sun's enclosures.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  This song Visvavasu shall sing us, meter of air's mid-realm celestial Gandharva,
That we may know aright both truth and falsehood: may he inspire our thoughts and help our praises.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  In the floods' track he found the bootyseeker: the rocky cow-pen's doors he threw wide open.
These, the Gandharva told him, Rowed with Amṛta. Indra knew well the puissancc of the dragons.

<span id="h140"></span>

## HYMN CXL. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  AGNI, life-power and fame are thine: thy fires blaze mightily, thou rich in wealth of beams!
Sage, passing bright, thou givest to the worshipper, with strength, the food that merits laud.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  With brilliant, purifying sheen, with perfect sheen thou liftest up thyself in light.
Thou, visiting both thy Mothers, aidest them as Son: thou joinest close the earth and heaven.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  O Jātavedas, Son of Strength, rejoice ihyself, gracious, in our fair hymns and songs.
In thee are treasured various forms of strengthening food, born nobly and of wondrous help.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Agni, spread forth, as Ruler, over living things: give wealth to us, Immortal God.
Thou shinest out from beauty fair to look upon: thou leadest us to conquering power.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  To him, the wise, who orders sacrifice, who hath great riches un der his control,
Thou givest blest award of good, and plenteous food, givest him wealth that conquers all.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The men have set before them them for their welfare Agni, strong, visible to all, the Holy.
Thee, Godlike One, with ears to hear, most famous, men's generations magnify with praise-songs.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_130">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CXXI. — CXXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_150">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXLI. — CL.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
