---
title: "HYMN XCI. — C."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_110">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CI. — CX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h91"></span>

## HYMN XCI. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  BRISK, at the place of Iḷā, hymned by men who wake, our own familiar Friend is kindled in the house;
Hotar of all oblation, worthy of our choice, Lord, beaming, trusty friend to one who loveth him.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  He, excellent in glory, guest in every house, finds like a swift-winged bird a home in every tree.
Benevolent to men, he scorns no living man: Friend to the tribes of men he dwells with every tribe.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Most sage with insight, passing skilful with thy powers art thou, O Agni, wise with wisdom, knowing all.
As Vasu, thou alone art Lord of all good things, of all the treasures that the heavens and earth produce.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Foreknowing well, O Agni, thou in Iḷā's place hast occupied thy regular station balmed with oil.
Marked are thy comings like the comings of the Dawns, the rays of him who shineth spotless as the Sun.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Thy glories are, as lightnings from the rainy cloud, marked, many-hued, like heralds of the Dawns’ approach,
When, loosed to wander over plants and forest trees, thou crammest by thyself thy food into thy mouth.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Him, duly coming as their germ, have plants received: this Agni have maternal Waters brought to life.
So in like manner do the forest trees and plants bear him within them and produce him evermore.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  When, sped and urged by wind, thou spreadest thee abroad, swift piercing through thy food according to thy will,
Thy never-ceasing blazes, longing to consume, like men on chariots, Agni, strive on every side.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Agni, the Hotar-priest who fills the assembly full, Waker of knowledge, chief Controller of the thought,—
Him, yea, none other than thyself, doth man elect at sacrificial offerings great and small alike.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Here, Agni, the arrangers, those attached to thee, elect thee as their Priest in sacred gatherings,
When men with strewn clipt grass and sacrificial gifts offer thee entertainment, piously inclined.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Thine is the Herald's task and Cleanser's duly timed; Leader art thou, and Kindler for the pious man.
Thou art Director, thou the ministering Priest: thou art the Brahman, Lord and Master in our home.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  When mortal man presents to thee Immortal God, Agni, his fuel or his sacrificial gift,
Then thou art his Adhvaryu, Hotar, messenger, callest the Gods and orderest the sacrifice.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  From us these hymns in concert have gone forth to him, these. holy words, these Ṛcas, songs and eulogies,
Eager for wealth, to Jātavedas fain for wealth: when they have waxen strong they please their Strengthener.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  This newest eulogy will I speak forth to him, the Ancient One who loves it. May he hear our voice.
May it come near his heart and make it stir with love, as a fond well-dressed matron clings about her lord.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  He in whom horses, bulls, oxen, and barren cows, and rams, when duly set apart, are offered up,—
To Agni, Soma-sprinkled, drinker of sweet juice, Disposer, with my heart I bring a fair hymn forth.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Into thy mouth is poured the offering, Agni, as Soma into cup, oil into ladle.
Vouchsafe us wealth. strength-winning, blest with heroes, wealth lofty, praised by men, and full of splendour.

<span id="h92"></span>

## HYMN XCII. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I PRAISE your Charioteer of sacrifice, the Lord of men, Priest of the tribes, refulgent, Guest of night.
Blazing amid dry plants, snatching amid the green, the Strong, the Holy Herald hath attained to heaven.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Him, Agni, Gods and men have made their chief support, who drinks the fatness and completes the sacrifice.
With kisses they caress the Grandson of the Red, like the swift ray of light, the Household Priest of Dawn.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Yea, we discriminate his and the niggard's ways: his branches evermore are sent forth to consume.
When his terrific flames have reached the Immortal's world, then men remember and extol the Heavenly Folk.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  For then the net of Law, Dyaus, and the wide expanse, Earth, Worship, and Devotion meet for highest praise,
Varuṇa, Indra, Mitra were of one accord, and Savitar and Bhaga, Lords of holy might.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Onward, with ever-roaming Rudra, speed the floods: over Aramati the Mighty have they run.
With them Parijman, moving round his vast domain, loud bellowing, bedews all things that are within.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Straightway the Rudras, Maruts visiting all men, Falcons of Dyaus, home-dwellers with the Asura,—
Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman look on with these, and the swift-moving Indra with swift-moving Gods.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  With Indra have they found enjoyment, they who toil, in the light's beauty, in the very Strong One's strength;
The singers who in men's assemblies forged for him, according to his due, his friend the thunderbolt.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Even the Sun's Bay Coursers hath lie held in check: each one fears Indra as the mightiest of all.
Unhindered, from the air's vault thunders day by day the loud triumphant breathing of the fearful Bull.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  With humble adoration show this day your song of praise to mighty Rudra, Ruler of the brave:
With whom, the Eager Ones, going their ordered course, he comes from heaven Self-bright, auspicious, strong to guard.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  For these have spread abroad the fame of human kind, the Bull Bṛhaspati and Soma's brotherhood.
Atharvan first by sacrifices made men sure: through skill the Bhṛgus were esteemed of all as Gods.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  For these, the Earth and Heaven with their abundant seed, four-bodied Narāśaṁsa, Yama, Aditi,
God Tvaṣṭar Wealth-bestower, the Ṛbhukṣaṇas, Rodasī, Maruts, Viṣṇu, claim and merit praise.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  And may he too give car, the Sage, from far away, the Dragon of the Deep, to this our yearning call.
Ye Sun and Moon who dwell in heaven and move in turn, and with your thought, O Earth and Sky, observe this well.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Dear to all Gods, may Pūṣan guard the ways we go, the Waters’ child and Vāyu help us to success.
Sing lauds for your great bliss to Wind, the breath of all: ye Aśvins prompt to hear, hear this upon your way.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  With hymns of praise we sing him who is throned as Lord over these fearless tribes, the Self-resplendent One.
We praise Night's youthful Lord benevolent to men, the foeless One, the free, with all celestial Dames.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  By reason of his birth here Aṅgiras first sang: the pressing-stones upraised beheld the sacrifice-
The stones through which the Sage became exceeding vast, and the sharp axe obtains in fight the beauteous place.

<span id="h93"></span>

## HYMN XCIII. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MIGHTY are ye, and far-extended, Heaven and Earth: both Worlds are evermore to us like two young Dames.
Guard us thereby from stronger foe; guard us hereby to give us strength.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  In each succeeding sacrifice that mortal honoureth the Gods,
He who, most widely known and famed for happiness, inviteth them.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Ye who are Rulers over all, great is your sovran power as Gods.
Ye all possess all majesty: all must be served in sacrifice.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  These are the joyous Kings of Immortality, Parijman, Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuṇa.
What else is Rudra, praised of men? the Maruts, Bhaga, Pūṣaṇa?
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Come also to our dwelling, Lords of ample wealth, common partakers of our waters, Sun and Moon,
When the great Dragon of the Deep hath settled down upon their floors.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  And let the Aśvins, Lords of splendour, set us free,—both Gods, and, with their Laws, Mitra and Varuṇa.
Through woes, as over desert lands, he speeds to ample opulence.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Yea, let the Aśvins Twain he gracious unto us, even Rudras, and all Gods, Bhaga, Rathaspati;
Parijman, Ṛbhu, Vāja, O Lords of all wealth Ṛbhukṣaṇas.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Prompt is Ṛbhukṣan, prompt the worshipper's strong drink: may thy fleet Bay Steeds, thine who speedest on, approach.
Not mans but God's is sacrifice whose psalm is unassailable.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  O God Savitar, harmed by none, lauded, give us a place among wealthy princes.
With his Car-steeds at once 'hath our Indra guided the reins and the car of these men.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  To these men present here, O Heaven and Earth, to us grant lofty fame extending over all mankind.
Give us a steed to win us strength, a steed with wealth for victory.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  This speaker, Indra—for thou art our Friend—wherever he may be, guard thou, Victor! for help, ever for help
Thy wisdom, Vasu! prosper him.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  So have they strengthened this mine hymn which seems to take its bright path to the Sun, and reconciles the men:
Thus forms a carpenter the yoke of horses, not to be displaced.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Whose chariot-seat hath come again laden with wealth and bright with gold,
Lightly, with piercing ends, as ’twere two ranks of heroes ranged for fight.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  This to Duḥśīma Pṛthavāna have I sung, to Vena, Rama, to the nobles, and the King.
They yoked five hundred, and their love of us was famed upon their way.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Besides, they showed us seven-and-seventy horses here.
Tānva at once displayed his gift, Pārthya at once displayed his gift; and straightway Māyava showed his.

<span id="h94"></span>

## HYMN XCIV. Press-stones.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  LET these speak loudly forth; let us speak out aloud: to the loud speaking Pressing-stones address the speech;
When, rich with Soma juice, Stones of the mountain, ye, united, swift to Indra bring the sound of praise.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  They speak out like a hundred, like a thousand men: they cry aloud to us with their green-tinted mouths,
While, pious Stones, they ply their task with piety, and, even before the Hotar, taste the offered food.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Loudly they speak, for they have found the savoury meath: they make a humming sound over the meat prepared.
As they devour the branch of the Red-coloured Tree, these, the well-pastured Bulls, have uttered bellowings.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  They cry aloud, with strong exhilarating drink, calling on Indra now, for they have found the meath.
Bold, with the sisters they have danced, embraced by them, making the earth reecho with their ringing sound.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The Eagles have sent forth their cry aloft in heaven; in the sky's vault the dark impetuous ones have danced.
Then downward to the nether stone's fixt place they sink, and, splendid as the Sun, effuse their copious stream.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Like strong ones drawing, they have put forth all their strength: the Bulls, harnessed together, bear the chariot-poles.
When they have bellowed, panting, swallowing their food, the sound of their loud snorting is like that of steeds.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  To these who have ten workers and a tenfold girth, to these who have ten yoke-straps and ten binding thongs,
To these who bear ten reins, the eternal, sing ye praise, to these who bear ten car-poles, ten when they are yoked.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  These Stones with ten conductors, rapid in their course, with lovely revolution travel round and round.
They have been first to drink the flowing Soma juice, first to enjoy the milky fluid of the stalk.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  These Soma-eaters kiss Indra's Bay-coloured Steeds: draining. the stalk they sit upon the ox's hide.
Indra, when he hath drunk Soma-meath drawn by them, waxes in strength, is famed, is mighty as a Bull.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Strong is your stalk; ye, verily, never shall be harmed; ye have refreshment, ye are ever satisfied.
Fair are ye, as it were, through splendour of his wealth, his in whose sacrifice, O Stones, ye find delight.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Bored deep, but not pierced through with holes, are ye, O Stones, not loosened, never weary, and exempt from death,
Eternal, undiseased, moving in sundry ways, unthirsting, full of fatness, void of all desire.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Your fathers, verily, stand firm from age to age: they, loving rest, are not dissevered from their seat.
Untouched by time, ne’er lacking green plants and green trees, they with their voice have caused the heavens and earth to hear.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  This, this the Stones proclaim, what time they are disjoined, and when with ringing sounds they move and drink the balm.
Like tillers of the ground when they are sowing seed, they mix the Soma, nor, devouring, minish it.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  They have raised high their voice for juice, for sacrifice, striking the Mother earth as though they danced thereon.
So loose thou too his thought who hath effused the sap, and let the Stones which we are honouring be disjoined.

<span id="h95"></span>

## HYMN XCV. Urvasi. Purūravas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Ho there, my consort! Stay, thou fierce-souled lady, and let us reason for a while together.
Such thoughts as these of ours, while yet unspoken in days gone by have never brought us comfort.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  What am I now to do with this thy saying? I have gone from thee like the first of Mornings.
Purūravas, return thou to thy dwelling: I, like the wind, am difficult to capture.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Like a shaft sent for glory from the quiver, or swift-steed winning cattle winning hundreds.
The lightning seemed to flash, as cowards planned it. The minstrels bleated like a lamb in trouble.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Giving her husband's father life and riches, from the near dwelling, when her lover craved her,
She sought the home wherein she found her pleasure, accepting day and night her lord's embraces.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Thrice in the day didst thou embrace thy consort, though coldly she received thy fond caresses.
To thy desires, Purūravas, I yielded: so wast thou king, O hero, of my body.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The maids Sujirni, Sreni, Sumne-api, Charanyu, Granthini, and Hradecaksus,—
These like red kine have hastened forth, the bright ones, and like milch-cows have lowed in emulation.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  While he was born the Dames sate down together, the Rivers with free kindness gave him nurture;
And then, Purūravas, the Gods increased thee for mighty battle, to destroy the Dasyus.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  When I, a mortal, wooed to mine embraces these heavenly nymphs who laid aside their raiment,
Like a scared snake they fled from me in terror, like chariot horses when the car has touched them.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  When, loving these Immortal Ones, the mortal hath converse with the nymphs as they allow him.
Like swans they show the beauty of their bodies, like horses in their play they bite and nibble.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  She who flashed brilliant as the falling lightning brought me delicious presents from the waters.
Now from the flood be born a strong young hero May Uruvasi prolong her life for ever
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Thy birth hath made me drink from earthly milch-kine: this power, Purūravas, hast thou vouchsafed me.
I knew, and, warned thee, on that day. Thou wouldst not hear me. What sayest thou, when naught avails thee?
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  When will the son be born and seek his father? Mourner-like, will he weep when first he knows him?
Who shall divide the accordant wife and husband, while fire is shining with thy consort's parents?
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  I will console him when his tears are falling: he shall not weep and cry for care that blesses.
That which is thine, between us, will I send thee. Go home again, thou fool;ṭhou hast not won me.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Thy lover shall flee forth this day for ever, to seek, without return, the farthest distance.
Then let his bed be in Destruction's bosom, and there let fierce rapacious wolves devour him.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Nay, do not die, Purūravas, nor vanish: let not the evil-omened wolves devour thee.
With women there can be no lasting friendship: hearts of hyenas are the hearts of women.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  When amid men in altered shape I sojourned, and through four autumns spent the nights among them,
I tasted once a day a drop of butter; and even now with that am I am contented.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  I, her best love, call Urvasi to meet me, her who fills air and measures out the region.
Let the gift brought by piety approach thee. Turn thou to me again: my heart is troubled.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Thus speak these Gods to thee, O son of Iḷā: As death hath verily got thee for his subject,
Thy sons shall serve the Gods with their oblation, and thou, moreover, shalt rejoice in Svarga.

<span id="h96"></span>

## HYMN XCVI. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  In the great synod will I laud thy two Bay Steeds: I prize the sweet strong drink of thee the Warrior-God,
His who pours lovely oil as ’twere with yellow drops. Let my songs enter thee whose form hath golden tints.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Ye who in concert sing unto the goldhued place, like Bay Steeds driving onward to the heavenly seat,
For Indra laud ye strength allied with Tawny Steeds, laud him whom cows content as ’twere with yellow drops.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  His is that thunderbolt, of iron, goldenhued, gold-coloured, very dear, and yellow in his arms;
Bright with strong teeth, destroying with its tawny rage. In Indra are set fast all forms of golden hue.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  As if a lovely ray were laid upon the sky, the golden thunderbolt spread out as in a race.
That iron bolt with yellow jaw smote Ahi down. A thousand flames had he who bore the tawny-hued.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Thou, thou, when praised by men who sacrificed of old. hadst pleasure in their lauds, O Indra golden-haired.
All that befits thy song of praise thou welcornest, the perfect pleasant gift, O Golden-hued from birth.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  These two dear Bays bring hither Indra on his car, Thunder-armed, joyous, meet for laud, to drink his fill.
Many libations flow for him who loveth them: to Indra have the gold-hued Soma juices run.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Tle gold-hued drops have flowed to gratify his wish: the yellow dro s have urged the swift Bays to the Strong.
He who speeds on with Bay Steeds even as he lists hath satisfied his longing for the golden drops.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  At the swift draught the Soma-drinker waxed in might, the Iron One with yellow beard and yellow hair.
He, Lord of Tawny Coursers, Lord of fleet-foot Mares, will bear his Bay Steeds safely over all distress.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  His yellow-coloured jaws, like ladles move apart, what time, for strength, he makes the yellow-tinted stir,
When, while the bowl stands there, he grooms his Tawny Steeds, when he hath drunk strong drink, the sweet juice that he loves.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Yea, to the Dear One's seat in homes of heaven and earth the Bay Steeds' Lord hath whinnied like a horse for food.
Then the great wish hath seized upon him mightily, and the Beloved One hath gained high power of life,
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Thou, comprehending with thy might the earth and heaven, acceptest the dear hymn for ever new and new.
O Asura, disclose thou and make visible the Cow's beloved home to the bright golden Sun.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  O Indra, let the eager wishes of the folk bring thee, delightful, golden-visored, on thy car,
That, pleased with sacrifice wherein ten fingers toil, thou mayest, at the feast, drink of our offered meath.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Juices aforetime, Lord of Bays, thou drankest; and thine especially is this libation.
Gladden thee, Indra, with the meath-rich Soma: pour it down ever, Mighty One! within thee.

<span id="h97"></span>

## HYMN XCVII. Praise of Herbs.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  HERBS that sprang up in time of old, three ages earlier than the Gods,—
Of these, whose hue is brown, will I declare the hundred powers and seven.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Ye, Mothers, have a hundred homes, yea, and a thousand are your growths.
Do ye who have a thousand powers free this my patient from disease.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Be glad and joyful in the Plants, both blossoming and bearing fruit,
Plants that will lead us to success like mares who conquer in the race.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Plants, by this name I speak to you, Mothers, to you the Goddesses:
Steed, cow, and garment may I win, win back thy very self, O man.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The Holy Fig tree is your home, your mansion is the Parna tree:
Winners of cattle shali ye be if ye regain for me this man.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  He who hath store of Herbs at hand like Kings amid a crowd of men,—
Physician is that sage's name, fiend-slayer, chaser of disease.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Herbs rich in Soma, rich in steeds, in nourishments, in strengthening power,—
All these have I provided here, that this man may be whole again.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The healing virtues of the Plants stream forth like cattle from the stall,—
Plants that shall win me store of wealth, and save thy vital breath, O man.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Reliever is your mother's name, and hence Restorers are ye called.
Rivers are ye with wings that fly: keep far whatever brings disease.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Over all fences have they passed, as steals a thief into the fold.
The Plants have driven from the frame whatever malady was there.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  When, bringing back the vanished strength, I hold these herbs within my hand,
The spirit of disease departs ere he can seize upon the life.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  He through whose frame, O Plants, ye creep member by member, joint by joint,—
From him ye drive away disease like some strong arbiter of strife.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Fly, Spirit of Disease, begone, with the blue jay and kingfisher.
Fly with the wind's impetuousspeed, vanish together with the storm.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Help every one the other, lend assistance each of you to each,
All of you be accordant, give furtherance to this speech of mine.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Let fruitful Plants, and fruitless, those that blossom, and the blossomless,
Urged onward by Bṛhaspati, release us from our pain and grief;
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Release me from the curse's plague and woe that comes from Varuṇa;
Free me from Yama's fetter, from sin and offence against the Gods.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  What time, descending from the sky, the Plants flew earthward, thus they spake:
No evil shall befall the man whom while he liveth we pervade,
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Of all the many Plants whose King is, Soma, Plants of hundred forms,
Thou art the Plant most excellent, prompt to the wish, sweet to the heart.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  O all ye various Herbs whose King is Soma, that o’erspread the earth,
Urged onward by Bṛhaspati, combine your virtue in this Plant.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Unharmed be he who digs you up, unharmed the man for whom I dig:
And let no malady attack biped or quadruped of ours.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  All Plants that hear this speech, and those that have departed far away,
Come all assembled and confer your healing power upon this Herb.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  With Soma as their Sovran Lord the Plants hold colloquy and say:
O King, we save from death the man whose cure a Brahman undertakes.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  Most excellent of all art thou, O Plant thy vassals are the trees.
Let him be subject to our power, the man who seeks to injure us.

<span id="h98"></span>

## HYMN XCVIII. The Gods.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  COME, be thou Mitra, Varuṇa, or Pūṣan, come, O Bṛhaspati, to mine oblation:
With Maruts, Vasus, or Ādityas, make thou Parjanya pour for Santanu his rain-drops.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The God, intelligent, the speedy envoy whom thou hast sent hath come to me, Devapi:
Address thyself to me and turn thee hither within thy lips will I put brilliant language.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Within my mouth, Bṛhaspati, deposit speech lucid, vigorous, and free from weakness,
Thereby to win for Santanu the rain-fall. The meath-rich drop from heaven hath passed within it.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Let the sweet drops descend on us, O Indra: give us enough to lade a thousand wagons.
Sit to thy Hotar task; pay worship duly, and serve the Gods, Devapi, with oblation.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Knowing the God's good-will, Devapi, Ṛṣi, the son of Rstisena, sate as Hotar.
He hath brought down from heaven's most lofty summit the ocean of the rain, celestial waters.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Gathered together in that highest ocean, the waters stood by deities obstructed.
They burried down set free by Arstisena, in gaping clefts, urged onward by Devapi.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  When as chief priest for Santanu, Devapi, chosen for Hotar's duty, prayed beseeching,
Graciously pleased Bṛhaspati vouchsafed him a voice that reached the Gods and won the waters.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  O Agni whom Devapi Arstisena, the mortal man, hath kindled in his glory,
Joying in him with all the Gods together, urge on the sender of the rain, Parjanya.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  All ancient Ṛṣis with their songs approached thee, even thee, O Much-invoked, at sacrifices.
We have provided wagon-loads in thousands: come to the solemn rite, Lord of Red Horses.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  The wagon-loads, the nine-and-ninety thousand, these have been offered up to thee, O Agni.
Hero, with these increase thy many bodies, and, stimulated, send us rain from heaven.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Give thou these ninety thousand loads, O Agni, to Indra, to the Bull, to be his portion.
Knowing the paths which Deities duly travel, set mid the Gods in heaven Aulana also.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  O Agni, drive afar our foes, our troubles chase malady away and wicked demons.
From this air-ocean, from the lofty heavens, send down on us a mighty flood of waters.

<span id="h99"></span>

## HYMN XCIX. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WHAT Splendid One, Loud-voiced, Farstriding, dost thou, well knowing, urge us to exalt with praises?
What give we him? When his might dawned, he fashioned the Vṛtra-slaying bolt, and sent us waters.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  He goes to end his work with lightning flashes: wide is the seat his Asura glory gives him.
With his Companions, not without his Brother, he quells Saptatha's magic devices.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  On most auspicious path he goes to battle he toiled to win heaven's light, full fain to gain it;
He seized the hundred-gated castle's treasure by craft, unchecked, and slew the lustful demons.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Fighting for kine, the prize of war, and I roaming among the berd be brings the young streams hither,
Where, footless, joined, without a car to bear them, with jars for steeds, they pour their flood like butter.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Bold, unsolicited for wealth, with Rudras he came, the Blameless, having left his dwelling,
Came, seized the food of Vamra and his consort, and left the couple weeping and unsheltered.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Lord of the dwelling, he subdued the demon who roared aloud, six-eyed and triple-headed.
Tṛta, made stronger by the might he lent him, struck down the boar with shaft whose point was iron.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  He raised himself on high and shot his arrow against the guileful and oppressive foeman.
Strong, glorious, manliest, for us he shattered the forts of Nabus when he slew the Dasyus.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  He, like a cloud that rains upon the pasture, hath found for us the way to dwell in safety.
When the Hawk comes in body to the Soma, armed with his iron claws he slays the Dasyus.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  He with his potent Friends gave up the mighty, gave gusnia up to Kutsa for affliction.
He led the lauded Kavi, he delivered Atka as prey to him and to his heroes.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  He, with his Gods who love mankind, the Wondrous, giving like Varuṇa who works with magic,
Was known, yet young as guardian of the seasons; and he quelled Araru, four-footed dernon.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Through lauds of him hath Auśija Ṛjiśvan burst, with the Mighty's aid, the stall of Pipru.
When the saint pressed the juice and shone as singer, he seized the forts and with his craft subdued them.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  So, swiftly Asura, for exaltation, hath the great Vamraka come nigh to Indra.
He will, when supplicated, bring him blessing: he hath brought all, food, strength, a happy dwelling.

<span id="h100"></span>

## HYMN C. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Be, like thyself, O Indra, strong for our delight: here lauded, aid us, Maghavan, drinker of the juice.
Savitar with the Gods protect us: hear ye Twain. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Bring swift, for offering, the snare that suits the time, to the pure-drinker Vāyu, roaring as he goes,
To him who hath approached the draught of shining milk. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  May Savitar the God send us full life, to each who sacrifices, lives aright and pours the juice
That we with simple hearts may wait upon the Gods. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  May Indra evermore be gracious unto us, and may King Soma meditate our happiness,
Even as men secure the comfort of a friend. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Indra hath given the body with its song and strength: Bṛhaspati, thou art the lengthener of life.
The sacrifice is Manu, Providence, our Sire. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Indra possesseth might celestial nobly formed: the singer in the house is Agni, prudent Sage.
He is the sacrifice in synod, fair, most near. We ask for freedom and complete felicity,
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Not often have we sinned against you secretly, nor, Vasus, have we openly provoked the Gods.
Not one of its, ye Gods, hath worn an alien shape. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  May Savitar remove from us our malady, and may the Mountains keep it far away from where
The press-stone as it sheds the meath rings loudly forth. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Ye Vasus, let the stone, the presser stand erect: avert all enmities and keep them far remote.
Our guard to be adored is Savitar this God. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Eat strength and fatness in the pasture, kine, who are balmed at the reservoir and at the seat of Law.
So let your body be our body's medicine. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  The singer fills the spirit: all mens, love hath he. Indra takes kindly care of those who pour the juice.
For his libation is the heavenly udder full. We ask for freedom and complete felicity.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Wondrous thy spirit-filling light, triumpliant; thy hosts save from decay and are resistless.
The pious votary by straightest pathway speeds to possess the best of all the cattle.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_110">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CI. — CX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
