---
title: "HYMN CLXXI. — CLXXX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_170">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CLXI. — CLXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_190">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLXXXI. — CXC.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN CLXXI. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FOR Iṭa's sake who pressed the juice, thou, Indra, didst protect his car,
And hear the Soma-giver's call.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou from his skin hast borne the head of the swift-moving combatant,
And sought the Soma-pourer's home.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Venya, that mortal man, hast thou, for Āstrabudhna the devout,
O Indra, many a time set free.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Bring, Indra, to the east again that Sun who now is in the west,
Even against the will of Gods.

## HYMN CLXXII. Dawn.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WITH all thy beauty come: the kine approaching with full udders follow on thy path.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Come with kind thoughts, most liberal, rousing the warrior's hymn of praise, with bounteous ones,
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  As nourishers we tie the thread, and, liberal with our bounty, offer sacrifice.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Dawn drives away her Sister's gloom, and, through her excellence, makes her retrace her path.

## HYMN CLXXIII. The King.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  BE with us; I have chosen thee: stand stedfast and immovable.
Let all the people wish for thee let not thy kingship fall away.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Be even here; fall not away be like a mountain unremoved.
Stand stedfast here like Indra's self, and hold the kingship in the grasp.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  This man hath Indra stablished, made secure by strong oblation's power.
May Soma speak a benison, and Brahmaṇaspati, on him.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Firm is the sky and firm the earth, and stedfast also are these hills.
Stedfast is all this living world, and stedfast is this King of men.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Stedfast, may Varuṇa the King, stedfast, the God Bṛhaspati,
Stedfast, may Indra, stedfast too, may Agni keep thy stedfast reign.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  On constant Soma let us think with constant sacrificial gift
And then may Indra make the clans bring tribute unto thee alone.

## HYMN CLXXIV. The King.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WITH offering for success in fight whence Indra was victorious.
With this, O Brahmaṇaspati, let us attain to royal sway.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Subduing those who rival us, subduing all malignities,
Withstand the man who menaces, withstand the man who angers us.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Soma and Savitar the God have made thee a victorious King
All elements have aided thee, to make thee general conqueror.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Oblation, that which Indra. gave and thus grew glorious and most high,—
This have I offered, Gods! and hence now, verily, am rivalless.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Slayer of rivals, rivalless, victorious, with royal sway,
Over these beings may I rule, may I be Sovran of the folk.

## HYMN CLXXV. Press-stones.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY Savitar the God, O Stones, stir you according to the Law:
Be harnessed to the shafts, and press.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Stones, drive calamity away, drive ye away malevolence:
Make ye the Cows our medicine.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Of one accord the upper Stones, giving the Bull his bull-like strength,
Look down with pride on those below.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  May Savitar the God, O Stones, stir you as Law commands for him
Who sacrifices, pouring juice.

## HYMN CLXXVI. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WITH hymns of praise their sons have told aloud the Ṛbhus' mighty deeds.
Who, all-supporting, have enjoyed the earth as, twere a mother cow.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Bring forth the God with song divine, being Jātavedas hitherward,
To bear our gifts at once to heaven.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  He here, a God-devoted Priest, led forward comes to sacrifice.
Like a car covered for the road, he, glowing, knows, himself, the way.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  This Agni rescues from distress, as ’twere from the Immortal Race,
A God yet mightier than strength, a God who hath been made for life.

## HYMN CLXXVII. Māyābheda.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE sapient with their spirit and their mind behold the Bird adorned with all an Asura's magic might.
Sages observe him in the ocean's inmost depth: the wise disposers seek the station of his rays.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The flying Bird bears Speech within his spirit: erst the Gandharva in the womb pronounced it:
And at the seat of sacrifice the sages cherish this radiant, heavenly-bright invention.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  I saw the Herdsman, him who never resteth, approaching and departing on his pathways.
He, clothed in gathered and diffusive splendour, within the worlds continually travels.

## HYMN CLXXVIII. Tārkṣya.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THIS very mighty one whom Gods commission, the Conqueror of cars, ever triumphant,
Swift, fleet to battle, with uninjured fellies, even Tārkṣya for our weal will we call hither.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  As though we offered up our gifts to Indra, may we ascend. him as a ship. for safety.
Like the two wide worlds, broad, deep far-extended, may we be safe both when he comes and leaves you.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  He who with might the Five Lands hath pervaded, like Sūrya with his lustre, and the waters—
His strength wins hundreds, thousands none avert it, as the young maid repelleth not her lover.

## HYMN CLXXIX. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Now lift ye up yourselves and look on Indra's seasonable share.
If it be ready, offer it; unready, ye have been remise.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Oblation is prepared: come to us, Indra; the Sun hath travelled over half his journey.
Friends with their stores are sitting round thee waiting like lords of clans for the tribe's wandering chieftain.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Dressed in the udder and on fire, I fancy; well-dressed, I fancy, is this recent present.
Drink, Indra, of the curd of noon's libation with favour, Thunderer, thou whose deeds are mighty.

## HYMN CLXXX. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  O MUCH-INVOKED, thou hast subdued thy foemen: thy might is loftiest; here display thy bounty.
In thy right hand, O Indra, bring us treasures: thou art the Lord of rivers filled with riches.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Like a dread wild beast roaming on the mountain thou hast approached us from the farthest distance.
Whetting thy bold and thy sharp blade, O Indra, crush thou the foe and scatter those who hate us.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Thou, mighty Indra, sprangest into being as strength for lovely lordship o’er the people.
Thou drovest off the folk who were unfriendly, and to the Gods thou gavest room and freedom.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_170">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CLXI. — CLXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_190">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLXXXI. — CXC.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
