---
title: "HYMN XXXI. — XL."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_30">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XXI. — XXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_50">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN XLI. — L.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN XXXI. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY benediction of the Gods approach us, holy, to aid us with all rapid succours.
Therewith may we be happily befriended, and pass triumphant over all our troubles.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  A man should think on wealth and strive to win it by adoration on the path of Order,
Counsel himself with his own mental insight, and grasp still nobler vigour with his spirit.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The hymn is formed, poured are the allotted portions: as to a ford friends come unto the Wondrous.
We have obtained the power of case and comfort, we haVe become acquainted, with Immortals.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Pleased be the Eternal Lord who loves the household with this man whom God Savitar created.
May Bhaga Aryaman grace him with cattle: may he appear to him, and be, delightful.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Like the Dawns' dwelling-place be this assembly, where in their might men rich in food have gathered.
Striving to share the praises of this singer. To us come strengthening and effectual riches!
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  This Bull's most gracious far-extended favour existed first of all in full abundance.
By his support they are maintained in common who in the Asura's mansion dwell together.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  What was the tree, what wood, in sooth, produced it, from which they fashioned forth the Earth and Heaven?
These Twain stand fast and wax not old for ever: these have sung praise to many a day and morning.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Not only here is this: more is beyond us. He is the Bull, the Heaven's and Earth's supporter.
With power divine he makes his skin a filter, when the Bay Coursers bear him on as Sūrya.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  He passes o’er the broad earth like a Stega: he penetrates the world as Wind the mist-cloud.
He, balmed with oil, near Varuṇa and Mitra, like Agni in the wood, hath shot forth splendour.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  When suddenly called the cow that erst was barren, she, self-protected, ended all her troubles.
Earth, when the first son sprang from sire and mother, cast up the gami, that which men were seeking.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  To Nṛṣad's son they gave the name of Kainva, and he the brown-hued courser won the treasure.
For him dark-coloured streamed the shining udder: none made it swell for him. Thus Order willed it.

## HYMN XXXII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FORTH speed the Pair to bring the meditating God, benevolent with boons sent in return for boons.
May Indra graciously accept both gifts from us, when he hath knowledge of the flowing Soma juice.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou wanderest far, O Indra, through the spheres of light and realms of earth, the region, thou whom many praise!
Let those who often bring their solemn rites conquer the noisy babblers who present no gifts.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  More beautiful than beauty must this seem to me, when the son duly careth for his parents' line.
The wife attracts the husband: with a shout of joy the man's auspicious marriage is performed aright.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  This beauteous place of meeting have I looked upon, where, like milch-cows, the kine order the marriage train;
Where the Herd's Mother counts as first and best of all, and round her are the seven-toned people of the choir.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The Pious One hath reached your place before the rest: One only moves victorious with the Rudras' band.
To these your helpers pour our meath, Immortal Gods, with whom your song of praise hath power to win their gifts.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  He who maintains the Laws of God informed me that thou wast lying hidden in the waters.
Indra, who knoweth well, beheld and showed thee. By him instructed am I come, O Agni.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The stranger asks the way of him who knows it: taught by the skilful guide he travels onward.
This is, in truth, the blessing of instruction: he finds the path that leads directly forward.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Even now he breathed: these days hath he remembered. Concealed, he sucked the bosom of his Mother.
Yet in his youth old age hath come upon him: he hath grown gracious, good, and free from anger.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  O Kalasa, all these blessings will we bring them, O Kurusravana, who give rich presents.
May he, O wealthy princes, and this Soma which I am bearing in my heart, reward you.

## HYMN XXXIII. Various Deities.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE urgings of the people have impelled me, and by,the nearest way I bring you Pūṣan.
The Universal Gods have brought me safely. The cry was heard, Behold, Dubsasu cometh!
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The ribs that compass me give pain and trouble me like rival wives.
Indigence, nakedness, exhaustion press me sore: my mind is fluttering like a bird's.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  As rats eat weavers' threads, cares are consuming me, thy singer, gatakratu, me.
Have mercy on us once, O Indra, Bounteous Lord: be thou a Father unto us.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  I the priests' Ṛṣi chose as prince most liberal Kurusravana,
The son of Trasadasyu's son,
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Whose three bays harnessed to the car bear me straight onward: I will laud
The giver of a thousand meeds,
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The sire of Upamasravas, even him whose words were passing sweet,
As a fair field is to its lord.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Mark, Upamasravas, his son, mark, grandson of Mitratithi:
I am thy father's eulogist.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  If I controlled Immortal Gods, yea, even were I Lord of men,
My liberal prince were living still.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  None lives, even had he hundred lives, beyond the statute of the Gods
So am I parted from my friend.

## HYMN XXXIV. Dice, Etc.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SPRUNG from tall trees on windy heights, these rollers transport me as they turn upon the table.
Dearer to me the die that never slumbers than the deep draught of Mujavan's own Soma.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  She never vexed me nor was angry with me, but to my friends and me was ever gracious.
For the die's sake, whose single point is final, mine own devoted wife I alienated.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  My wife holds me aloof, her mother hates me: the wretched man finds none to give him comfort.
As of a costly horse grown old and feeble, I find not any profit of the gamester.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Others caress the wife of him whose riches the die hath coveted, that rapid courser:
Of him speak father, mother, brothers saying, We know him not: bind him and take him with you.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  When I resolve to play with these no longer, my friends depart from me and leave me lonely.
When the brown dice, thrown on the board, have rattled, like a fond girl I seek the place of meeting.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The gamester seeks the gambling-house, and wonders, his body all afire, Shall I be lucky?
Still do the dice extend his eager longing, staking his gains against his adversary.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Dice, verily, are armed with goads and driving-hooks, deceiving and tormenting, causing grievous woe.
They give frail gifts and then destroy the man who wins, thickly anointed with the player's fairest good.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Merrily sports their troop, the three-and-fifty, like Savitar the God whose ways are faithful.
They bend not even to the mighty's anger: the King himself pays homage and reveres them.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Downward they roll, and then spring quickly upward, and, handless, force the man with hands to serve them.
Cast on the board, like lumps of magic charcoal, though cold themselves they burn the heart to ashes.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  The gambler's wife is left forlorn and wretched: the mother mourns the son who wanders homeless.
In constant fear, in debt, and seeking riches, he goes by night unto the home of others.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Sad is the gambler when he sees a matron, another's wife, and his well-ordered dwelling.
He yokes the brown steeds in the early morning, and when the fire is cold sinks down an outcast.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  To the great captain of your mighty army, who hath become the host's imperial leader,
To him I show my ten extended fingers: I speak the truth. No wealth am I withholding.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Play not with dice: no, cultivate thy corn-land. Enjoy the gain, and deem that wealth sufficient.
There are thy cattle there thy wife, O gambler. So this good Savitar himself hath told me.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Make me your friend: show us some little mercy. Assail us not with your terrific fierceness.
Appeased be your malignity and anger, and let the brown dice snare some other captive.

## HYMN XXXV. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THESE fires associate with Indra are awake, bringing their light when first the Dawn begins to shine.
May Heaven and Earth, great Pair, observe our holy work. We claim for us this day the favour of the Gods.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Yea, for ourselves we claim the grace of Heaven and Earth, of Śaryaṇāvān, of the Hills and Mother Streams.
For innocence we pray to Sūrya and to Dawn. So may the flowing Soma bring us bliss to-day.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  May the great Twain, the Mothers, Heaven and Earth, this day preserve us free from sin for peace and happiness.
May Morning sending forth her light drive sin afar. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  May this first Dawn bring us the host of gracious Gods: rich, may it richly shine for us who strive for wealth.
The wrath of the malignant may we keep afar. We pray to kindled Agni for feilicity.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Dawns, who come forward with the bright beams of the Sun, and at your earliest flushing bring to us the light,
Shine ye on us to-day auspicious, for renown. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Free from all sickness may the Mornings come to us, and let our fires mount upward with a lofty blaze.
The Aśvin Pair have harnessed their swift-moving car. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Send us to-day a portion choice and excellent, O Savitar, for thou art he who dealeth wealth.
I cry to Dhiṣaṇā, Mother of opulence. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Further me this declaring of Eternal Law, the Law of Gods, as we mortals acknowledge it!
The Sun goes up beholding all the rays of morn. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  This day we pray with innocence in strewing grass, adjusting pressing-stones, and perfecting the hymn.
Thou in the Ādityas’ keeping movest restlessly. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  To our great holy grass I bid the Gods at morn to banquet, and will seat them as the seven priests,—
Varuṇa, Indra, Mitra, Bhaga for our gain. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Come hither, O Ādityas, for our perfect weal: accordant help our sacrifice that we may thrive.
Pūṣan, Bṛhaspati, Bhaga, both Aśvins, and enkindled Agni we implore for happiness.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Ādityas, Gods, vouchsafe that this our home may be praise-worthy, prosperous, our heroes' sure defence,
For cattle, for our sons, for progeny, for life. We pray to kindled Agni for felicity.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  This day may all the Maruts, all he near us with aid: may all our fires be well enkindled.
May all Gods come to us with gracious favour. May spoil and wealth he ours, and all possessions.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  He whom ye aid, O Deities, in battle, whom ye protect and rescue from affliction,
Who fears no danger at your milk-libation, -such may we be to feast the Gods, ye Mighty.

## HYMN XXXVI. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THERE are the Dawn and Night, the grand and beauteous Pair, Earth, Heaven, and Varuṇa, Mitra, and Aryaman.
Indra I call, the Maruts, Mountains, and the Floods, Ādityas, Heaven and Earth, the Waters, and the Sky.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  May Dyaus and Prthivi, wise, true to Holy Law, keep us in safety from distress and injury.
Let not malignant Nirrti rule over us. We crave to-day this gracious favour of the Gods.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Mother of Mitra and of opulent Varuṇa, may Aditi preserve us safe from all distress.
May we obtain the light of heaven without a foe. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  May ringing press-stones keep the Rākṣasas afar, ill dream, and Nirrti, and each voracious fiend.
May the Ādityas and the Maruts shelter us. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Full flow libations; on our grass let Indra sit; Bṛhaspati the singer laud with Sāma hymns!
Wise be our hearts' imaginings that we may live. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Ye Aśvins, make our sacrifice ascend to heaven, and animate the rite that it may send us bliss,
Offered with holy oil, with forward-speeding rein. We crave the gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Hither I call the band of Maruts, swift to hear, great, purifying, bringing bliss, to he our Friends.
May we increase our wealth to glorify our name. We crave this graciousfavour of the Gods to-day.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  We bring the Stay of Life, who makes the waters swell, swift-hearing, Friend of Gods, who waits on sacrifice.
May we control that Power, Soma whose rays are bright. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Alive ourselves, with living sons, devoid of guilt, may we win this with winners by fair means to win.
Let the prayer-haters bear our sin to every side. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Hear us, O ye who claim the worship of mankind, and give us, O ye Gods, the gift for which we pray,
Victorious wisdom, fame with heroes and with wealth. We crave to-day this gracious favour of the Gods.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  We crave the gracious favour of the Gods to-day, great favour of great Gods, sublime and free from foes,
That we may gain rich treasure sprung from hero sons. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  In great enkindled Agni's keeping, and, for bliss, free from all sin before Mitra and Varuṇa.
May we share Savitar's best animating help. We crave this gracious favour of the Gods to-day.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  All ye, the Gods whom Savitar the Father of truth, and Varuṇa and Mitra govern,
Give us prosperity with hero children, and opulence in kine and various treasure.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Savitar, Savitar from cast and westward, Savitar, Savitar from north and southward,
Savitar send us perfect health and comfort, Savitar let our days of life be lengthened!

## HYMN XXXVII. Sūrya.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Do homage unto Varuṇa's and Mitra's Eye: offer this solemn worship to the Mighty God,
Who seeth far away, the Ensign, born of Gods. Sing praises unto Sūrya, to the Son of Dyaus.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  May this my truthful speech guard me on every side wherever heaven and earth and days are spread abroad.
All else that is in motion finds a place of rest: the waters ever flow and ever mounts the Sun.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  No godless man from time remotest draws thee down when thou art driving forth with winged dappled Steeds.
One lustre waits upon thee moving to the cast, and, Sūrya, thou arisest with a different light.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  O Sūrya, with the light whereby thou scatterest gloom, and with thy ray impellest every moving thing,
Keep far from us all feeble, worthless sacrifice, and drive away disease and every evil dream.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Sent forth thou guardest well the Universe's law, and in thy wonted way arisest free from wrath.
When Sūrya, we address our prayers to thee to-day, may the Gods favour this our purpose and desire.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  This invocation, these our words may Heaven and Earth, and Indra and the Waters and the Maruts hear.
Ne’er may we suffer want in presence of the Sun, and, living happy lives, may we attain old age.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Cheerful in spirit, evermore, and keen of sight, with store of children, free from sickness and from sin,
Long-living, may we look, O Sūrya, upon thee uprising day by day, thou great as Mitra is!
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Sūrya, may we live long and look upon thee still, thee, O Far-seeing One, bringing the glorious light,
The radiant God, the spring of joy to every eye, as thou art mounting up o’er the high shining flood.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Thou by whose lustre all the world of life comes forth, and by thy beams again returns unto its rest,
O Sūrya with the golden hair, ascend for us day after day, still bringing purer innocence.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Bless us with shine, bless us with perfect daylight, bless us with cold, with fervent heat and lustre.
Bestow on us, O Sūrya, varied riches, to bless us in our home and when we travel.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Gods, to our living creatures of both kinds vouchsafe protection, both to bipeds and to quadrupeds,
That they may drink and eat invigorating food. So grant us health and strength and perfect innocence.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  If by some grievous sin we have provoked the Gods, O Deities, with the tongue or thoughtlessness of heart,
That guilt, O Vasus, lay upon the Evil One, on him who ever leads us into deep distress.

## HYMN XXXVIII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  O INDRA, in this battle great and glorious, in this loud din of war help us to victory,
Where in the strife for kine among bold ring-decked men arrows fly all around and heroes are subdued.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  At home disclose to us opulence rich in food, streaming with milk, O Indra, meet to be renowned.
Śakra, may we be thine, the friendly Conqueror's: even as we desire, O Vasu, so do thou.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The godless man, much-lauded Indra, whether he be Dāsa or be Ārya, who would war with us,—
Easy to conquer he for thee, with us, these foes: with thee may we subdue them in the clash of fight.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Him who must be invoked by many and by few, who standeth nigh with comfort in the war of men,
Indra, famed Hero, winner in the deadly strife, let us bring hitherward to-day to favour us.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  For, Indra, I have heard thee called Self. capturer, One, Steer! who never yields, who urges even the churl.
Release thyself from Kutsa and come hither. How shall one like thee sit still bound that he may not move?

## HYMN XXXIX. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  As ’twere the name of father, easy to invoke, we all assembled here invoke this Car of yours,
Aśvins, your swiftly-rolling circumambient Car which he who worships must invoke at eve and dawn.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Awake all pleasant strains and let the hymns flow forth: raise up abundant fulness: this is our desire.
Aśvins, bestow on us a glorious heritage, and give our princes treasure fair as Soma is.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Ye are the bliss of her who groweth old at home, and helpers of the slow although he linger last.
Men call you too, Nāsatyas, healers of the blind, the thin and feeble, and the man with broken bones.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Ye made Cyavāna, weak and worn with length of days, young again, like a car, that he had power to move.
Ye lifted up the son of Tugra from the floods. At our libations must all these your acts be praised.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  We will declare among the folk your ancient deeds heroic; yea, ye were Physicians bringing health.
You, you who must be lauded, will we bring for aid, so that this foe of ours, O Aśvins, may believe.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Listen to me, O Aśvins; I have cried to you. Give me-your aid as sire and mother aid their son.
Poor, without kin or friend or ties of blood am I. Save me before it be too late, from this my curse.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Ye, mounted on your chariot brought to Vimada the comely maid of Purumitra as a bride.
Ye, came unto the calling of the weakling's dame, and granted noble offspring to the happy wife.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Ye gave a ain the vigour of his youthful life to tge sage Kali when old age was coming nigh.
Ye rescued Vandana and raised him from the pit, and in a moment gave Viśpalā power to move.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Ye Aśvins Twain, endowed with manly strength, brought forth Reblia when hidden in the cave and well-nigh dead,
Freed Saptavadliri, and for Atri caused the pit heated with fire to be a pleasant resting-place.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  On Pedu ye bestowed, Aśvins, a courser white, mighty with nine-and-ninety varied gifts of strength,
A horse to be renowned, who bore his friend at speed, joy-giving, Bhaga-like to be invoked of men.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  From no side, ye Two Kings whom none may check or stay, doth grief, distress, or danger come u on the man
Whom, Aśvins swift to hear, borne on your glowing path, ye with your Consort make the foremost in the race.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Come on that Chariot which the Ṛbhus wrought for you, the Chariot, Aśvins, that is speedier than thought,
At harnessing whereof Heaven's Daughter springs to birth, and from Vivasvān come auspicious Night and Day.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Come, Conquerors of the sundered mountain, to our home, Aśvins who made the cow stream milk for Śayu's sake,
Ye who delivered even from the wolf's deep throat and set again at liberty the swallowed quail.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  We have prepared this laud for you, O Aśvins, and, like the Bhṛgus, as a car have framed it,
Have decked it as a maid to meet the bridegroom, and brought it as a son, our stay for ever.

## HYMN XL. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  YOUR radiant Chariot-whither goes it on its way?-who decks it for you, Heroes, for its happy course,
Starting at daybreak, visiting each morning every house, borne hitherward through prayer unto the sacrifice?
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Where are ye, Aśvins, in the evening, where at morn? Where is your haltingplace, where rest ye for the night?
Who brings you homeward, as the widow bedward draws her husband's brother, as the bride attracts the groom?
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Early ye sing forth praise as with a herald's voice, and, meet for worship, go each morning to the house.
Whom do ye ever bring to ruin? Unto whose libations come ye, Heroes, like two Sons of Kings?
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Even as hunters follow two wild elephants, we with oblations call you down at morn and eve.
To folk who pay you offierings at appointed times, Chiefs, Lords of splendour, ye bring food to strengthen them.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  To you, O Aśvins, came the daughter of a King, Ghoṣā, and said, O Heroes, this I beg of you:
Be near me in the day, he near me in the night: help me to gain a car-borne chieftain rich in steeds.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  O Aśvins, ye are wise: as Kutsa comes to men, bring your car nigh the folk of him who sings your praise.
The bee, O Aśvins, bears your honey in her mouth, as the maid carries it purified in her hand.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  To Bhujyu and to Vaśa ye come near with help, O Aśvins, to Sinjara and to Uśanā.
Your worshipper secures your friendship for himself. Through your protection I desire felicity.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Krsa and Śayu ye protect, ye Aśvins Twain: ye Two assist the widow and the worshipper;
And ye throw open, Aśvins, unto those who win the cattle-stall that thunders with its serenfold mouth.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  The Woman hath brought forth, the Infant hath appeared, the plants of wondrous beauty straightway have sprung up.
To him the rivers run as down a deep descent, and he this day becomes their master and their lord.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  They mourn the living, cry aloud, at sacrifice: the men have set their thoughts upon a distant cast.
A lovely thing for fathers who have gathered here,—a joy to husbands,—are the wives their arms shall clasp
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Of this we have no knowledge. Tall it forth to us, now the youth rests within the chambers of the bride.
Fain would we reach the dwelling of the vigorous Steer who loves the kine, O Aśvins: this is our desire.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Your favouring grace hath come, ye Lords of ample wealth: Aśvins, our longings are stored up within your hearts.
Ye, Lords of splendour, have become our twofold guard: may we as welcome friends reach Aryaman's abode.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Even so, rejoicing in the dwelling-place of man, give hero sons and riches to the eloquent.
Make a ford, Lords of splendour, where men well may drink: remove the spiteful tree-stump standing in the path.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  O Aśvins, Wonder-Workers, Lords of lustre, where and with what folk do ye delight yourselves to-day?
Who hath detained them with him? Whither are they gone? Unto what sage's or what worshipper's abode?

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_30">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XXI. — XXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_50">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN XLI. — L.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
