---
title: "HYMN XCI. — XCII."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_8_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_8_110">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN I. — XI.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN XCI. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  LORD of the house, Sage, ever young, high power of life, O Agni, God,
Thou givest to thy worshipper.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  So with our song that prays and serves, attentive, Lord of spreading light,
Agni, bring hitherward the Gods.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  For, Ever-Youthful One, with thee, best Furtherer, as our ally,
We overcome, to win the spoil.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  As Aurva Bhṛgu used, as Apnavāna used, I call the pure
Agni who clothes him with the sea.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  1 call the Sage who sounds like wind, the Might that like Parjanya roars,
Agni who clothes him with the sea.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  As Savitar's productive Power, as him who sends down bliss, I call
Agni who clothes him with the sea.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Hither, for powerful kirship, I call Agni, him Who prospers you,
Most frequent at our solemn rites
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  That through this famed One's power, he may stand by us even as Tvaṣṭar comes
Unto the forms that must he shaped.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  This Agni is the Lord supreme above all glories mid the Gods:
May he come nigh to us with strength.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Here praise ye him the most renowned of all the ministering Priests,
Agni, the Chief at sacrifice;
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Piercing, with purifying flame, enkindled in our homes, most high,
Swiftest to hear from far away.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Sage, laud the Mighty One who wins the spoil of victory like a steed,
And, Mitra like, unites the folk.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Still turning to their aim in thee, the oblation-bearer's sister hymns
Have come to thee before the wind.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  The waters find their place in him, for whom the threefold sacred grass
Is spread unbound, unlimited.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  The station of the Bounteous God hath, through his aid which none impair,
A pleasant aspect like the Sun.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Blazing with splendour, Agni, God, through pious gifts of sacred oil,
Bring thou the Gods and worship them.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  The Gods as mothers brought thee forth, the Immortal Sage, O Aṅgiras,
The bearer of our gifts to heaven.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Wise Agni, Gods established thee, the Seer, noblest messenger,
As bearer of our sacred gifts.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  No cow have I to call mine own, no axe at hand wherewith to work,
Yet what is here I bring to thee.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  O Agni, whatsoever be the fuel that we lay for thee,
Be pleased therewith, Most Youthful God
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  That which the white-ant cats away, that over which the emmet crawls-
May all of this be oil to thee.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  When he enkindles Agni, man should with his heart attend the song:
I with the priests have kindled him.

## HYMN XCII. Agni

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THAT noblest Furtherer hath appeared, to whom men bring their holy works.
Our songs of praise have risen aloft to Agni who was barn to give the Ārya strength.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Agni of Divodāsa turned, as ’twere in majesty, to the Gods.
Onward he sped along the mother earth, and took his station in the height of heaven.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Him before whom the people shrink when he performs his glorious deeds,
Him who wins thousands at the worship of the Gods, himself, that Agni, serve with son s.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The mortal man whom thou wouldst lead to opulence, O Vasu, he who brings thee gifts.
He, Agni, wins himself a hero singing lauds, yea, one who feeds a thousand men.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  He with the steed wins spoil even in the fenced fort, and gains imperishable fame.
In thee, O Lord of wealth, continually we lay all precious offerings to the Gods.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  To him who dealeth out all wealth, who is the cheerful Priest of men,
To him, like the first vessels filled with savoury juice, to Agni go the songs of praise.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Votaries, richly-gifted, deck him with their songs, even as the steed who draws the car.
On both, Strong Lord of men! on child and grandson pour the bounties which our nobles give.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Sing forth to him, the Holy, most munificent, sublime with his refulgent glow,
To Agni, ye Upastutas.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Worshipped with gifts, enkindled, splendid, Maghavan shall win himself heroic fame.
And will not his most newly shown benevolence come to us with abundant strength?
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Priest, presser of the juice! praise now the dearest Guest of all our friends,
Agni, the driver of the cars.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Who, finder-out of treasures open and concealed, bringeth them hither, Holy One;
Whose waves, as in a cataract, are hard to pass, when he, through song, would win him strength.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Let not the noble Guest, Agni, be wroth with us: by many a man his praise is sung,
Good Herald, skilled in sacrifice.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  O Vasu, Agni, let not them be harmed who come in any way with lauds to thee.
Even the lowly, skilled in rites, with offered gifts, seeketh thee for the envoy's task.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Friend of the Maruts, Agni, come with Rudras to the Soma-draught,
To Sobhar's fair song of praise, and be thou joyful in the light.
VALAKHILYA

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_8_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_8_110">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN I. — XI.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
