---
title: "HYMN CLXI. — CLXX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_160">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CLI. — CLX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_180">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLXXI. — CLXXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h161"></span>

## HYMN CLXI. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FOR life I set thee free by this oblation from the unknown decline and from Consumption;
Or, if the grasping demon have possessed him, free him from her, O Indra, thou and Agni.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Be his days ended, be he now departed, be he brought very near to death already,
Out of Destruction's lap again I bring him, save him for life to last a hundred autumns.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  With hundred-eyed oblation, hundred-autumned, bringing a hundred lives, have I restored him,
That Indra for a hundred years may lead him safe to the farther shore of all misfortune.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Live, waxing in thy strength, a hundred autumns, live through a hundred springs, a hundred winters.
Through hundred-lived oblation Indra, Agni, Bṛhaspati, Savitar yield him for a hundred!
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  So have I found and rescued thee thou hast returned with youth renewed.
Whole in thy members! I have found thy sight and all thy life for thee.

<span id="h162"></span>

## HYMN CLXII. Agni

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY Agni, yielding to our prayer, the Rakṣas-slayer, drive away
The malady of evil name that hath beset thy labouring womb.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Agni, concurring in the prayer, drive off the eater of the flesh,
The malady of evil name that hath attacked thy babe and womb.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  That which destroys the sinking germ, the settled, moving embryo,
That which will kill the babe at birth,—even this will we drive far away.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  That which divides thy legs that it may lie between the married pair,
That penetrates and licks thy side,—even this will we exterminate.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  What rests by thee in borrowed form of brother, lover, or of lord,
And would destroy thy Progeny,—even this will we exterminate.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  That which through sleep or darkness hath deceived thee and lies down by thee,
And will destroy thy progeny,—even this will we exterminate.

<span id="h163"></span>

## HYMN CLXIII

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FROM both thy nostrils, from thine eyes, from both thine ears and from thy chin,
Forth from thy head and brain and tongue I drive thy malady away.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  From the neck-tendons and the neck, from the breast-bones and from the spine,
From shoulders, upper, lower arms, I drive thy malady away.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  From viscera and all within, forth from the rectum, from the heart,
From kidneys, liver, and from spleen, I drive thy malady away.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  From thighs, from knee-caps, and from heels, and from the forepart of the feet,
From hips from stomach, and from groin I drive thy malady away.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  From what is voided from within, and from thy hair, and from they nails,
From all thyself from top to toe, I drive thy malady away.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  From every member, every hair, disease that comes in every joint,
From all thyself, from top to toe, I drive thy malady away.

<span id="h164"></span>

## HYMN CLXIV. Dream-charm.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  AVAUNT, thou Master of the mind Depart, and vanish far away.
Look on Destruction far from hence. The live man's mind is manifold.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  A happy boon do men elect, a mighty blessing they obtain.
Bliss with Vaivasvata they see. The live man's mind seeks many a place.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  If by address, by blame, by imprecation we have committed sin, awake or sleeping,
All hateful acts of ours, all evil doings may Agni bear away to distant places.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  When, Indra, Brahmaṇaspati, our deeds are wrongful and unjust,
May provident Aṅgirasa prevent our foes from troubling, us.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  We have prevailed this day and won: we are made free from sin and guilt.
Ill thoughts, that visit us awake or sleeping, seize the man we hate, yea, seize the man who hateth us.

<span id="h165"></span>

## HYMN CLXV. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  GODS, whatsoe’er the Dove came hither seeking, sent to us as the envoy of Destruction,
For that let us sing hymns and make atonement. Well be it with our quadrupeds and bipeds.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Auspicious be the Dove that hath been sent us, a harmless bird, ye Gods, within our dwelling.
May Agni, Sage, be pleased with our oblation, and may the Missile borne on wings avoid us.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Let not the Arrow that hath wings distract us: beside the fire-place, on the hearth it settles.
May, it bring welfare to our men and cattle: here let the Dove, ye Gods, forbear to harm us.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The screeching of the owl is ineffective and when beside the fire the Dove hath settled,
To him who sent it hither as an envoy, to him be reverence paid, to Death, to Yama.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Drive forth the Dove, chase it with holy verses: rejoicing, bring ye hither food and cattle,
Barring the way against all grief and trouble. Let the swift bird fly forth and leave us vigour.

<span id="h166"></span>

## HYMN CLXVI. Sapatnanāśanam.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAKE me a bull among my peers, make me my rivals, conqueror:
Make me the slayer of my foes, a sovran ruler, lord of kine
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  I am my rivals’ slayer, like Indra unwounded and unhurt,
And all these enemies of mine are vanquished and beneath my feet.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Here, verily, I bind you fast, as the two bow-ends with the string.
Press down these men, O Lord of Speech, that they may humbly speak to me.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Hither I came as conqueror with mighty all-effecting power,
And I have mastered all your thought, your synod, and your holy work.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  May I be highest, having gained your strength in war, your skill in peace
my feet have trodden on your heads.
Speak to me from beneath my feet, as frogs from out the water croak, as frogs from out the water croak.

<span id="h167"></span>

## HYMN CLXVII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THIS pleasant meath, O Indra, is effused for thee: thou art the ruling Lord of beaker and of juice.
Bestow upon us wealth with many hero sons: thou, having glowed with Fervour, wonnest heavenly light.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Let us call Śakra to libations here effused, winner of light who joyeth in the potent juice.
Mark well this sacrifice of ours and come to us: we pray to Maghavan the Vanquisher of hosts.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  By royal Soma's and by Varuṇa's decree, under Bṛhaspati's and Anumati's guard,
This day by thine authority, O Maghavan, Maker, Disposer thou! have I enjoyed the jars.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  1, too, urged on, have had my portion, in the bowl, and as first Prince I drew forth this my hymn of praise,
When with the prize I came unto the flowing juice, O Viśvāmitra, Jamadagni, to your home.

<span id="h168"></span>

## HYMN CLXVIII. Vāyu.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  O THE Wind's chariot, O its power and glory! Crashing it goes and hath a voice of thunder.
It makes the regions red and touches heaven, and as it moves the dust of earth is scattered.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Along the traces of the Wind they hurry, they come to him as dames to an assembly.
Borne on his car with these for his attendants, the God speeds forth, the universe's Monarch.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Travelling on the paths of air's mid-region, no single day doth he take rest or slumber.
Holy and earliest-born, Friend of the waters, where did he spring and from what region came he?
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Germ of the world, the Deities’ vital spirit, this God moves ever as his will inclines him.
His voice is heard, his shape is ever viewless. Let us adore this Wind with our oblation.

<span id="h169"></span>

## HYMN CLXIX. COWS.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY the wind blow upon our Cows with healing: may they eat herbage full of vigorous juices.
May they drink waters rich in life and fatness: to food that moves on feet be gracious, Rudra.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Like-coloured, various-hued, or single-coloured, whose names through sacrifice are known to Agni,
Whom the Aṅgirases produced by Fervour,—vouchsafe to these, Parjanya, great protection.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Those who have offered to the Gods their bodies, whose varied forms are all well known to Soma,—
Those grant us in our cattle-pen, O Indra, with their full streams of milk and plenteous offspring.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Prajāpati, bestowing these upon me, one-minded with all Gods and with the Fathers,
Hath to our cow-pen brought auspicious cattle: so may we own the offspring they will bear us.

<span id="h170"></span>

## HYMN CLXX. Sūrya.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY the Bright God drink glorious Soma-mingled meath, giving the sacrifice's lord uninjured life;
He who, wind-urged, in person guards our offspring well, hath nourished them with food and shines o’er many a land.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Radiant, as high Truth, cherished, best at winning strength, Truth based upon the statute that supports the heavens,
He rose, a light, that kills Vṛtras and enemies, best slayer of the Dasyus, Asuras, and foes.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  This light, the best of lights, supreme, all-conquering, winner of riches, is exalted with high laud.
All-lighting, radiant, mighty as the Sun to see, he spreadeth wide unfailing victory and strength.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Beaming forth splendour with thy light, thou hast attained heaven's lustrous realm.
By thee were brought together all existing things, possessor of all Godhead, All-effecting God.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_160">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CLI. — CLX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_180">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLXXI. — CLXXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
