---
title: "HYMN CXLI. — CL."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_140">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CXXXI. — CXL.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_160">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLI. — CLX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN CXLI. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  TURN hither, Agni, speak to us: come to us with a gracious mind.
Enrich us, Master of the house: thou art the Giver of our wealth.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Let Aryarnan vouchsafe us wealth, and Bhaga, and Bṛhaspati.
Let the Gods give their gifts, and let Sūnṛtā, Goddess, grant us wealth.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  We call King Soma to our aid, and Agni with our songs and hymns,
Ādityas, Viṣṇu, Sūrya, and the Brahman Priest Bṛhaspati.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Indra, Vāyu, Bṛhaspati, Gods swift to listen, we invoke,
That in the synod all the folk may be benevolent to us.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Urge Aryaman to send us gifts, and Indra, and Bṛhaspati,
Vāta, Viṣṇu, Sarasvatī and the Strong Courser Savitar.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Do thou, O Agni, with thy fires strengthen our prayer and sacrifice:
Urge givers to bestow their wealth to aid our service of the Gods.

## HYMN CXLII. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WITH thee, O Agni, was this singer of the laud: he hath no other kinship, O thou Son of Strength.
Thou givest blessed shelter with a triple guard. Keep the destructive lightning far away from us.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thy birth who seekest food is in the falling flood, Agni: as Comrade thou winnest all living things.
Our coursers and our songs shall be victorious: they of themselves advance like one who guards the herd.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  And thou, O Agni, thou of Godlike nature, sparest the stones, while caring up the brushwood.
Then are thy tracks like deserts in the corn-lands. Let us not stir to wrath thy mighty arrow.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  O'er hills through vales devouring as thou goest, thou partest like an army fain for booty
As when a barber shaves a beard, thou shavest earth when the wind blows on thy flame and fans it.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Apparent are his lines as he approaches the course is single, but the cars are many,
When, Agni, thou, making thine arms resplendent, advancest o’er the land spread out beneath thee.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Now let thy strength, thy burning flames fly upward, thine energies, O Agni, as thou toilest.
Gape widely, bend thee, waxing in thy vigour: let all the Vasus sit this day beside thee.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  This is the waters' reservoir, the great abode of gathered streams.
Take thou another path than this, and as thou listest walk thereon.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  On thy way hitherward and hence let flowery Durva grass spring up
Let there be lakes with lotus blooms. These are the mansions of the flood.

## HYMN CXLIII. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  YE made that Atri, worn with eld, free as a horse to win the goal.
When ye restored to youth and strength Kakṣīvān like a car renewed,
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Ye freed that Atri like a horse, and brought him newly-born to earth.
Ye loosed him like a firm-tied knot which Gods unsoiled by dust had bound.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Heroes who showed most wondrous power to Atri, strive to win fair songs;
For then, O Heroes of the sky, your hymn of praise shall cease no more.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  This claims your notice, Bounteous Gods! - oblation, Aśvins! and our love,
That ye, O Heroes, in the fight may bring us safe to ample room.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Ye Twain to Bhujyu tossed about in ocean at the region's end,
Nāsatyas, with your winged sterds came nigh, and gave him strength to win.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Come with your joys, most liberal Gods, Lords of all treasures, bringing weal.
Like fresh full waters to a well, so, Heroes come and be with us.

## HYMN CXLIV. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THIS deathless Indu, like a steed, strong and of full vitality,
Belongs to thee, the Orderer.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Here, by us, for the worshipper, is the wise bolt that works with skill.
It brings the bubbling beverage as a dexterous man brings the effectual strong drink.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Impetuous Ahīśuva, a bull among cows of his,
looked down upon the restless Hawk.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  That the strong-pinioned Bird hath brought, Child of the Falcon, from afar,
What moves upon a hundred wheels along the female Dragon's path.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Which, fair, unrobbed, the Falcon brought thee in his foot, the red-hued dwelling of the juice;
Through this came vital power which lengthens out our days, and kinship through its help awoke.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  So Indra is by lndu's power; e’en among Gods will it repel great treachery.
Wisdom, Most Sapient One, brings force that lengthens life. May wisdom bring the juice to us.

## HYMN CXLV. Sapatnibadhanam.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FROM out the earth I dig this plant, a herb of most effectual power,
Wherewith one quells the rival wife and gains the husband for oneself.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Auspicious, with expanded leaves, sent by the Gods, victorious plant,
Blow thou the rival wife away, and make my husband only mine.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Stronger am 1, O Stronger One, yea, mightier than the mightier;
And she who is my rival wife is lower than the lowest dames.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Her very name I utter not: she takes no pleasure in this man.
Far into distance most remote drive we the rival wife away.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  I am the conqueror, and thou, thou also act victorious:
As victory attends us both we will subdue my fellow-wife.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  I have gained thee for vanquisher, have grasped thee with a stronger spell.
As a cow hastens to her calf, so let thy spirit speed te me, hasten like water on its way.

## HYMN CXLVI. Aranyani.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  GODDESS of wild and forest who seemest to vanish from the sight.
How is it that thou seekest not the village? Art thou not afraid?
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  What time the grasshopper replies and swells the shrill cicala's voice,
Seeming to sound with tinkling bells, the Lady of the Wood exults.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  And, yonder, cattle seem to graze, what seems a dwelling-place appears:
Or else at eve the Lady of the Forest seems to free the wains.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Here one is calling to his cow, another there hath felled a tree:
At eve the dweller in the wood fancies that somebody hath screamed.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The Goddess never slays, unless some murderous enemy approach.
Man eats of savoury fruit and then takes, even as he wills, his rest.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Now have I praised the Forest Queen, sweet-scented, redolent of balm,
The Mother of all sylvan things, who tills not but hath stores of food.

## HYMN CXLVII Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I TRUST in thy first wrathful deed, O Indra, when thou slewest Vṛtra and didst work to profit man;
What time the two world-halves fell short of thee in might, and the earth trembled at thy force, O Thunder-anned.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou with thy magic powers didst rend the conjurer Vṛtra, O Blameless One, with heart that longed for fame.
Heroes elect thee when they battle for the prey, thee in all sacrifices worthy of renown.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  God Much-invoked, take pleasure in these princes here, who, thine exalters, Maghavan, have come to wealth.
In synods, when the rite succeeds, they hymn the Strong for sons and progeny and riches undisturbed.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  That man shall find delight in well-protected wealth whose care provides for him the quick-sought joyous draught.
Bringing oblations, strengthened Maghavan, by thee, he swiftly wins the spoil with heroes in the fight.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Now for our band, O Maghavan, when lauded, make ample room with might, and grant us riches.
Magician thou, our Varuṇa and Mitra, deal food to us, O Wondrous, as Dispenser.

## HYMN CXLVIII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WHEN we have pressed the juice we laud thee, Indra, and when, Most Valorous we have won the booty.
Bring us prosperity, as each desires it under thine own protection may we conquer.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Sublime from birth, mayst thou O Indra, Hero, with Sūrya overcome the Dāsa races.
As by a fountain's side, we bring the Soma that lay concealed, close-hidden in the waters.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Answer the votary's hymns, for these thou knowest, craving the Ṛṣis’ prayer, thyself a Singer
May we be they who take delight in Somas: these with sweet food for thee, O Chariot-rider.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  These holy prayers, O Indra, have I sung thee: grant to the men the strength of men, thou Hero.
Be of one mind with those in whom thou joyest: keep thou the singers safe and their companions.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Listen to Pṛthi's call, heroic Indra, and be thou lauded by the hymns of Venya,
Him who hath sung thee to thine oil-rich dwelling, whose rolling songs have sped thee like a torrent.

## HYMN CXLIX. Savitar.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SAVITAR fixed the earth with bands to bind it, and made heaven stedfast where no prop supported.
Savitar milked, as ’twere a restless courser, air, sea bound fast to what no foot had trodden.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Well knoweth Savitar, O Child of Waters, where ocean, firmly fixt, o’erflowed its limit.
Thence sprang the world, from that uprose the region: thence heaven spread out and the wide earth expanded.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Then, with a full crowd of Immortal Beings, this other realm came later, high and holy.
First, verily, Savitar's strong-pinioned Eagle was born: and he obeys his law for ever.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  As warriors to their steeds, kine to their village, as fond milk giving cows approach their youngling,
As man to wife, let Savitar come downward to us, heaven's bearer, Lord of every blessing.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Like the Aṅgirasa Hiranvastupa, I call thee, Savitar, to this achievement:
So worshipping and lauding thee for favour I watch for thee as for the stalk of Soma.

## HYMN CL. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THOU, bearer of oblations, though kindled, art kindled for the Gods.
With the Ādityas, Rudras, Vasus, come to us: to show us favour come to us.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Come hither and accept with joy this sacrifice and hymn of ours.
O kindled God, we mortals are invoking thee, calling on thee to show us grace.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  I laud thee Jātavedas, thee Lord of all blessings, with my song.
Agni, bring hitherward the Gods whose Laws we love, whose laws we love, to show us grace.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Agni the God was made the great High-Priest of Gods, Ṛṣis have kindled Agni, men of mortal mould.
Agni I invocate for winning ample wealth. kindly disposed for winning wealth.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Atri and Bharadvāja and Gavisthira, Kaṇva and Trasadasyu, in our fight he helped.
On Agni calls Vasiṣṭha, even the household priest, the household priest to win his grace.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_140">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CXXXI. — CXL.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_160">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLI. — CLX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
