---
title: "HYMN CI. — CX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_9_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XCI. — C.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_9_120">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXI. — CXIV.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN CI. Soma Pavamana

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FOR first possession of your juice, for the exhilarating drink,
Drive ye away the dog, my friends, drive ye the long-tongued dog away.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  He who with purifying stream, effused, comes flowing hitherward,
Indu, is like an able steed.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The men with all-pervading song send unassailable Soma forth,
By pressing-stones, to sacrifice.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The Somas, very rich in sweets, for which the sieve is destined, flow,
Effused, the source of Indra's joy: may your strong juices reach the Gods.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Indu flows on for Indra's sake: thus have the Deities declared.
The Lord of Speech exerts himself, Ruler of all, because of might.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Inciter of the voice of song, with thousand streams the ocean flows,
Even Soma, Lord of opulence, the Friend of Indra, day by day.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  As Pūṣan, Fortune, Bhaga, comes this Soma while they make him pure.
He, Lord of the multitude, hath looked upon the earth and heaven.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The dear cows lowed in joyful mood together to the gladdening drink.
The drops as they were purified, the Soma juices, made then paths.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  O Pavamana, bring the juice, the mightiest, worthy to be famed,
Which the Five Tribes have over them, whereby we may win opulence.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  For us the Soma juices flow, the drops best furtherers of our weal,
Effused as friends without a spot, benevolent, finders of the light.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Effused by means of pressing-stones, upon the ox-hide visible,
They, treasure-finders, have announced food unto us from every side.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Tlese Soma juices, skilled in song, purified, blent with milk and curd,
When moving and when firmly laid in oil, resemble lovely Suns.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Let not the power of men restrain the voice of the outpouring juice:
As Bhṛgu's sons chased Makha, so drive ye the greedy hound away.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  The Friend hath wrapped him in his robe, as in his parents arms, a son.
He went, as lover to a dame, to take his station suitor-like.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  That Hero who produces strength, he who hath propped both worlds apart,
Gold-hued, hath wrapped him in the sieve, to settle, priest-like, in his place.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Soma upon the ox's skin through the sheep's wool flows purified.
Bellowing out, the Tawny Steer goes on to Indra's special place.

## HYMN CIL Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE Child, when blended with the streams, speeding the plan of sacrifice,
Surpasses all things that are dear, yea, from of old.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The place, near the two pressing-stones of Trita, hath he occupied,
Secret and dear through seven lights of sacrifice.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Urge to three courses, on the heights of Trita, riches in a stream.
He who is passing wise measures his courses out.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Even at his birth the Mothers Seven taught him, for glory, like a sage,
So that he, firm and sure, hath set his mind on wealth.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Under his sway, of one accord, are all the guileless Deities:
Warriors to be envied, they, when they are pleased.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The Babe whom they who strengthen Law have generated fair to see,
Much longed for at the sacrifice, most liberal Sage,—
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  To him, united, of themselves, come the young Parents of the rite,
When they adorn him, duly weaving sacrifice.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  With wisdom and with radiant eyes unbar to us the stall of heaven,
Speeding at solemn rite the plan of Holy Law.

## HYMN CIII. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  To Soma who is purified as ordering Priest the song is raised:
Bring meed, as ’twere, to one who makes thee glad with hymns.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Blended with milk and curds he flows on through the long wool of the sheep.
The Gold-hued, purified, makes him three seats for rest.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  On through the long wool of the sheep to the meath-dropping vat he flows:
The Ṛṣis’ sevenfold quire hath sung aloud to him.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Shared by all Gods, Infallible, the Leader of our holy hymns,
Golden-hued Soma, being cleansed, hath reached the bowls.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  After thy Godlike qualities, associate with Indra, go,
As a Priest purified by priests, Immortal One.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Like a car-horse who shows his strength, a God effused for Deities.
The penetrating Pavamana flows along.

## HYMN CIV. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SIT down, O friends, and sing aloud to him who purifies himself:
Deck him for glory, like a child, with holy rites.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Unite him bringing household wealth, even as a calf, with mother kine,
Him who hath double strength, the God, delighting juice.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Purify him who gives us power, that he, most Blessed One, may be
A banquet for the Troop, Mitra, and Varuṇa.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Voices have sung aloud to thee as finderout of wealth for us:
We clothe the hue thou wearest with a robe of milk.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Thou, Indu, art the food of Gods, O Sovran of all gladdening drinks:
As Friend for friend, be thou best finder of success.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Drive utterly away from us each demon, each voracious fiend,
The godless and the false: keep sorrow far away.

## HYMN CV. Soma Pavamana

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SING; ye aloud, O friends, to him who makes him pure for gladdening drink:
They shall make sweet the Child with sacrifice and laud.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Like as a calf with mother cows, so Indu is urged forth and sent,
Glorified by our hymns, the God-delighting juice.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Effectual means of power is he, he is a banquet for the Troop,
He who hath been effused, most rich in meath, for Gods.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Flow to us, Indu, passing, strong, effused, with wealth of kine and steeds:
I will spread forth above the milk thy radiant hue.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Lord of the tawny, Indu thou who art the God's most special food,
As Friend to friend, for splendour be thou good to men.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Drive utterly, far away from us each godless, each voracious foe.
O Indu, overcome and drive the false afar.

## HYMN CVI. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  To Indra, to the Mighty Steer, may these gold-coloured juices go,
Drops rapidly produced, that find the light of heaven.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Effused, this juice victorious flows for Indra, for his maintenance.
Soma bethinks him of the Conqueror, as he knows.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  May Indra in his raptures gain from him the grasp that gathers spoil,
And, winning waters, wield the steerstrong thunderbolt.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Flow vigilant for Indra, thou Soma, yea, Indu, run thou on:
Bring hither splendid strength that finds the light of heaven.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Do thou, all-beautiful, purify for Indra's sake the mighty juice,
Path-maker thou, far seeing, with a thousand ways.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Best finder of prosperity for us, most rich in sweets for Gods,
Proceed thou loudly roaring on a thousand paths.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  O Indu, with thy streams, in might, flow for the banquet of the Gods:
Rich in meath, Soma, in our beaker take thy place.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Thy drops that swim in water have exalted Indra to delight:
The Gods have drunk thee up for immortality.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Stream opulence to us, ye drops of Soma, pressed and purified,
Pouring down rain from heaven in hoods, and finding light.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Soma, while filtered, with his wave flows through the long wool of the sheep,
Shouting while purified before the voice of song.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  With songs they send the Mighty forth, sporting in wood, above the fleece:
Our psalms have glorified him of the triple height.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Into the jars hath he been loosed, like an impetuous steed for war,
And lifting up his voice, while filtered, glided on.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Gold-hued and lovely in his course, througb tangles of the wool he flows,
And pours heroic fame upon the worshippers.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Flow thus, a faithful votary: the streams of meath have been effused.
Thou comest to the filter, singing, from each side.

## HYMN CVII. Soma Pavamana.

I., HENCE sprinkle forth the juice effused,. Soma, the best of sacred gifts,
Who, friend of man, hath run amid the water-streams. He hath pressed Soma out with stones.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Now, being purified, flow hither through the fleece inviolate and most odorous.
We ladden thee in waters when thou art effused, blending thee still with juice and milk.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Pressed out for all to see, delighting Gods, Indu, Far-sighted One, is mental power.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Cleansing thee, Soma, in thy stream, thou flowest in a watery robe:
Giver of wealth, thou sittest in the place of Law, O God, a fountain made of gold.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Milking the heavenly udder for dear meath, he hath sat in the ancient gatheringplace.
Washed by the men, the Strong Farseeing One streams forth nutriti us food that all desire.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  O Soma, while they cleanse thee, dear and watchful in the sheep's long wool,
Thou hast become a Singer most like Aṅgiras: thou madest Sūrya mount to heaven.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Bountiful, best of furtherers, Soma floweth on, Ṛṣi and Singer, keen of sight.
Thou hast become a Sage most welcome to the Gods: thou madest Sūrya mount to heaven.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Pressed out by pressers, Soma goes over the fleecy backs of sheep,
Goes, even as with a mare, in tawnycoloured stream, goes in exhilarating stream.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Down to the water-Soma, rich in kine hath flowed with cows, with cows that have been milked.
They have approached the mixing-vessel as a sea: the cheerer streams for the carouse.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Effused by stones, O Soma, and urged through the long wool of the sheep,
Thou, entering the saucers as a man the fort, gold-hued hast settled in the wood.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  He beautifies himself through the sheep's long fine wool, like an impetuous steed in war,
Even Soma Pavamana who shall be the joy of sages and of holy bards.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  O Soma,—for the feast of Gods, river-like he hath swelled with surge,
With the stalk's juice, exhilarating, resting not, into the vat that drops with meath.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Like a dear son who must be decked, the Lovely One hath clad him in a shining robe.
Men skilful at their work drive him forth, like a car, into the rivers from their bands.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  The living drops of Soma juice pour, as they flow, the gladdening drink,
Intelligent drops above the basin of the sea, exhilarating, finding light.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  May Pavamana, King and God, speed with his wave over the sea the lofty rite:
May he by Mitra's and by Varuṇa's decree flow furthering the lofty rite.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Far-seeing, lovely, guided by the men, the God whose home is in the sea-
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Soma, the gladdening juice, flows pressed for Indra with his Marut host:
He hastens o’er the fleece with all his thousand streams: men make him bright and beautiful.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Purified in the bowl and gendering the hymn, wise Soma joys among the Gods.
Robed in the flood, the Mighty One hath clad himself with milk and settled in the vats.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  O Soma, Indu, every day thy friendship hath been my delight.
Many fiends follow me; help me, thou Tawny-hued; pass on beyond these barriers.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Close to thy bosom am I, Soma, day and night. O Tawny-hued, for friendship sake.
Sūrya himself refulgent with his glow have we o’ertaken in his course like birds.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Deft-handcd! thou when purified liftest thy voice amid the sea.
Thou, Pavamana, makest riches flow to us, yellow, abundant, much-desifed.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  Making thee pure and bright in the sheep's long wool, thou hast bellowed, steerlike, in the wood.
Thou flowest, Soma Pavamana, balmed with milk unto the special place of Gods.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  Flow on to win us strength, flow on to lofty lore of every kind.
Thou, Soma, as Exhilarator wast the first to spread the sea abroad for Gods.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  Flow to the realm of earth, flow to the realm of heaven, O Soma, in thy righteous ways.
Fair art thou whom the sages, O Far-seeing One, urge onward with their songs and hymns.
<p id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup>  Over the cleansing sieve have flowed the Pavamanas in a stream,
Girt by the Maruts, gladdening, Steeds with Indra's stiength, for wisdom and for dainty food.
<p id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup>  Urged onward by the pressers, clad in watery robes, Indu is speeding to the vat.
He gendering light, hath made the glad Cows low, while he takes them as his garb of state.

## HYMN CVIII. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FOR Indra, flow thou Soma on, as gladdening juice most sweet, intelligent,
Great, cheering, dwelling most in heaven.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou, of whom having drunk the Steer acts like a steer. drinking of this that finds the light,
He, Excellently Wise, is come to strengthening food, to spoil and wealth like Etaśa.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  For, verily, Pavamana, thou hast, splendidest, called all the generations of
The Gods to immortality.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  By whom Dadhyac Navagva opens fastened doors, by whom the sages gained their wish,
By whom they won the fame of lovely Amṛta in the felicity of Gods.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Effused, he floweth in a stream, best rapture-giver, in the long wool of the sheep,
Sporting, as ’twere the waters' wave.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  He who from out the rocky cavern took with might the redmrefulgent watery Cows,
Thou masterest the stable full of kine and steeds: burst it, brave Lord, like one in mail.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Press ye and pour him, like a steed, laudworthy, speeding through the region and the flood,
Who swims in water, roan in wood;
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Increaser of the water, Steer with thousand streams, dear to the race of Deities;
Who born in Law hath waxen mighty by the Law, King, God, and lofty Ordinance.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Make splendid glory shine on us, thou Lord of strengthening food, God, as the Friend of Gods:
Unclose the fount of middle air.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Roll onward to the bowls, O Mighty One, effused, as Prince supporter of the tribes.
Pour on us rain from heaven, send us the waters' flow: incite our thoughts to win the spoil.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  They have drained him the Steer of heaven, him with a thousand streams, distilling rapturous joy,
Him who brings all things excellent.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  The Mighty One was born Immortal, giving life, lightening darkness with his shine.
Wcll-praised by. sages he hath. by his wondrous power assumed the Threefold as his robe.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Effused is he who brings good things, who brings us bounteous gifts and sweet refreshing food,
Soma who brings us quiet homes:
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  He whom our Indra and the Marut host shall drink, Bhaga shall drink with Aryarnan,
By whom we bring to us Mitra and Varuṇa and Indra for our great defence.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Soma, for Indra's drink do thou, led by the men, well-wcaponcd and most gladdening,
Flow on with greatest store of sweets.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Enter the Soma-holder, even Indra's heart, as rivers pass into the sea,
Acceptable to Mitra, Vāyu, Varuṇa, the noblest Pillar of the heavens.

## HYMN CIX. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  PLEASANT to Indra's Mitra's, Pūṣan's Bhaga's taste, sped onward, Soma, with thy flowing stream.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Let Indra drink, O Soma, of thy juice for wisdom, and all Deities for strength.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  So flow thou on as bright celestial juice, flow to the vast, immortal dwelling-place.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Flow onward, Soma, as a mighty sea, as Father of the Gods to every form.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Flow on, O Soma, radiant for the Gods and Heaven and Earth and bless our progeny.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Thou, bright Juice, art Sustainer of the sky: flow, mighty, in accordance with true Law.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Soma, flow splendid with thy copious stream through the great fleece as in the olden time.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Bom, led by men, joyous, and purified, let the Light-finder make all blessings flow:
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Indu, while cleansed, keeping the people safe, shall give us all possessions for our own.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Flow on for wisdom, Soma, and for power, as a strong courser bathed, to win the prize.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  The pressers purify this juice of thine, the Soma, for delight, and lofty fame
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  They deck the Gold-hued Infant, newlyborn, even Soma, Indu, in the sieve for Gods.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Fair Indu hath flowed on for rapturous joy, Sage for good fortune in the waters' lap.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  He bears the beauteous name of Indra, that wherewith he overcame all demon foes.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  All Deities are wont to drink of him, pressed by the men and blent with milk and curds.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  He hath flowed forth with thousand streams effused, flowed ihsough the filter and the sheep's long wool.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  With endless genial flow the Strong hath run, purified by the waters, blent with milk.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Pressed out with stones, directed by the men, go fortli, O Soma, into Indra's throat.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  The mighty Soma with a thousand streams is poured to Indra through the cleansing sieve.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Indu they balm with pleasant milky juice for Indra, for the Steer, for his delight.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Lightly, for sheen, they cleanse thee for the Gods, gold-coloured, wearing water as thy robe.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  Indu to Indra streams, yea, downward streams, Strong, flowing to the floods, and mingling -there.

## HYMN CX. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  O'ERPOWERING Vṛtras, forward run to win great strength:
Thou speedest to subdue like one exacting debts.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  In thee, effused, O Soma, we rejoice ourselves for great supremacy in fight.
Thou, Pavamana, enterest into mighty deeds,
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  O Pavamana, thou didst generate the Sun, and spread the moisture out with power,
Hasting to us with plenty vivified with milk.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Thou didst produce him, Deathless God mid mortal men for maintenance of Law and lovely Amṛta:
Thou evermore hast moved making strength flow to us.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  All round about hast thou with glory pierced for us as ’twere a never-failing well for men to drink,
Borne on thy way in fragments from the presser's arms.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Then, beautifully radiant, certain Heavenly Ones, have sung to him their kinship as they looked thereon,
And Savitar the God opens as ’twere a stall.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Soma, the men of old whose grass was trimmed addressed the hymn to thee for mighty strength and for renown:
So, Hero, urge us onward to heroic power.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  They have drained forth from out the great depth of the sky the old primeval milk of heaven that claims the laud:
They lifted up their voice to Indra athis birth.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  As long as thou, O Pavamana, art above this earth and heaven and all existence in thy might,
Thou standest like a Bull the chief amid the herd.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  In the sheep's wool hath Soma Pavamana flowed, while they cleanse him, like a playful infant,
Indu with hundred powers and hundred currents.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Holy and sweet, while purified, this Indu flows on, a wave of pleasant taste, to Indra,—
Strength-winner, Treasure-finder, Life. bestower.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  So flow thou on, subduing our assailants, chasing the demons hard to beencountered,
Well-armed and conquering our foes, O Soma.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_9_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XCI. — C.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_9_120">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXI. — CXIV.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
