---
title: "HYMN LXXXI. — XC."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_80">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXI. — LXXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_100">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN XCI. — C.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h81"></span>

## HYMN LXXXI. Visvakarman.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  HE who sate down as Hotar-priest, the Ṛṣi, our Father, offering up all things existing,—
He, seeking through his wish a great possession, came among men on earth as archetypal.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  What was the place whereon he took his station? What was it that supported him? How was it?
Whence Visvakarman, seeing all, producing the earth, with mighty power disclosed the heavens.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  He who hath eyes on all sides round about him, a mouth on all sides, arms and feet on all sides,
He, the Sole God, producing earth and heaven, weldeth them, with his arms as wings, together.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  What was the tree, what wood in sooth produced it, from which they fashioned out the earth and heaven?
Ye thoughtful men inquire within your spirit whereon he stood when he established all things.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Nine highest, lowest, sacrificial natures, and these thy mid-most here, O Visvakarman,
Teach thou thy friends at sacrifice, O Blessed, and come thyself, exalted, to our worship.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Bring thou thyself, exalted with oblation, O Visvakarman, Earth and Heaven to worship.
Let other men around us live in folly here let us have a rich and liberal patron.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Let us invoke to-day, to aid our labour, the Lord of Speech, the thought-swift Visvakarman.
May he hear kindly all our invocations who gives all bliss for aid, whose works are righteous.

<span id="h82"></span>

## HYMN LXXXII. Visvakarman.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE Father of the eye, the Wise in spirit, created both these worlds submerged in fatness.
Then when the eastern ends were firmly fastened, the heavens and the earth were far extended.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Mighty in mind and power is Visvakarman, Maker, Disposer, and most lofty Presence.
Their offerings joy in rich juice where they value One, only One, beyond the Seven Ṛṣis.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Father who made us, he who, as Disposer, knoweth all races and all things existing,
Even he alone, the Deities' narne-giver,him other beings seek for information.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  To him in sacrifice they offered treasures,—Ṛṣis of old, in numerous troops, as singers,
Who, in the distant, near, and lower region, made ready all these things that have existence.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  That which is earlier than this earth and heaven, before the Asuras and Gods had being,—
What was the germ primeval which the waters received where all the Gods were seen together?
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The waters, they received that germ primeval wherein the Gods were gathefed all together.
It rested set upon the Unborn's navel, that One wherein abide all things existing.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Ye will not find him who produced these creatures: another thing hath risen up among you.
Enwrapt in misty cloud, with lips that stammer, hymn-chanters wander and are discontented.

<span id="h82"></span>

## HYMN LXXXII. Manyu.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  HE who hath reverenced thee, Manyu, destructive bolt, breeds for himself forthwith all conquering energy.
Ārya and Dāsa will we conquer with thine aid, with thee the Conqueror, with conquest conquest-sped.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Manyu was Indra, yea, the God, was Manyu, Manyu was Hotar, Varuṇa, Jātavedas.
The tribes of human lineage worship Manyu. Accordant with thy fervour, Manyu, guard us.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Come hither, Manyu, mightier tham the mighty; chase, with thy fervour for ally, our foemen.
Slayer of foes, of Vṛtra, and of Dasyu, bring thou to us all kinds of wealth and treasure.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  For thou art, Manyu, of surpassing vigour, fierce, queller of the foe, and self-existent,
Shared by all men, victorious, subduer: vouchsafe to us superior strengith in battles.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  I have departed, still without a portion, wise God! according to thy will, the Mighty.
I, feeble man, was wroth thee, O Manyu I am myself; come thou to give me vigour.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Come hither. I am all thine own; advancing turn thou to me, Victorious, All-supporter!
Come to me, Manyu, Wielder of the Thunder: bethink thee of thy friend, and slay the Dasyus.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Approach, and on my right hand hold thy station: so shall we slay a multitude of foemen.
The best of meath I offer to support thee: may we be first to drink thereof in quiet.

<span id="h84"></span>

## HYMN LXXXIV. Manyu.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  BORNE on with thee, O Manyu girt by Maruts, let our brave men, impetuous, bursting forward,
March on, like flames of fire in form, exulting, with pointed arrows, sharpening their weapons.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Flashing like fire, be thou, O conquering Manyu, invoked, O Victor, as our army's leader.
Slay thou our foes, distribute their possessions: show forth thy vigour, scatter those who hate us.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  O Manyu, overcome thou our assailant on! breaking, slaying, crushing down the foemen.
They have not hindered thine impetuous vigour: Mighty, Sole born! thou makest them thy subjects.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Alone or many thou art worshipped, Manyu: sharpen the spirit of each clan for battle.
With thee to aid, O thou of perfect splendour, we will uplift the glorious shout for conquest.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Unyielding bringing victory like Indra, O Manyu, be thou here our Sovran Ruler.
To thy dear name, O Victor, we sing praises: we know the spring from which thou art come hither.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Twin-born with power, destructive bolt of thunder, the highest conquering might is thine, Subduer!
Be friendly to its in thy spirit, Manyu, O Much-invoked, in shock of mighty battle.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  For spoil let Varuṇa and Manyu give us the wealth of both sides gathered and collected;
And let our enemies with stricken spirits, o’erwhelmed with terror, slink away defeated.

<span id="h85"></span>

## HYMN LXXXV. Sūrya's Bridal.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  TRUTH is the base that bears the earth; by Sūrya are the heavens sustained.
By Law the Ādityas stand secure, and Soma holds his place in heaven.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  By Soma are the Ādityas strong, by Soma mighty is the earth.
Thus Soma in the midst of all these constellations hath his place.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  One thinks, when they have brayed the plant, that he hath drunk the Soma's juice;
Of him whom Brahmans truly know as Soma no one ever tastes.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Soma, secured by sheltering rules, guarded by hymns in Brhati,
Thou standest listening to the stones none tastes of thee who dwells on earth.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  When they begin to drink thee then, O God, thou swellest out again.
Vāyu is Soma's guardian God. The Moon is that which shapes the years.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Raibhi was her dear bridal friend, and Narasamsi led her home.
Lovely was Sūrya's robe: she came to that which Gatha had adorned.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Thought was the pillow of her couch, sight was the unguent for her eyes:
Her treasury was earth and heaven.ẉhen Sūrya went unto her Lord.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Hymns were the cross-bars of the pole, Kurira-metre decked the car:
The bridesmen were the Aśvin Pair Agni was leader of the train.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Soma was he who wooed the maid: the groomsmen were both Aśvins, when
The Sun-God Savitar bestowed his willing Sūrya on her Lord.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Her spirit was the bridal car; the covering thereof was heaven:
Bright were both Steers that drew it when Sūrya approached her husband's, home.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Thy Steers were steady, kept in place by holy verse and Sāma-hymn:
All car were thy two chariot wheels: thy path was tremulous in the sky,
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Clean, as thou wentest, were thy wheels wind, was the axle fastened there.
Sūrya, proceeding to her Lord, mounted a spirit-fashioried car.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  The bridal pomp of Sūrya, which Savitar started, moved along.
In Magha days are oxen slain, in Arjuris they wed the bride.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  When on your three-wheeled chariot, O Aśvins, ye came as wooers unto Sūrya's bridal,
Then all the Gods agreed to your proposal Pūṣan as Son elected you as Fathers.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  O ye Two Lords of lustre, then when ye to Sūrya's wooing came,
Where was one chariot wheel of yours? Where stood ye for die Sire's command?
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  The Brahmans, by their seasons, know, O Sūrya, those two wheels of thine:
One kept concealed, those only who are skilled in highest truths have learned.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  To Sūrya and the Deities, to Mitra and to Varuṇa.
Who know aright the thing that is, this adoration have I paid.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  By their own power these Twain in close succession move;
They go as playing children round the sacrifice.
One of the Pair beholdeth all existing things; the other ordereth seasons and is born again.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  He, born afresh, is new and new for ever ensign of days he goes before the Mornings
Coming, he orders f6r the Gods their portion. The Moon prolongs the days of our existence.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Mount this, all-shaped, gold-hued, with strong wheels, fashioned of Kimsuka and Salmali, light-rolling,
Bound for the world of life immortal, Sūrya: make for thy lord a happy bridal journey.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Rise up from hence: this maiden hath a husband. I laud Visvavasu with hymns and homage.
Seek in her father's home another fair one, and find the portion from of old assigned thee.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  Rise up from hence, Visvavasu: with reverence we worship thee.
Seek thou another willing maid, and with her husband leave the bride.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  Straight in direction be the path:s, and thornless, whereon our fellows travel to the wooing.
Let Aryaman and Bhaga lead us: perfect, O Gods, the union of the wife and husband.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  Now from the noose of Varuṇa I free thee, wherewith Most Blessed Savitar hath bound thee.
In Law's seat, to the world of virtuous action, I give thee up uninjured with thy consort.
<p id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup>  Hence, and not thence, I send these free. I make thee softly fettered there.
That, Bounteous Indra, she may live blest in her fortune and her sons.
<p id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup>  Let Pūṣan take thy hand and hence conduct thee; may the two Aśvins on their car transport thee.
Go to the house to be the household's mistress and speak as lady ito thy gathered people.
<p id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup>  Happy be thou and prosper witlh thy children here: be vigilant to rule thy household in this home.
Closely unite thy body with this; man, thy lord. So shall ye, full of years, address your company.
<p id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup>  Her hue is blue and red: the fienod who clingeth close is driven off.
Well thrive the kinsmen of this bride the husband is bourid fast in bonds.
<p id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup>  Give thou the woollen robe away: deal treasure to the Brahman priests.
This female fiend hath got her feet, and as a wife attends her lord.
<p id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup>  Unlovely is his body when it glistens with this wicked fiend,
What time the husband wraps about his limbs the garment of his wife.
<p id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup>  Consumptions, from her people, which follow the bride's resplendent train,—
These let the Holy Gods again bear to the place from which they came.
<p id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup>  Let not the highway thieves who lie in ambush find the wedded pair.
By pleasant ways let them escape the danger, and let foes depart.
<p id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup>  Signs of good fortune mark the bride come all of you and look at her.
Wish her prosperity, and then return unto your homes again.
<p id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup>  Pungent is this, and bitter this, filled, as it were, with arrow-barbs, Empoisoned andṇot fit for use.
The Brahman who knows Sūrya well deserves the garment of the bride.
<p id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup>  The fringe, the cloth that decks her head, and then the triply parted robe,—
Behold the hues which Sūrya wears these doth the Brahman purify.
<p id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup>  I take thy hand in mine for happy fortune that thou mayst reach old age with me thy husband.
Gods, Aryaman, Bhaga, Savitar, Purandhi, have given thee to be my household's mistress.
<p id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup>  O Pūṣan, send her on as most auspicious, her who shall be the sharer of my pleasures;
Her who shall twine her loving arms about me, and welcome all my love and mine embraces.
<p id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup>  For thee, with bridal train, they, first, escorted Sūrya to her home.
Give to the husband in return, Agni, the wife with progeny.
<p id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup>  Agni hath given the bride again with splendour and with ample life.
Long lived be he who is her lord; a hundred autumns let him live.
<p id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup>  Soma obtained her first of all; next the Gandharva was her lord.
Agai was thy third husband: now one bornof woman is thy fourth.
<p id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup>  Soma to the Gandharva, and to Agni the Gandharva gave:
And Agni hath bestowed on me riches and sons and this my spouse.
<p id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup>  Be ye not parted; dwell ye here reach the full time of human life.
With sons and grandsons sport and play, rejoicing in your own abode.
<p id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup>  So may Prajāpati bring children forth to us; may Aryaman adorn us till old age come nigh.
Not inauspicious enter thou thy husband's house: bring blessing to our bipeds and our quadrupeds.
<p id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup>  Not evil-eyed, no slayer of thy husband, bring weal to cattle, radiant, gentlehearted;
Loving the Gods, delightful, bearing heroes, bring blessing to our quadrupeds and bipeds.
<p id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup>  O Bounteous Indra, make this bride blest in her sons and fortunate.
Vouchsafe to her ten sons, and make her husband the eleventh man.
<p id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup>  Over thy husband's father and thy husband's mother bear full sway.
Over the sister of thy lord, over his brothers rule supreme.
<p id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup>  So may the Universal Gods, so may the Waters join our hearts.
May Mātariśvan, Dhātar, and Destri together bind us close.

<span id="h86"></span>

## HYMN LXXXVI. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MEN have abstained from pouring juice they count not Indra as a God.
Where at the votary's store my friend Vrsakapi hath drunk his fill. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou, Indra, heedless passest by the ill Vrsakapi hath wrought;
Yet nowhere else thou findest place wherein to drink the Soma juice. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  What hath he done to injure thee, this tawny beast Vrsakapi,
With whom thou art so angry now? What is the votary's foodful store? Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Soon may the hound who hunts the boar seize him and bite him in the car,
O Indra, that Vrsakapi whom thou protectest as a friend, Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Kapi hath marred the beauteous things, all deftly wrought, that were my joy.
In pieces will I rend his head; the sinner's portion sball be woo. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  No Dame hath ampler charms than 1, or greater wealth of love's delights.
None with more ardour offers all her beauty to her lord's embrace. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Mother whose love is quickly wibn, I say what verily will be.
My,breast, O Mother, and my head and both my hips seem quivering. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Dame with the lovely hands and arms, with broad hair-plaits add ample hips,
Why, O thou Hero's wife, art thou angry with our Vrsakapi? Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  This noxious creature looks on me as one bereft of hero's love,
Yet Heroes for my sons have I, the Maruts’ Friend and Indra's Queen. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  From olden time the matron goes to feast and general sacrifice.
Mother of Heroes, Indra's Queen, the rite's ordainer is extolled. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  So have I heard Indrāṇī called most fortunate among these Dames,
For never shall her Consort die in future time through length of days. Supreme is Indra overall.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Never, Indralni, have I joyed without my friend Vrsakapi,
Whose welcome offering here, made pure with water, goeth to the Gods. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Wealthy Vrsakapayi, blest with sons and consorts of thy sons,
Indra will eat thy bulls, thy dear oblation that effecteth much. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Fifteen in number, then, for me a score of bullocks they prepare,
And I devour the fat thereof: they fill my belly full with food. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Like as a bull with pointed horn, loud bellowing amid the herds,
Sweet to thine heart, O Indra, is the brew which she who tends thee pours. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  O Indra this Vrsakapi hath found a slain wild animal,
Dresser, and new-made pan, and knife, and wagon with a load of wood. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Distinguishing the Dāsa and the Ārya, viewing all, I go.
I look upon the wise, and drink the simple votary's Soma juice. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  The desert plains and steep descents, how many leagues in length they spread!
Go to the nearest houses, go unto thine home, Vrsakapi. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Turn thee again Vrsakapi: we twain will bring thee happiness.
Thou goest homeward on thy way along this path which leads to sleep. Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  When, Indra and Vrsakapi, ye travelled upward to your home,
Where was that noisome beast, to whom went it, the beast that troubles man? Supreme is Indra over all.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  Daughter of Manu, Parsu bare a score of children at a birth.
Her portion verily was bliss although her burthen caused her grief.

<span id="h87"></span>

## HYMN LXXXVII. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I BALM with oil the mighty Rakṣas-slayer; to the most famous Friend I come for shelter
Enkindled, sharpened by our rites, may Agni protect us in the day and night from evil.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  O Jātavedas with the teeth of iron, enkindled with thy flame attack the demons.
Seize with thy longue the foolish gods' adorers: rend, put within thy mouth the raw-flesh caters.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Apply thy teeth, the upper and the lower, thou who hast both, enkindled and destroying.
Roam also in the air, O King, around us, and with thy jaws assail the wicked spirits.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Bending thy shafts through sacrifices, Agni, whetting their points with song as if with whetstones,
Pierce to the heart therewith the Yātudhānas, and break their arms uplifed to attack thee.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Pierce through the Yātudhāna's skin, O Agni; let the destroying dart with fire consume him.
Rend his joints, Jātavedas, let the cater of flesh, flesh-seeking, track his mangled body.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Where now thou seest Agni Jātavedas, one of these demons standing still or roaming,
Or flying on those paths in air's midregion, sharpen the shaft and as an archer pierce him.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Tear from the evil spirit, Jātavedas, what he hath seized and with his spears hath captured.
Blazing before him strike him down, O Agni; let spotted carrion-eating kites devour him.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Here tell this forth, O Agni: whosoever is, he himself, or acteth as, a demon,
Him grasp, O thou Most Youthful, with thy fuel. to the Mati-seer's eye give him as booty.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  With keen glance guard the sacrifice, O Agni: thou Sage, conduct it onward to the Vasus.
Let not the fiends, O Man-beholder, harm thee burning against the Rākṣasas to slay them.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Look on the fiend mid men, as Man-beholder: rend thou his three extremities in pieces.
Demolish with thy flame his ribs, O Agni, the Yātudhāna's root destroy thou triply.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Thrice, Agni, let thy noose surround the demon who with his falsehood injures Holy Order.
Loud roaring with thy flame, O Jātavedas, crush him and cast him down before the singer.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Lead thou the worshipper that eye, O Agni, wherewith thou lookest on the hoof-armed demon.
With light celestial in Atharvan's manner burn up the foot who ruins truth with falsehood.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Agni, what curse the pair this day have uttered, what heated word the worshippers have spoken,
Each arrowy taunt sped from the angry spirit,—pierce to the heart therewith the Yātudhānas.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  With fervent heat exterminate the demons; destroy the fiends with burning flame, O Agni.
Destroy with fire the foolish gods' adorers; blaze and destrepy the insatiable monsters.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  May Gods destroy this day the evil-doer may each hot curse of his return and blast him.
Let arrows pierce the liar in his vitals, and Visva's net enclose the Yātudhāna.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  The fiend who smears himself with flesh of cattle, with flesh of horses and of human bodies,
Who steals the milch-cow's milk away, O Agni,—tear off the heads of such with fiery fury.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  The cow gives milk each year, O Man-regarder: let not the Yātudhāna ever taste it.
If one would glut him with the biesting, Agni, pierce with thy flame his vitals as he meets thee.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Let the fiends drink the poison of the cattle; may Aditi cast off the evildoers.
May the God Savitar give them up to ruin, and be their share of plants and herbs denied them.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Agni, from days of old thou slayest demons: never shall Rākṣasas in fight o’ercome thee.
Burn up the foolish ones, the flesh-devourers: let none of them escape thine heavenly arrow.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Guard us, O Agni, from above and under, protect us fl-om behind us and before us;
And may thy flames, most fierce and never wasting, glowing with fervent heat, consume the sinner.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  From rear, from front, from under, from above us, O King, protect us as a Sage with wisdom.
Guard to old age thy friend, O Friend, Eternal: O Agni, as Immortal, guard us mortals.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  We set thee round us as a fort, victorious Agni, thee a Sage,
Of hero lineage, day by day, destroyer of our treacherous foes.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  Burn with thy poison turned against the treacherous brood of Rākṣasas,
O Agni, with thy sharpened glow, with lances armed with points of flame.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  Burn thou the paired Kimīdins, brun, Agni, the Yātudhāna pairs.
I sharpen thee, Infallible, with hymns. O Sage, be vigilant.
<p id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup>  Shoot forth, O Agni, with thy flame demolish them on every side.
Break thou the Yātudhāna's strength, the vigour of the Rākṣasa.

<span id="h88"></span>

## HYMN LXXXVIII. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  DEAR, ageless sacrificial drink is offered in light-discovering, heaven-pervading Agni.
The Gods spread forth through his Celestial Nature, that he might bear the world up and sustain it.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The world was swallowed and concealed in darkness: Agni was born, and light became apparent.
The Deities, the broad earth, and the heavens, and plants, and waters gloried in his friendship.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Inspired by Gods who claim our adoration, I now will laud Eternal Lofty Agni,
Him who hath spread abroad the earth with lustre, this heaven, and both the worlds, and air's mid-region.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Earliest Priest whom all the Gods accepted, and chose him, and anointed him with butter,
He swiftly made all things that fly, stand, travel, all that hath motion, Agni Jātavedas.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Because thou, Agni, Jātavedas, stoodest at the world's head with thy refulgent splendour,
We sent thee forth with hymns and songs and praises: thou filledst heaven and earth, God meet for worship.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Head of the world is Agni in the night-time; then, as the Sun, at morn springs up and rises.
Then to his task goes the prompt Priest foreknowing the wondrous power of Gods who must be honoured.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Lovely is he who, kindled in his greatness, hath shone forth, seated in the heavens, refulgent.
With resonant hymns all Gods who guard our bodies have offered up oblation in this Agni.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  First the Gods brought the hymnal into being; then they engendered Agni, then oblation.
He was their sacrifice that guards our bodies: him the heavens know, the earth, the waters know him.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  He, Agni, whom the Gods have generated, in whom they offered up all worlds and creatures,
He with his bright glow heated earth and heaven, urging himself right onward in his grandeur.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Then by the laud the Gods engendered Agni in heaven, who fills both worlds through strength and vigour.
They made him to appear in threefold essence: he ripens plants of every form and nature.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  What time the Gods, whose due is worship, set him as Sūrya, Son of Aditi, in heaven,
When the Pair, ever wandering, sprang to being, all creatures that existed looked upon them.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  For all the world of life the Gods made Agni Vaiśvānara to be the days' bright Banner,—
Him who hath spread abroad the radiant Mornings, and, coming with his light, unveils the darkness.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  The wise and holy Deities engendered Agni Vaiśvānara whom age ne’er touches.
The Ancient Star that wanders on for ever, lofty and. strong, Lord of the Living Being.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  We call upon the Sage with holy verses, Agni Vaiśvānara the ever-beaming,
Who hath surpassed both heaven and earth in greatness: he is a God below, a God above us.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  I have heard mention of two several pathways, ways of the Fathers and of Gods and mortals.
On these two paths each moving creature travels, each thing between the Father and the Mother.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  These two united paths bear him who journeys born from the head and pondered with the spirit
He stands directed to all things existing, hasting, unresting in his fiery splendour.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Which of us twain knows where they speak together, upper and lower of the two rite-leaders?
Our friends have helped to gather our assembly. They came to sacrifice; who will announce it?
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  How many are the Fires and Suns in number? What is the number of the Dawns and Waters?
Not jestingly I speak to you, O Fathers. Sages, I ask you this for information.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  As great as is the fair-winged Morning's presence to him who dwells beside us, Mātariśvan!
Is what the Brahman does when he approaches to sacrifice and sits below the Hotar.

<span id="h89"></span>

## HYMN LXXXIX. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I WILL extol the most heroic Indra who with his might forced earth and sky asunder;
Who hath filled all with width as man's Upholder, surpassing floods and rivers in his greatness.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Sūrya is he: throughout the wide expanses shall Indra turn him, swift as car-wheels, hither,
Like a stream resting not but ever active he hath destroyed, with light, the black-hued darkness.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  To him I sing a holy prayer, incessant new, matchless, common to the earth and heaven,
Who marks, as they were backs, all living creatures: ne’er doth he fail a friend, the noble Indra.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  I will send forth my songs in flow unceasing, like water from the ocean's depth, to Indra.
Who to his car on both its sides securely hath fixed the earth and heaven as with an axle.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Rousing with draughts, the Shaker, rushing onward, impetuous, very strong, armed as with arrows
Is Soma; forest trees and all the bushes deceive not Indra with their offered likeness.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Soma hath flowed to him whom naught can equal, the earth, the heavens, the firmament, the mountains,—
When heightened in his ire his indignation shatters the firm and breaks the strong in pieces.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  As an axe fells the tree so be slew Vṛtra, brake down the strongholds and dug out the rivers.
He cleft the mountain like a new-made pitcher. Indra brought forth the kine with his Companions.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Wise art thou, Punisher of guilt, O Indra. The sword lops limbs, thou smitest down the sinner,
The men who injure, as it were a comrade, the lofty Law of Varuṇa and Mitra.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Men who lead evil lives, who break agreements, and injure Varuṇa, Aryaman and Mitra,—
Against these foes, O Mighty Indra, sharpen, as furious death, thy Bull of fiery colour.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Indra is Sovran Lord of Earth and Heaven, Indra is Lord of waters and of mountains.
Indra is Lord of prosperers and sages Indra must be invoked in rest and effort.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Vaster than days and nights, Giver of increase, vaster than firmament and flood of ocean,
Vaster than bounds of earth and wind's extension, vaster than rivers and our lands is Indra.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Forward, as herald of refulgent Morning, let thine insatiate arrow fly, O Indra.
And pierce, as ’twere a stone launched forth from heaven, with hottest blaze the men who love deception.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Him, verily, the moons, the mountains followed, the tall trees followed and the plants and herbage.
Yearning with love both Worlds approached, the Waters waited on Indra when he first had being.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Where was the vengeful dart when thou, O Indra, clavest the demon ever beat on outrage?
When fiends lay there upon the ground extended like cattle in the place of immolation?
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Those who are set in enmity against us, the Ogaṇas, O Indra, waxen mighty,—
Let blinding darkness follow those our foemen, while these shall have bright shining nights to light them.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  May plentiful libations of the people, and singing Ṛṣis’ holy prayers rejoice thee.
Hearing with love this common invocation, come unto us, pass by all those who praise thee.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  O Indra, thus may we be made partakers of thy new favours that shall bring us profit.
Singing with love, may we the Viśvāmitras win daylight even now through thee, O Indra.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Call we on Maghavan, auspicious Indra, best hero in the fight where spoil is gathered,
The Strong who listens, who gives aid in battles, who slays the Vṛtras, wins and gathers riches.

<span id="h90"></span>

## HYMN XC. Puruṣa.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  A THOUSAND heads hath Puruṣa, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet.
On every side pervading earth he fills a space ten fingers wide.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  This Puruṣa is all that yet hath been and all that is to be;
The Lord of Immortality which waxes greater still by food.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  So mighty is his greatness; yea, greater than this is Puruṣa.
All creatures are one-fourth of him, three-fourths eternal life in heaven.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  With three-fourths Puruṣa went up: one-fourth of him again was here.
Thence he strode out to every side over what cats not and what cats.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  From him Virāj was born; again Puruṣa from Virāj was born.
As soon as he was born he spread eastward and westward o’er the earth.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  When Gods prepared the sacrifice with Puruṣa as their offering,
Its oil was spring, the holy gift was autumn; summer was the wood.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  They balmed as victim on the grass Puruṣa born in earliest time.
With him the Deities and all Sādhyas and Ṛṣis sacrificed.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  From that great general sacrifice the dripping fat was gathered up.
He formed the creatures of-the air, and animals both wild and tame.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  From that great general sacrifice Ṛcas and Sāma-hymns were born:
Therefrom were spells and charms produced; the Yajus had its birth from it.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  From it were horses born, from it all cattle with two rows of teeth:
From it were generated kine, from it the goats and sheep were born.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  When they divided Puruṣa how many portions did they make?
What do they call his mouth, his arms? What do they call his thighs and feet?
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  The Brahman was his mouth, of both his arms was the Rājanya made.
His thighs became the Vaiśya, from his feet the Śūdra was produced.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  The Moon was gendered from his mind, and from his eye the Sun had birth;
Indra and Agni from his mouth were born, and Vāyu from his breath.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Forth from his navel came mid-air the sky was fashioned from his head
Earth from his feet, and from his car the regions. Thus they formed the worlds.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Seven fencing-sticks had he, thrice seven layers of fuel were prepared,
When the Gods, offering sacrifice, bound, as their victim, Puruṣa.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Gods, sacrificing, sacrificed the victim these were the earliest holy ordinances.
The Mighty Ones attained the height of heaven, there where the Sādhyas, Gods of old, are dwelling.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_80">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXI. — LXXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_100">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN XCI. — C.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
