---
title: "HYMN I. — XI."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_8_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XCI. — XCII.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_9_Index">
          <span class="pr-2">Rig-Veda, Book 9</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN I. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  TO you will I sing Indra's praise who gives good gifts as well we know;
The praise of Maghavan who, rich in treasure, aids his singers with wealth thousandfold.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  As with a hundred hosts, he rushes boldly on, and for the offerer slays his foes.
As from a mountain flow the water-brooks, thus flow his gifts who feedeth many a one.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The drops effused, the gladdening draughts, O Indra, Lover of the Son
As waters seek the lake where they are wont to rest, fill thee, for bounty, Thunderer.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The matchless draught that strengthens and gives eloquence, the sweetest of the meath drink thou,
That in thy joy thou maysi scatter thy gifts o’er us, plenteously, even as the dust.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Come quickly to our laud, urged on by Soma-pressers like a horse-
Laud, Godlike Indra, which milch-kine make sweet for thee: with Kaṇva's sons are gifts for thee.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  With homage have we sought thee as a Hero, strong, preeminent, with unfailing wealth.
O Thunderer, as a plenteous spring pours forth its stream, so, Indra, flow our songs to thee.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  If now thou art at sacrifice, or if thou art upon the earth,
Come thence, high-thoughted! to our sacrifice with the Swift, come, Mighty with the Mighty Ones.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The active, fleet-foot, tawny Coursers that are thine are swift to victory, like the Wind,
Wherewith thou goest round to visit Manus' seed, wherewith all heaven is visible.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Indra, from thee so great we crave prosperity in wealth of kine,
As, Maghavan, thou favouredst Medhyātithi, and, in the fight, Nipatithi.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  As, Maghavan, to Kaṇva, Trasadasyu, and to Paktha and Dasavraja;
As, Indra, to Gosarya and Ṛjiśvan, thou vouchsafedst wealth in kine and gold.

## HYMN II. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SAKRA I praise, to win his aid, far-famed, exceeding bountiful,
Who gives, as ’twere in thousands, precious wealth to him who sheds the juice and worships him.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Arrows with hundred points, unconquerable, are this Indra's n-dghty arms in war.
He streams on liberal worshippers like a hill with springs, when juices poured have gladdened him.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  What time the flowing Soma-drops have gladdened with their taste the Friend,
Like water, gracious Lord! were my libations made, like milch-kine to the worshipper.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  To him the peerless, who is calling you to give you aid, forth flow the drops of pleasant meath.
The Soloa-drops which call on thee, O gracious Lord, have brought thee to our hymn of praise.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  He rushes hurrying like a steed to Soma that adorns our rite,
Which hymns make sweet to thee, lover of pleasant food. The call to Paura thou dost love.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Praise the strong, grasping Hero, winner of the spoil, ruling supreme oer mighty wealth.
Like a full spring, O Thunderer, from thy store hast thou poured on the worshipper evermore.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Now whether thou be far away, or in the heavens, or on the earth,
O Indra, mighty- thoughted, harnessing thy Bays, come Lofty with the Lofty Ones.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The Bays who draw thy chariot, Steeds who injure none, surpass the wind's impetuous strength-
With whom thou silencest the enemy of man, with whon; thou goest round the sky.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  O gracious Hero, may we learn anew to know thee as thou art:
As in decisive fight thou holpest Etaśa, or Vaśa 'gainst Dasavraja,
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  As, Maghavan, to Kaṇva at the sacred feast, to Dirghanitha thine home-friend,
As to Gosarya thou, Stone-darter, gavest wealth, give me a gold-bright stall of kine.

## HYMN III. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  As with Manu Samvarani, Indra, thou drankest Soma juice,
And, Maghavan, with Nipatithi, Medbyatithi, with Pustigu and Srustigu,—
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  T'he son of Prsadvana was Praskaniva's host, who lay decrepit and forlorn.
Aided by thee the Ṛṣi Dasyave-vrka strove to obtain thousands of kine.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Call hither with thy newest song Indra who lacks not hymns of praise,
Him who observes and knows, inspirer of the sage, him who seems eager to enjoy.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  He unto whom they sang the seven-headed hymn, three-parted, in the loftiest place,
He sent his thunder down on all these living things, and so displayed heroic might.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  We invocate that Indra who bestoweth precious things on us.
Now do we know his newest favour; may we gain a stable that is full of kine.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  He whom thou aidest, gracious Lord, to give again, obtains great wealth to nourish him.
We with our Soma ready, Lover of the Song! call, Indra Maghavan, on thee.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Ne’er art thou fruitless, Indra ne’er dost thou desert the worshipper
But now, O Maghavan, thy bounty as a God is poured forth ever more and more.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  He who hath. overtaken Krvi with his might, and silenced Śuṣṇa with deathbolts,—
When he supported yonder heaven and spread it out, then first the son of earth was born.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Good Lord of wealth is he to whom all Āryas, Dāsas here belong.
Directly unto thee, the pious Ruśama Paviru, is that wealth brought nigh.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  In zealous haste the singers have sung forth a song distilling oil and rich in sweets.
Riches have spread among us and heroic strength, with us are flowing Soma-drops.

## HYMN IV. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  As, Śakra, thou with Manu called Vivasvān drankest Soma juice,
As, Indra, thou didst love the hymn by Trita's side, so dost thou joy with Āyu now.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  As thou with Mātariśvan, Medhya, Prsadhra, hast cheered thee Indra, with pressed juice,
Drunk Soma with Rjunas, Syūmaraśmi, by Dasonya's Dasasipra's side.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  ’Tis he who made the lauds his own and boldly drank the Soma juice,
He to whom Viṣṇu came striding his three wide steps, as Mitra's statutes ordered it.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  In whose laud thou didst joy, Indra, at the great deed, O Śatakratu, Mighty One!
Seeking renown we call thee as the milkers call the cow who yields abundant milk.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  He is our Sire who gives to us, Great, Mighty, ruling as he wills.
Unsought, may he the Strong, Rich, Lord of ample wealth, give us of horses and of kine.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  He to whom thou, Good Lord, givest that he may give increases wealth that nourishes.
Eager for wealth we call on Indra, Lord of wealth, on Śatakratu with our lauds.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Never art thou neglectful: thou guardest both races with thy care.
The call on Indra, fourth Āditya! is thine own. Amṛta is stablished in the heavens.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The offercr whom thou, Indra, Lover of the Song, liberal Maghavan, favourest,—
As at the call of Kaṇva so, O gracious Lord, hear, thou our songs and eulogy.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Sung is the song of ancient time: to Indra have ye said the prayer.
They have sung many a Brhati of sacrifice, poured forth the worshipper's many thoughts.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Indra hath tossed together mighty stores of wealth, and both the worlds, yea, and the Sun.
Pure, brightly-shining, mingled with the milk, the draughts of Soma have made Indra glad.

## HYMN V. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  As highest of the Maghavans, preeminent among the Bulls,
Best breaker-down of forts, kine-winner, Lord of wealth, we seek thee, Indra Maghavan.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou who subduedst Āyu, Kutsa, Atithigva, waxing daily in thy might,
As such, rousing thy power, we invocate thee now, thee Śatakratu, Lord of Bays.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The pressing-stones shall pour for us the essence of the meath of all,
Drops that have been pressed out afar among the folk, and those that have been pressed near us.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Repel all enmities and keep thern far away: let all win treasure for their own.
Even among Sistas are the stalks that make thee glad, where thou with Soma satest thee.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Come, Indra, very near to us with aids of firmly-based resolve;
Come, most auspicious, with thy most auspicious help, good Kinsman, with good kinsmen, come!
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Bless thou with progeny the chief of men, the lord of heroes, victor in the fray.
Aid with thy powers the men who sing thee lauds and keep their spirits ever pure and bright.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  May we be such in battle as are surest to obtain thy grace:
With holy offerings and invocations of the Gods, we mean, that we may win the spoil.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Thine, Lord of Bays, am I. Prayer longeth for the spoil. Still with thy help I seek the fight.
So, at the raiders' head, I, craving steeds and kine, unite myself with thee alone.

## HYMN VI. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  INDRA, the poets with. their hymns extol this hero might of thine:
They strengthened, loud in song, thy power that droppeth oil. With hymns the Pauras came to thee.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Through piety they came to Indra for his aid, they whose libations give theejoy.
As thou with, Krsa and Samvarta hast rejoiced, so, Indra, be thou glad with us.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Agreeing in your spirit, all ye Deities, come nigh to us.
Vasus and Rudras shall come near to give us aid, and Maruts listen to our call.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  May Pūṣan, Viṣṇu, and Sarasvatī befriend, and the Seven Streams, this call of mine:
May Waters, Wind, the Mountains, and the Forest-Lord, and Earth give ear unto my cry.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Indra, with thine own bounteous gift, most liberal of the Mighty Ones,
Be our boon benefactor, Vṛtra-slayer, be our feast-companion for our weal.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Leader of heroes, Lord of battle, lead thou us to combat, thou Most Sapient One.
High fame is theirs who win by invocations, feasts and entertainment of the Gods.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Our hopes rest on the Faithful One: in Indra is the people's life.
O Maghavan, come nigh that thou mayst give us aid: make plenteous food stream forth for us.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Thee would we worship, Indra, with our songs of praise: O Śatakratu, be thou ours.
Pour down upon Praskaṇva bounty vast and firm, exuberant, that shall never fail.

## HYMN VII. Praskaṇva's Gift.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  GREAT, verily, is Indra's might. I have beheld, and hither comes
Thy bounty, Dasyave-vrka!
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  A hundred oxen white of hue are shining like the stars in heaven,
So tall, they seem to prop the sky.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Bamboos a hundred, a hundred dogs, a hundred skins of beasts well-tanned,
A hundred tufts of Balbaja, four hundred red-hued mares are mine.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Blest by the Gods, Kinvayanas! be ye who spread through life on life:
Like horses have ye stridden forth.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Then men extolled the team of seven not yet full-grown, its fame is great.
The dark mares rushed along the paths, so that no eye could follow them.

## HYMN VIII Praskaṇva's Go.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THY bounty, Dasyave-vrka, exhaustless hath displayed itself:
Its fulness is as broad as heaven.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Ten thousand Dasyave-vrka, the son of Putakrata, hath
From his own wealth bestowed on me.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  A hundred asses hath he given, a hundred head of fleecy sheep,
A hundred slaves, and wreaths besides.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  There also was a mare led forth, picked out for Putakrata's sake,
Not of the horses of the herd.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Observant Agni hath appeared, oblation-bearer with his car.
Agni with his resplendent flame hath shone on high as shines the Sun, hath shone like Sūrya in theheavens.

## HYMN IX. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  ENDOWED, O Gods, with your primeval wisdom, come quickly with your chariot, O ye Holy.
Come with your mighty powers, O ye Nāsatyas; come hither, drink ye this the third libation.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The truthful Deities, the Three-and-Thirty, saw you approach before the Ever-Truthful.
Accepting this our worship and libation, O Aśvins bright with fire, drink ye the Soma.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Aśvins, that work of yours deserves our wonder,—the Bull of heaven and earth and air's mid region;
Yea, and your thousand promises in battle, -to all of these come near and drink beside us.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Here is your portion laid for you, ye Holy: come to these songs of ours, O ye Nāsatyas.
Drink among us the Soma full of sweetness, and with your powers assist the man who worships.

## HYMN X. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  HE whom the priests in sundry ways arranging the sacrifice, of one accord, bring hither,
Who was appointed as a learned Brahman, -what is the sacrificer's knowledge of him?
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Kindled in many a spot, still One is Agni; Silrya is One though high o’er all he shineth.
Illumining this All, still One is usas. That which is One hath into All developed.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The chariot bright and radiant, treasure-laden, three-wheeled, with easy seat, and lightly rolling,
Which She of Wondrous Wealth was born to harness,—this car of yours I call. Drink what remaineth.

## HYMN XI. Indra-Varuṇa.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  IN offerings poured to you, O Indra-Varuṇa, these shares of yours stream forth to glorify your state.
Ye haste to the libations at each sacrifice when ye assist the worshipper who sheds the juice.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The waters and the plants, O Indra-Varuṇa, had efficacious vigour, and attained to might:
Ye who have gone beyond the path of middle air,—no godless man is worthy to be called your foe.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  True is your Krsa's word, Indra and Varuṇa: The seven holy voices pour a wave of meath.
For their sake, Lords of splendour! aid the pious man who, unbewildered, keeps you ever in his thoughts.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Dropping oil, sweet with Soma, pouring forth their stream, are the Seven Sisters in the seat of sacrifice.
These, dropping oil, are yours, O Indra-Varuṇa: with these enrich with gifts and help the worshipper.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  To our great happiness have we ascribed to these Two Bright Ones truthfulness, great strength, and majesty.
O Lords of splendour, aid us through the Three-times-Seven, as we pour holy oil, O Indra-Varuṇa.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  What ye in time of old Indra and Varuṇa, gave Ṛṣis revelation, thought, and power of song,
And places which the wise made, weaving sacrifice,—these through my spirit's fervid glow have I beheld.,
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  O Indra-Varuṇa, grant to the worshippers cheerfulness void of pride, and wealth to nourish them.


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_8_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XCI. — XCII.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_9_Index">
          <span class="pr-2">Rig-Veda, Book 9</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
