---
title: "HYMN CLXI. — CLXX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_160">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CLI. — CLX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_180">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLXXI. — CLXXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN CLXI. Ṛbhus.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WHY hath the Best, why hath the Youngest come to us? Upon what embassy comes he? What have we said?
We have not blamed the chalice of illustrious birth. We, Brother Agni, praised the goodness of the wood.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The chalice that is single make ye into four: thus have the Gods commanded; therefore am I come.
If, O Sudhanvan's Children, ye will do this thing ye shall participate in sacrifice with Gods.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  What to the envoy Agni in reply ye spake, A courser must be made, a chariot fashioned here,
A cow must be created, and the Twain made young. When we have done these things, Brother, we turn to you.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  When thus, O Ṛbhus, ye had done ye questioned thus, Whither went he who came to us a messenger?
Then Tvaṣṭar, when he viewed the four wrought chalices, concealed himself among the Consorts of the Gods.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  As Tvaṣṭar thus had spoken, Let us slay these men who have reviled the chalice, drinking-cup of Gods,
They gave themselves new names when Soma juice was shed, and under these new names the Maiden welcomed them.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Indra hath yoked his Bays, the Aśvins' car is horsed, Bṛhaspati hath brought the Cow of every hue.
Ye went as Ṛbhus, Vibhvan, Vāja to the Gods, and skilled in war, obtained your share in sacrifice.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Ye by your wisdom brought a cow from out a hide; unto that ancient Pair ye gave again their youth.
Out of a horse, Sudhanvan's Sons, ye formed a horse: a chariot ye equipped, and went unto the Gods.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Drink ye this water, were the words ye spake to them; or drink ye this, the rinsing of the Muñja-grass.
If ye approve not even this, Sudhanvan's Sons, then at the third libation gladden ye yourselves.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Most excellent are waters, thus said one of you; most excellent is Agni, thus another said.
Another praised to many a one the lightning cloud. Then did ye shape the cups, speaking the words of truth.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  One downward to the water drives the crippled cow, another trims the flesh brought on the carving-board.
One carries off the refuse at the set of sun. How did the Parents aid their children in their task!
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  On the high places ye have made the grass for man, and water in the valleys, by your skill, O Men.
Ṛbhus, ye iterate not to-day that act of yours, your sleeping in the house of him whom naught can hide.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  As, compassing them round, ye glided through the worlds, where had the venerable Parents their abode?
Ye laid a curse on him who raised his arm at you: to him who spake aloud to you ye spake again.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  When ye had slept your fill, ye Ṛbhus, thus ye asked, O thou whom naught may hide, who now hath wakened us?
The goat declared the hound to be your wakener. That day, in a full year, ye first unclosed our eyes.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  The Maruts move in heaven, on earth this Agni; through the mid-firmament the Wind approaches.
Varuṇa comes in the sea's gathered waters, O Sons of Strength, desirous of your presence.

## HYMN CLXII. The Horse.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SLIGHT us not Varuṇa, Aryaman, or Mitra, Ṛbhukṣan, Indra, Āyu, or the Maruts,
When we declare amid the congregation the virtues of the strong Steed, God-descended.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  What time they bear before the Courser, covered with trappings and with wealth, the grasped oblation,
The dappled goat goeth straightforward, bleating, to the place dear to Indra and to Pūṣan.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Dear to all Gods, this goat, the share of Pūṣan, is first led forward with the vigorous Courser,
While Tvaṣṭar sends him forward with the Charger, acceptable for sacrifice, to glory.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  When thrice the men lead round the Steed, in order, who goeth to the Gods as meet oblation,
The goat precedeth him, the share of Pūṣan, and to the Gods the sacrifice announceth.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Invoker, ministering priest, atoner, fire-kindler Soma-presser, sage, reciter,
With this well ordered sacrifice, well finished, do ye fill full the channels of the rivers.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The hewers of the post and those who carry it, and those who carve the knob to deck the Horse's stake;
Those who prepare the cooking-vessels for the Steed,—may the approving help of these promote our work.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Forth, for the regions of the Gods, the Charger with his smooth back is come my prayer attends him.
In him rejoice the singers and the sages. A good friend have we won for the Gods’ banquet.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  May the fleet Courser's halter and his heel-ropes, the head-stall and the girths and cords about him.
And the grass put within his mouth to bait him,—among the Gods, too, let all these be with thee.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  What part of the Steed's flesh the fly hath eaten, or is left sticking to the post or hatchet,
Or to the slayer's hands and nails adhereth,—among the Gods, too, may all this be with thee.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Food undigested steaming from his belly, and any odour of raw flesh remaining,
This let the immolators set in order and dress the sacrifice with perfect cooking.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  What from thy body which with fire is roasted, when thou art set upon the spit, distilleth,
Let not that lie on earth or grass neglected, but to the longing Gods let all be offered.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  They who observing that the Horse is ready call out and say, the smell is good; remove it;
And, craving meat, await the distribution,—may their approving help promote labour.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  The trial-fork of the flesh-cooking caldron, the vessels out of which the broth is sprinkled,
The warming-pots, the covers of the dishes, hooks, carving-boards,—all these attend the Charger.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  The starting-place, his place of rest and rolling, the ropes wherewith the Charger's feet were fastened,
The water that he drank, the food he tasted,—among the Gods, too, may all these attend thee.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Let not the fire, smoke-scented, make thee crackle, nor glowing caldron smell and break to pieces.
Offered, beloved, approved, and consecrated,—such Charger do the Gods accept with favour.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  The robe they spread upon the Horse to clothe him, the upper covering and the golden trappings,
The halters which restrain the Steed, the heel-ropes,—all these, as grateful to the Gods, they offer.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  If one, when seated, with excessive urging hath with his heel or with his whip distressed thee,
All these thy woes, as with the oblations' ladle at sacrifices, with my prayer I banish.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  The four-and-thirty ribs of the. Swift Charger, kin to the Gods, the slayer's hatchet pierces.
Cut ye with skill, so that the parts be flawless, and piece by piece declaring them dissect them.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Of Tvaṣṭar's Charger there is one dissector,—this is the custom-two there are who guide him.
Such of his limbs as I divide in order, these, amid the balls, in fire I offer.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Let not thy dear soul burn thee as thou comest, let not the hatchet linger in thy body.
Let not a greedy clumsy immolator, missing the joints, mangle thy limbs unduly.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  No, here thou diest not, thou art not injured: by easy paths unto the Gods thou goest.
Both Bays, both spotted mares are now thy fellows, and to the ass's pole is yoked the Charger.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  May this Steed bring us all-sustaining riches, wealth in good kine, good horses, manly offspring.
Freedom from sin may Aditi vouchsafe us: the Steed with our oblations gain us lordship!

## HYMN CLXIII. The Horse.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WHAT time, first springing into life, thou neighedst, proceeding from the sea or upper waters,
Limbs of the deer hadst thou, and eagle pinions. O Steed, thy birth is nigh and must be lauded.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  This Steed which Yama gave hath Trita harnessed, and him, the first of all, hath Indra mounted.
His bridle the Gandharva grasped. O Vasus, from out the Sun ye fashioned forth the Courser.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Yama art thou, O Horse; thou art Āditya; Trita art thou by secret operation.
Thou art divided thoroughly from Soma. They say thou hast three bonds in heaven
that hold thee.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Three bonds, they say, thou hast in heaven that bind thee, three in the waters,
three within the ocean.
To me thou seemest Varuṇa, O Courser, there where they say is thy sublimest birth-place.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Here-, Courser, are the places where they groomed thee, here are the traces of thy hoofs as winner.
Here have I seen the auspicious reins that guide thee, which those who guard the holy Law keep safely.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Thyself from far I recognized in spirit,—a Bird that from below flew through the heaven.
I saw thy head still soaring, striving upward by paths unsoiled by dust, pleasant to travel.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Here I beheld thy form, matchless in glory, eager to win thee food at the Cow's station.
Whene’er a man brings thee to thine enjoyment, thou swallowest the plants most greedy eater.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  After thee, Courser, come the car, the bridegroom, the kine come after, and the charm of maidens.
Full companies have followed for thy friendship: the pattern of thy vigour Gods have copied.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Horns made of gold hath he: his feet are iron: less fleet than he, though swift as thought, is Indra.
The Gods have come that they may taste the oblation of him who mounted, first of all, the Courser.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Symmetrical in flank, with rounded haunches, mettled like heroes, the Celestial Coursers
Put forth their strength, like swans in lengthened order, when they, the Steeds, have reached the heavenly causeway.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  A body formed for flight hast thou, O Charger; swift as the wind in motion is thy spirit.
Thy horns are spread abroad in all directions: they move with restless beat in wildernesses.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  The strong Steed hath come forward to the slaughter, pondering with a mind directed God-ward.
The goat who is his kin is led before him the sages and the singers follow after.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  The Steed is come unto the noblest mansion, is come unto his Father and his Mother.
This day shall he approach the Gods, most welcome: then he declares good gifts to him who offers.

## HYMN CLXIV. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  OF this benignant Priest, with eld grey-coloured, the brother midmost of the three is lightning.
The third is he whose back with oil is sprinkled. Here I behold the Chief with seven male children.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Seven to the one-wheeled chariot yoke the Courser; bearing seven names the single Courser draws it.
Three-naved the wheel is, sound and undecaying, whereon are resting all these worlds of being.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The seven who on the seven-wheeled car are mounted have horses, seven in tale, who draw them onward.
Seven Sisters utter songs of praise together, in whom the names of the seven Cows are treasured.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Who hath beheld him as he sprang to being, seen how the boneless One supports the bony?
Where is the blood of earth, the life, the spirit? Who may approach the man who knows, to ask it?
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Unripe in mind, in spirit undiscerning, I ask of these the Gods’ established places;
For up above the yearling Calf the sages, to form a web, their own seven threads have woven.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  I ask, unknowing, those who know, the sages, as one all ignorant for sake of knowledge,
What was that ONE who in the Unborn's image hath stablished and fixed firm these worlds' six regions.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Let him who knoweth presently declare it, this lovely Bird's securely founded station.
Forth from his head the Cows draw milk, and, wearing his vesture, with their foot have drunk the water.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The Mother gave the Sire his share of Order: with thought, at first, she wedded him in spirit.
She, the coy Dame, was filled with dew prolific: with adoration men approached to praise her.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Yoked was the Mother to the boon Cow's car-pole: in the dank rows of cloud the Infant rested.
Then the Calf lowed, and looked upon the Mother, the Cow who wears all shapes in three directions.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Bearing three Mothers and three Fathers, single he stood erect: they never make him weary.
There on the pitch of heaven they speak together in speech all-knowing but not all-impelling.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Formed with twelve spokes, by length of time, unweakened, rolls round the heaven this wheel of during Order.
Herein established, joined in pairs together, seven hundred Sons and twenty stand, O Agni.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  They call him in the farther half of heaven the Sire five-footed, of twelve forms, wealthy in watery store.
These others say that he, God with far-seeing eyes, is mounted on the lower seven-wheeled, six-spoked car.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Upon this five-spoked wheel revolving ever all living creatures rest and are dependent.
Its axle, heavy-laden, is not heated: the nave from ancient time remains unbroken.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  The wheel revolves, unwasting, with its felly: ten draw it, yoked to the far-stretching car-pole.
The Sun's eye moves encompassed by the region: on him dependent rest all living creatures.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Of the co-born they call the seventh single-born; the six twin pairs are called Ṛṣis, Children of Gods.
Their good gifts sought of men are ranged in order due, and various in their form move for the Lord who guides.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  They told me these were males, though truly females: he who hath eyes sees this, the blind discerns not.
The son who is a sage hath comprehended: who knows this rightly is his father's father.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Beneath the upper realm, above this lower, bearing her calf at foot the Cow hath risen.
Witherward, to what place hath she departed? Where calves she? Not amid this herd of cattle.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Who, that the father of this Calf discerneth beneath the upper realm, above the lower,
Showing himself a sage, may here declare it? Whence hath the Godlike spirit had its rising?
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Those that come hitherward they call departing, those that depart they call directed hither.
And what so ye have made, Indra and Soma, steeds bear as ’twere yoked to the region's car-pole.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Two Birds with fair wings, knit with bonds of friendship, in the same sheltering tree have found a refuge.
One of the twain eats the sweet Fig-tree's fruitage; the other eating not regardeth only.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Where those fine Birds hymn ceaselessly their portion of life eternal, and the sacred synods,
There is the Universe's mighty Keeper, who, wise, hath entered into me the simple.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  The, tree whereon the fine Birds eat the sweetness, where they all rest and procreate their offspring,—
Upon its top they say the fig is luscious: none gaineth it who knoweth not the Father.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  How on the Gāyatrī the Gāyatrī was based, how from the Triṣṭup they fashioned the Triṣṭup forth,
How on the Jagatī was based the Jagatī,—they who know this have won themselves immortal life.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  With Gāyatrī he measures out the praise-song, Sāma with praise-song, triplet with the Triṣṭup.
The triplet with the two or four-foot measure, and with the syllable they form seven metres.
<p id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup>  With Jagatī the flood in heaven he stablished, and saw the Sun in the Rathantara Sāman.
Gāyatrī hath, they say, three brands for kindling: hence it excels in majesty and vigour.
<p id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup>  I invocate the milch-cow good for milking so that the milker, deft of hand, may drain her.
May Savitar give goodliest stimulation. The caldron is made hot; I will proclaim it.
<p id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup>  She, lady of all treasure, is come hither yearning in spirit for her calf and lowing.
May this cow yield her milk for both the Aśvins, and may she prosper to our high advantage.
<p id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup>  The cow hath lowed after her blinking youngling; she licks his forehead, as she lows, to form it.
His mouth she fondly calls to her warm udder, and suckles him with milk while gently lowing.
<p id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup>  He also snorts, by whom encompassed round the Cow laws as she clings unto the shedder of the rain.
She with her shrilling cries hath humbled mortal man, and, turned to lightning, hath stripped off her covering robe.
<p id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup>  That which hath breath and speed and life and motion lies firmly stablished in the midst of houses.
Living, by offerings to the Dead he moveth Immortal One, the brother of the mortal.
<p id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup>  I saw the Herdsman, him who never stumbles, approaching by his pathways and departing.
He, clothed with gathered and diffusive splendour, within the worlds continually travels.
<p id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup>  He who hath made him cloth not comprehend him: from him who saw him surely is he hidden.
He, yet enveloped in his Mother's bosom, source of much life, hath sunk into destruction.
<p id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup>  Dyaus is my Father, my begetter: kinship is here. This great earth is my kin and Mother.
Between the wide-spread world-halves is the birth-place: the Father laid the Daughter's germ within it.
<p id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup>  I ask thee of the earth's extremest limit, where is the centre of the world, I ask thee.
I ask thee of the Stallion's seed prolific, I ask of highest heaven where Speech abideth.
<p id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup>  This altar is the earth's extremest limit; this sacrifice of ours is the world's centre.
The Stallion's seed prolific is the Soma; this Brahman highest heaven where Speech abideth.
<p id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup>  Seven germs unripened yet are heaven's prolific seed: their functions they maintain by Viṣṇu's ordinance.
Endued with wisdom through intelligence and thought, they compass us about present on every side.
<p id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup>  What thing I truly am I know not clearly: mysterious, fettered in my mind I wander.
When the first-born of holy Law approached me, then of this speech I first obtain a portion.
<p id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup>  Back, forward goes he, grasped by strength inherent, the Immortal born the brother of the mortal
Ceaseless they move in opposite directions: men mark the one, and fail to mark the other.
<p id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup>  Upon what syllable of holy praise-song, as twere their highest heaven, the Gods repose them,—
Who knows not this, what will he do with praise-song? But they who know it well sit here assembled.
<p id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup>  Fortunate mayst thou be with goodly pasture, and may we also be exceeding wealthy.
Feed on the grass, O Cow, at every season, and coming hitherward drink limpid water.
<p id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup>  Forming the water-floods, the buffalo hath lowed, one-footed or two-footed or four-footed, she,
Who hath become eight-footed or hath got nine feet, the thousand-syllabled in the sublimest heaven.
<p id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup>  From her descend in streams the seas of water; thereby the world's four regions have their being,
Thence flows the imperishable flood and thence the universe hath life.
<p id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup>  I saw from far away the smoke of fuel with spires that rose on high o’er that beneath it.
The Mighty Men have dressed the spotted bullock. These were the customs in the days aforetime,
<p id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup>  Three with long tresses show in ordered season. One of them sheareth when the year is ended.
One with his powers the universe regardeth: Of one, the sweep is seen, but his figure.
<p id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup>  Speech hath been measured out in four divisions, the Brahmans who have understanding know them.
Three kept in close concealment cause no motion; of speech, men speak only the fourth division.
<p id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup>  They call him Indra, Mitra, Varuṇa, Agni, and he is heavenly nobly-winged Garutmān.
To what is One, sages give many a title they call it Agni, Yama, Mātariśvan.
<p id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup>  Dark the descent: the birds are golden-coloured; up to the heaven they fly robed in the waters.
Again descend they from the seat of Order, and all the earth is moistened with their fatness.
<p id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup>  Twelve are the fellies, and the wheel is single; three are the naves. What man hath understood it?
Therein are set together spokes three hundred and sixty, which in nowise can be loosened.
<p id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup>  That breast of thine exhaustless, spring of pleasure, wherewith thou feedest all things that are choicest,
Wealth-giver, treasure. finder, free bestower,—bring that, Sarasvatī, that we may drain it.
<p id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup>  By means of sacrifice the Gods accomplished their sacrifice: these were the earliest ordinances.
These Mighty Ones attained the height of heaven, there where the Sādhyas, Gods of old, are dwelling.
<p id="v51"><sup><small>51</small></sup>  Uniform, with the passing days, this water mounts and fails again.
The tempest-clouds give life to earth, and fires re-animate the heaven.
<p id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup>  The Bird Celestial, vast with noble pinion, the lovely germ of plants, the germ of waters,
Him who delighteth us with rain in season, Sarasvān I invoke that he may help us.

## HYMN CLXV. Indra. Maruts.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WITH what bright beauty are the Maruts jointly invested, peers in age, who dwell together?
From what place have they come? With what intention? Sing they their strength through love of wealth, these Heroes?
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Whose prayers have they, the Youthful Ones, accepted? Who to his sacrifice hath turned the Maruts?
We will delay them on their journey sweeping—with what high spirit!—through the air like eagles.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Whence comest thou alone, thou who art mighty, Indra, Lord of the Brave? What is thy purpose?
Thou greetest us when meeting us the Bright Ones. Lord of Bay Steeds, say what thou hast against us.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Mine are devotions, hymns; sweet are libations. Strength stirs, and hurled forth is my bolt of thunder.
They call for me, their lauds are longing for me. These my Bay Steeds bear me to these oblations.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Therefore together with our strong companions, having adorned our bodies, now we harness,
Our spotted deer with might, for thou, O Indra, hast learnt and understood our Godlike nature.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Where was that nature then of yours, O Maruts, that ye charged me alone to slay the Dragon?
For I in truth am fierce and strong and mighty. I bent away from every foeman's weapons.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Yea, much hast thou achieved with us for comrades, with manly valour like thine own, thou Hero.
Much may we too achieve, O mightiest Indra, with our great power, we Maruts, when we will it.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Vṛtra I slew by mine own strength, O Maruts, having waxed mighty in mine indignation.
I with the thunder in my hand created for man these lucid softly flowing waters.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Nothing, O Maghavan, stands firm before thee; among the Gods not one is found thine equal.
None born or springing into life comes nigh thee. Do what thou hast to do, exceeding mighty?
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Mine only be transcendent power, whatever I, daring in my spirit, may accomplish.
For I am known as terrible, O Maruts I, Indra, am the Lord of what I ruined.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Now, O ye Maruts, hath your praise rejoiced me, the glorious hymn which ye have made me, Heroes!
For me, for Indra, champion strong in battle, for me, yourselves, as lovers for a lover.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Here, truly, they send forth their sheen to meet me, wearing their blameless glory and their vigour.
When I have seen you, Maruts, in gay splendour, ye have delighted me, so now delight me.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Who here hath magnified you, O ye Maruts? speed forward, O ye lovers, to your lovers.
Ye Radiant Ones, assisting their devotions, of these my holy rites he ye regardful.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  To this hath Mānya's wisdom brought us, so as to aid, as aids the poet him who worships.
Bring hither quick! On to the sage, ye Maruts! These prayers for you the singer hath recited.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  May this your praise, may this your song, O Maruts, sung by the poet, Māna's son, Māndārya,
Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. May we find strengthening food in full abundance!

## HYMN CLXVI. Maruts.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Now let us publish, for the vigorous company the herald of the Strong One, their primeval might.
With fire upon your way, O Maruts loud of voice, with battle, Mighty Ones, achieve your deeds of strength.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Bringing the pleasant meath as ’twere their own dear son, they sport in sportive wise gay at their gatherings.
The Rudras come with succour to the worshipper; self-strong they fail not him who offers sacrifice.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  To whomsoever, bringer of oblations, they immortal guardians, have given plenteous wealth,
For him, like loving friends, the Maruts bringing bliss bedew the regions round with milk abundantly.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Ye who with mighty powers have stirred the regions up, your coursers have sped forth directed by themselves.
All creatures of the earth, all dwellings are afraid, for brilliant is your coming with your spears advanced.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  When they in dazzling rush have made the mountains roar, and shaken heaven's high back in their heroic strength,
Each sovran of the forest fears as ye drive near, aid the shrubs fly before you swift as whirling wheels.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Terrible Maruts, ye with ne’er-diminished host, with great benevolence fulfil our heart's desire.
Where’er your lightning bites armed with its gory teeth it crunches up the cattle like a well-aimed dart.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Givers of during gifts whose bounties never fail, free from ill-will, at sacrifices glorified,
They sing their song aloud that they may drink sweet juice: well do they know the Hero's first heroic deeds.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  With castles hundredfold, O Maruts, guard ye well the man whom ye have loved from ruin and from sin,—
The man whom ye the fierce, the Mighty ones who roar, preserve from calumny by cherishing his seed.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  O Maruts, in your cars are all things that are good: great powers are set as ’twere in rivalry therein.
Rings are upon your shoulders when ye journey forth: your axle turns together both the chariot wheels.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Held in your manly arms are many goodly things, gold chains are on your chests, and glistering ornaments,
Deer-skins are on their shoulders, on their fellies knives: they spread their glory out as birds spread out their wings.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Mighty in mightiness, pervading, passing strong, visible from afar as ’twere with stars of heaven,
Lovely with pleasant tongues, sweet singers with their mouths, the Maruts, joined with Indra, shout forth all around.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  This is your majesty, ye Maruts nobly born, far as the sway of Aditi your bounty spreads.
Even Indra by desertion never disannuls the boon bestowed by you upon the pious man.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  This is your kinship, Maruts, that, Immortals, ye were oft in olden time regardful of our call,
Having vouchsafed to man a hearing through this prayer, by wondrous deeds the Heroes have displayed their might.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  That, O ye Maruts, we may long time flourish through your abundant riches, O swift movers,
And that our men may spread in the encampment, let me complete the rite with these oblations.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  May this your laud, may this your song, O Maruts, sung by the poet, Māna's son, Māndārya,
Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CLXVII. Indra. Maruts.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  A THOUSAND are thy helps for us, O Indra: a thousand, Lord of Bays, thy choice refreshments.
Wealth of a thousand sorts hast thou to cheer us: may precious goods come nigh to us in thousands.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  May the most sapient Maruts, with protection, with best boons brought from lofty heaven, approach us,
Now when their team of the most noble horses speeds even on the sea's extremest limit.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Close to them clings one moving in seclusion, like a man's wife, like a spear carried rearward,
Well grasped, bright, decked with gold there is Vāk also, like to a courtly, eloquent dame, among them.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Far off the brilliant, never-weary Maruts cling to the young Maid as a joint possession.
The fierce Gods drave not Rodasī before them, but wished for her to grow their friend and fellow.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  When chose immortal Rodasī to follow—she with loose tresses and heroic spirit—
She climbed her servant's chariot, she like Sūrya with cloud-like motion and refulgent aspect.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Upon their car the young men set the Maiden wedded to glory, mighty in assemblies,
When your song, Maruts, rose, and, with oblation, the Soma-pourer sang his hymn in worship.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  I will declare the greatness of these Maruts, their real greatness, worthy to be lauded,
How, with them, she though firm, strong-minded, haughty, travels to women happy in their fortune.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Mitra and Varuṇa they guard from censure: Aryaman too, discovers worthless sinners Firm things are overthrown that ne’er were shaken: he prospers, Maruts, who gives choice oblations.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  None of us, Maruts, near or at a distance, hath ever reached the limit of your vigour.
They in courageous might still waxing boldly have compassed round their foemen like an ocean.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  May we this day be dearest friends of Indra, and let us call on him in fight to-morrow.
So were we erst. New might attend us daily! So be with us! Ṛbhukṣan of the Heroes!
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  May this your laud, may this your song, O Maruts, sung by the poet, Māna's son, Māndārya,
Bring offspring for ourselves with. food to feed us. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CLXVIII. Maruts.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SWIFT gain is his who hath you near at every rite: ye welcome every song of him who serves the Gods.
So may I turn you hither with fair hymns of praise to give great succour for the weal of both the worlds.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Surrounding, as it were, self-born, self-powerful, they spring to life the shakers-down of food and light;
Like as the countess undulations of the floods, worthy of praise when near, like bullocks and like kine.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  They who, like Somas with their well-grown stalks pressed out, imbibed within the heart, dwell there in friendly wise.
Upon their shoulders rests as ’twere a warrior's spear and in their hand they hold a dagger and a ring.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Self-yoked they have descended lightly from the sky. With your own lash, Immortals, urge yourselves to speed.
Unstained by dust the Maruts, mighty in their strength, have cast down e’en firm things, armed with their shining spears.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Who among you, O Maruts armed with lightning-spears, moveth you by himself, as with the tongue his jaws?
Ye rush from heaven's floor as though ye sought for food, on many errands like the Sun's diurnal Steed.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Say where, then, is this mighty region's farthest bound, where, Maruts, is the lowest depth that ye have reached,
When ye cast down like chaff the firmly stablished pile, and from the mountain send the glittering water-flood?
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Your winning is with strength, dazzling, with heavenly light, with fruit mature, O Maruts, fall of plenteousness.
Auspicious is your gift like a free giver's meed, victorious, spreading far, as of immortal Gods.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The rivers roar before your chariot fellies when they are uttering the voice of rain-clouds.
The lightnings laugh upon the earth beneath them, what time the Maruts scatter forth their fatness.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Pṛśni brought forth, to fight the mighty battle, the glittering army of the restless Maruts.
Nurtured together they begat the monster, and then looked round them for the food that strengthens.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  May this your laud, may this your song O Maruts, sung by the poet Māna's son, Māndārya,
Bring offspring for ourselves with food to feed us. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CLXIX. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  As, Indra, from great treason thou protectest, yea, from great treachery these who approach us,
So, marking well, Controller of the Maruts grant us their blessings, for they are thy dearest.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The various doings of all mortal people by thee are ordered, in thy wisdom, Indra.
The host of Maruts goeth forth exulting to win the light-bestowing spoil of battle.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  That spear of thine sat firm for us, O Indra: the Maruts set their whole dread power in motion.
E’en Agni shines resplendent in the brush-wood: the viands hold him as floods hold an island.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Vouchsafe us now that opulence, O Indra, as guerdon won by mightiest donation.
May hymns that please thee cause the breast of Vāyu to swell as with the mead's refreshing sweetness.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  With thee, O Indra, are most bounteous riches that further every one who lives uprightly.
Now may these Maruts show us loving-kindness, Gods who of old were ever prompt to help us.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Bring forth the Men who rain down boons, O Indra: exert thee in the great terrestrial region;
For their broad-chested speckled deer are standing like a King's armies on the field of battle.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Heard is the roar of the advancing Maruts, terrific, glittering, and swiftly moving,
Who with their rush o’erthrow as ’twere a sinner the mortal who would fight with those who love him
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Give to the Mānas, Indra with Maruts, gifts universal, gifts of cattle foremost.
Thou, God, art praised with Gods who must be lauded. May we find strengthening food in full abundance.

## HYMN CLXX. Indra. Maruts.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  NAUGHT is to-day, to-morrow naught. Who comprehends the mystery?
We must address ourselves unto another's thought, and lost is then the hope we formed.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The Maruts are thy brothers. Why, O Indra, wouldst thou take our lives?
Agree with them in friendly wise, and do not slay us in the fight.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Agastya, brother, why dost thou neglect us, thou who art our friend?
We know the nature of thy mind. Verity thou wilt give us naught.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Let them prepare the altar, let them kindle fire in front: we two
Here will spread sacrifice for thee, that the Immortal may observe.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Thou, Lord of Wealth, art Master of all treasures, thou, Lord of friends, art thy friends' best supporter.
O Indra, speak thou kindly with the Maruts, and taste oblations in their proper season.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_160">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CLI. — CLX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_180">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLXXI. — CLXXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
