---
title: "HYMN CLI. — CLX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_150">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CXLI. — CXL.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_170">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLXI. — CLXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN CLI. Mitra and Varuṇa

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  HEAVEN and earth trembled at the might and voice of him, whom, loved and Holy One, helper of all mankind,
The wise who longed for spoil in fight for kine brought forth with power, a Friend, mid waters, at the sacrifice.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  As these, like friends, have done this work for you, these prompt servants of Purumīlha Soma-offerer,
Give mental power to him who sings the sacred song, and hearken, Strong Ones, to the master of the house.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The folk have glorified your birth from Earth and Heaven, to be extolled, ye Strong Ones, for your mighty power.
Ye, when ye bring to singer and the rite, enjoy the sacrifice performed with holy praise and strength.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The people prospers, Asuras! whom ye dearly love: ye, Righteous Ones, proclaim aloud the Holy Law.
That efficacious power that comes from lofty heaven, ye bind unto the work, as to the pole an ox.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  On this great earth ye send your treasure down with might: unstained by dust, the crowding kine are in the stalls.
Here in the neighbourhood they cry unto the Sun at morning and at evening, like swift birds of prey.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The flames with curling tresses serve your sacrifice, whereto ye sing the song, Mitra and Varuṇa.
Send down of your free will, prosper our holy songs: ye are sole Masters of the singer's hymn of praise.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Whoso with sacrifices toiling brings you gifts, and worships, sage and priest, fulfilling your desire,—
To him do ye draw nigh and taste his sacrifice. Come well-inclined to us unto our songs and prayer.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  With sacrifices and with milk they deck you first, ye Righteous Ones, as if through stirrings of the mind.
To you they bring their hymns with their collected thought, while ye with earnest soul come to us gloriously.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Rich strength of life is yours: ye, Heroes, have obtained through your surpassing powers rich far-extending might.
Not the past days conjoined with nights, not rivers, not the Paṇis have attained your Godhead and your wealth.

## HYMN CLII. Mitra-Varuṇa.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE robes which ye put on abound with fatness: uninterrupted courses are your counsels.
All falsehood, Mitra-Varuṇa! ye conquer, and closely cleave unto the Law Eternal.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  This might of theirs hath no one comprehended. True is the crushing word the sage hath uttered,
The fearful four-edged bolt smites down the three-edged, and those who hate the Gods first fall and perish.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The Footless Maid precedeth footed creatures. Who marketh, Mitra-Varuṇa, this your doing?
The Babe Unborn supporteth this world's burthen, fulfilleth Law and overcometh falsehood.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  We look on him the darling of the Maidens, always advancing, never falling downward,
Wearing inseparable, wide-spread raiment, Mitra's and Varuṇa's delightful glory.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Unbridled Courser, born but not of horses, neighing he flieth on with back uplifted.
The youthful love mystery thought-surpassing, praising in Mitra-Varuṇa, its glory.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  May the milch-kine who favour Māmateya prosper in this world him who loves devotion.
May he, well skilled in rites, be food, and calling Aditi with his lips give us assistance.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Gods, Mitra-Varuṇa, with love and worship, let me make you delight in this oblation.
May our prayer be victorious in battles, may we have rain from heaven to make us prosper.

## HYMN CLIII. Mitra-Varuṇa.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WE worship with our reverence and oblations you, Mitra Varuṇa, accordant, mighty,
So that with us, ye Twain whose backs are sprinkled with oil, the priests with oil and hymns support you.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Your praise is like a mighty power, an impulse: to you, Twain Gods, a well-formed hymn is offered,
As the priest decks yon, Strong Ones, in assemblies, and the prince fain to worship you for blessings.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  O Mitra-Varuṇa, Aditi the Milch-cow streams for the rite, for folk who bring oblation,
When in the assembly he who worships moves you, like to a human priest, with gifts presented.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  So may the kine and heavenly Waters pour you sweet drink in families that make you joyful.
Of this may he, the ancient House-Lord, give us. Enjoy, drink of the milk the cow provideth.

## HYMN CLIV. Viṣṇu

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I WILL declare the mighty deeds of Viṣṇu, of him who measured out the earthly regions,
Who propped the highest place of congregation, thrice setting down his footstep, widely striding.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  For this his mighty deed is Viṣṇu lauded, like some wild beast, dread, prowling, mountain-roaming;
He within whose three wide-extended paces all living creatures have their habitation.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Let the hymn lift itself as strength to Viṣṇu, the Bull far-striding, dwelling on the mountains,
Him who alone with triple step hath measured this common dwelling-place, long, far extended.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Him whose three places that are filled with sweetness, imperishable, joy as it may list them,
Who verily alone upholds the threefold, the earth, the heaven, and all living creatures.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  May I attain to that his well-loved mansion where men devoted to the Gods are happy.
For there springs, close akin to the Wide-Strider, the well of meath in Viṣṇu's highest footstep.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Fain would we go unto your dwelling-places where there are many-horned and nimble oxen,
For mightily, there, shineth down upon us the widely-striding Bull's sublimest mansion.

## HYMN CLV. Viṣṇu-Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  To the great Hero, him who sets his mind thereon, and Viṣṇu, praise aloud in song your draught of juice,—
Gods ne’er beguiled, who borne as ’twere by noble steed, have stood upon the lofty ridges of the hills.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Your Soma-drinker keeps afar your furious rush, Indra and Viṣṇu, when ye come with all your might.
That which hath been directed well at mortal man, bow-armed Kṛśānu's arrow, ye turn far aside.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  These offerings increase his mighty manly strength: he brings both Parents down to share the genial flow.
He lowers, though a son, the Father's highest name; the third is that which is high in the light of heaven.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  We laud this manly power of him the Mighty One, preserver, inoffensive, bounteous and benign;
His who strode, widely pacing, with three steppings forth over the realms of earth for freedom and for life.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  A mortal man, when he beholds two steps of him who looks upon the light, is restless with amaze.
But his third step doth no one venture to approach, no, nor the feathered birds of air who fly with wings.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  He, like a rounded wheel, hath in swift motion set his ninety racing steeds together with the four.
Developed, vast in form, with those who sing forth praise, a youth, no more a child, he cometh to our call.

## HYMN CLVI. Viṣṇu

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FAR-SHINING, widely famed, going thy wonted way, fed with the oil, be helpful. Mitra-like, to us.
So, Viṣṇu, e’en the wise must swell thy song of praise, and he who hath oblations pay thee solemn rites.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  He who brings gifts to him the Ancient and the Last, to Viṣṇu who ordains, together with his Spouse,
Who tells the lofty birth of him the Lofty One, shall verily surpass in glory e’en his peer.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Him have ye satisfied, singers, as well as ye know, primeval germ of Order even from his birth.
Ye, knowing e’en his name, have told it forth: may we, Viṣṇu, enjoy the grace of thee the Mighty One.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The Sovran Varuṇa and both the Aśvins wait on this the will of him who guides the Marut host.
Viṣṇu hath power supreme and might that finds the day, and with his Friend unbars the stable of the kine.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Even he the Heavenly One who came for fellowship, Viṣṇu to Indra, godly to the godlier,
Who Maker, throned in three worlds, helps the Āryan man, and gives the worshipper his share of Holy Law.

## HYMN CLVII. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  AGNI is wakened: Sūrya riseth from the earth. Mighty, refulgent Dawn hath shone with all her light.
The Aśvins have equipped their chariot for the course. God Savitar hath moved the folk in sundry ways.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  When, Aśvins, ye equip your very mighty car, bedew, ye Twain, our power with honey and with oil.
To our devotion give victorious strength in war: may we win riches in the heroes' strife for spoil.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Nigh to us come the Aśvins' lauded three-wheeled car, the car laden with meath and drawn by fleet-foot steeds,
Three-seated, opulent, bestowing all delight. may it bring weal to us, to cattle and to men.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Bring hither nourishment for us, ye Aśvins Twain; sprinkle us with your whip that drops with honey-dew.
Prolong our days of life, wipe out our trespasses; destroy our foes, be our companions and our Friends.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Ye store the germ of life in female creatures, ye lay it up within all living beings.
Ye have sent forth, O Aśvins passing mighty, the fire, the sovrans of the wood, the waters,
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Leeches are ye with medicines to heal us, and charioteers are ye with skill in driving.
Ye Strong, give sway to him who brings oblation and with his heart pours out his gift before you.

## HYMN CLVIII. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  YE Vasus Twain, ye Rudras full of counsel, grant us, Strong Strengtheners, when ye stand beside us,
What wealth Aucathya craves of you, great Helpers when ye come forward with no niggard succour.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Who may give you aught, Vasus, for your favour, for what, at the Cow's place, ye grant through worship?
Wake for us understanding full of riches, come with a heart that will fulfil our longing.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  As erst for Tugra's son your car, sea-crossing, strong, was equipped and set amid the waters,
So may I gain your shelter and protection as with winged course a hero seeks his army.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  May this my praise preserve Ucathya's offspring: let not these Twain who fly with wings exhaust me.
Let not the wood ten times up-piled consume me, when fixed for you it bites the ground it stands on.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The most maternal streams, wherein the Dāsas cast me securely bound, have not devoured me.
When Traitana would cleave my head asunder, the Dāsa wounded his own breast and shoulders.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Dīrghatamas the son of Mamatā hath come to length of days in the tenth age of human kind.
He is the Brahman of the waters as they strive to reach their end and aim: their charioteer is he.

## HYMN CLIX. Heaven and Earth.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I PRAISE with sacrifices mighty Heaven and Earth at festivals, the wise, the Strengtheners of Law.
Who, having Gods for progeny, conjoined with Gods, through wonder-working wisdom bring forth choicest boons.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  With invocations, on the gracious Father's mind, and on the Mother's great inherent power I muse.
Prolific Parents, they have made the world of life, and for their brood all round wide immortality.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  These Sons of yours well skilled in work, of wondrous power, brought forth to life the two great Mothers first of all.
To keep the truth of all that stands and all that moves, ye guard the station of your Son who knows no guile.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  They with surpassing skill, most wise, have measured out the Twins united in their birth and in their home.
They, the refulgent Sages, weave within the sky, yea, in the depths of sea, a web for ever new.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  This is to-day the goodliest gift of Savitar: this thought we have when now the God is furthering us.
On us with loving-kindness Heaven and Earth bestow riches and various wealth and treasure hundredfold!

## HYMN CLX. Heaven and Earth.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THESE, Heaven and Earth, bestow prosperity on all, sustainers of the region, Holy Ones and wise,
Two Bowls of noble kind: between these Goddesses the God, the fulgent Sun, travels by fixed decree.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Widely-capacious Pair, mighty, that never fail, the Father and the Mother keep all creatures safe:
The two world-halves, the spirited, the beautiful, because the Father hath clothed them in goodly forms.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Son of these Parents, he the Priest with power to cleanse, Sage, sanctifies the worlds with his surpassing power.
Thereto for his bright milk he milked through all the days the party-coloured Cow and the prolific Bull.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Among the skilful Gods most skilled is he, who made the two world-halves which bring prosperity to all;
Who with great wisdom measured both the regions out, and stablished them with pillars that shall ne’er decay.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Extolled in song, O Heaven and Earth, bestow on us, ye mighty Pair, great glory and high lordly sway,
Whereby we may extend ourselves ever over the folk; and send us strength that shall deserve the praise of men.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_150">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CXLI. — CXL.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_170">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CLXI. — CLXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
