---
title: "HYMN XCI. — C."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_110">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CI. — CX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h91"></span>

## HYMN XCI. Soma.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Thou, Soma, art preeminent for wisdom; along the straightest path thou art our leader.
Our wise forefathers by thy guidance, Indu, dealt out among the Gods their share of treasure.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou by thine insight art most wise, O Soma, strong by thine energies and all possessing,
Mighty art thou by all thy powers and greatness, by glories art thou glorious, guide of mortals.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Thine are King Varuṇa's eternal statutes, lofty and deep, O Soma, is thy glory.
All-pure art thou like Mitra the beloved, adorable, like Aryaman, O Soma.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  With all thy glories on the earth, in heaven, on mountains, in the plants, and in the waters,—
With all of these, well-pleased and not in anger, accept, O royal Soma, our oblations.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Thou, Soma, art the Lord of heroes, King, yea, Vṛtra-slayer thou:
Thou art auspicious energy.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  And, Soma, let it be thy wish that we may live and may not die:
Praise-loving Lord of plants art thou.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  To him who keeps the law, both old and young, thou givest happiness,
And energy that he may live.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Guard us, King Soma, on all sides from him who threatens us: never let
The friend of one like thee be harmed.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  With those delightful aids which thou hast, Soma, for the worshipper,—
Even with those protect thou us.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Accepting this our sacrifice and this our praise, O Soma, come,
And be thou nigh to prosper us.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Well-skilled in speech we magnify thee, Soma, with our sacred songs:
Come thou to us, most gracious One.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Enricher, healer of disease, wealth-finder, prospering our store,
Be, Soma, a good Friend to us.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Soma, be happy in our heart, as milch-kine in the grassy meads,
As a young man in his own house.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  O Soma, God, the mortal man who in thy friendship hath delight,
Him doth the mighty Sage befriend.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Save us from slanderous reproach, keep us., O Soma, from distress:
Be unto us a gracious Friend.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Soma, wax great. From every side may vigorous powers unite in thee:
Be in the gathering-place of strength.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Wax, O most gladdening Soma, great through all thy rays of light, and be
A Friend of most illustrious fame to prosper us.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  In thee be juicy nutriments united, and powers and mighty foe-subduing vigour,
Waxing to immortality, O Soma: win highest glories for thyself in heaven.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Such of thy glories as with poured oblations men honour, may they all invest our worship.
Wealth-giver, furtherer with troops of heroes, sparing the brave, come, Soma, to our houses.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  To him who worships Soma gives the milch-cow, a fleet steed and a man of active knowledge,
Skilled in home duties, meet for holy synod, for council meet, a glory to his father.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Invincible in fight, saver in battles, guard of our camp, winner of light and water,
Born amid hymns, well-housed, exceeding famous, victor, in thee will we rejoice, O Soma.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  These herbs, these milch-kine, and these running waters, all these, O Soma, thou hast generated.
The spacious firmament hast thou expanded, and with the light thou hast dispelled the darkness.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  Do thou, God Soma, with thy Godlike spirit, victorious, win for us a share of riches.
Let none prevent thee: thou art Lord of valour. Provide for both sides in the fray for booty.

<span id="h92"></span>

## HYMN XCII. Dawn.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THESE Dawns have raised their banner; in the eastern half of the mid-air they spread abroad their shining light.
Like heroes who prepare their weapons for the war, onward they come bright red in hue, the Mother Cows.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Readily have the purple beams of light shot up; the Red Cows have they harnessed, easy to be yoked.
The Dawns have brought distinct perception as before: red-hued, they have attained their fulgent brilliancy.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  They sing their song like women active in their tasks, along their common path hither from far away,
Bringing refreshment to the liberal devotee, yea, all things to the worshipper who pours the juice.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  She, like a dancer, puts her broidered garments on: as a cow yields her udder so she bares her breast.
Creating light for all the world of life, the Dawn hath laid the darkness open as the cows their stall.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  We have beheld the brightness of her shining; it spreads and drives away the darksome monster.
Like tints that deck the Post at sacrifices, Heaven's Daughter hath attained her wondrous splendour.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  We have o’erpast the limit of this darkness; Dawn breaking forth again brings clear perception.
She like a flatterer smiles in light for glory, and fair of face hath wakened to rejoice us.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The Gotamas have praised Heaven's radiant Daughter, the leader of the charm of pleasant voices.
Dawn, thou conferrest on us strength with offspring and men, conspicuous with kine and horses.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  O thou who shinest forth in wondrous glory, urged onward by thy strength, auspicious Lady,
Dawn, may I gain that wealth, renowned and ample, in brave sons, troops of slaves, far-famed for horses.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Bending her looks on all the world, the Goddess shines, widely spreading with her bright eye westward.
Waking to motion every living creature, she understands the voice of each adorer.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Ancient of days, again again born newly, decking her beauty with the self-same raiment.
The Goddess wastes away the life of mortals, like a skilled hunter cutting birds in pieces.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  She hath appeared discovering heaven's borders: to the far distance she drives off her Sister.
Diminishing the days of human creatures, the Lady shines with all her lover's splendour.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  The bright, the blessed One shines forth extending her rays like kine, as a flood rolls his waters.
Never transgressing the divine commandments, she is beheld visible with the sunbeams.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  O Dawn enriched with ample wealth, bestow on us the wondrous gift
Wherewith we may support children and children's sons.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Thou radiant mover of sweet sounds, with wealth of horses and of kine
Shine thou on us this day, O Dawn auspiciously.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  O Dawn enriched with holy rites, yoke to thy car thy purple steeds,
And then bring thou unto us all felicities.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  O Aśvins wonderful in act, do ye unanimous direct
Your chariot to our home wealthy in kine and gold.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Ye who brought down the hymn from heaven, a light that giveth light to man,
Do ye, O Aśvins, bring strength hither unto us.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Hither may they who wake at dawn bring, to drink Soma both the Gods
Health-givers Wonder-Workers, borne on paths of gold.

<span id="h93"></span>

## HYMN XCIII. Agni-Soma.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  AGNI and Soma, mighty Pair, graciously hearken to my call,
Accept in friendly wise my hymn, and prosper him who offers gifts.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The man who honours you to-day, Agni and Soma, with this hymn,
Bestow on him heroic strength, increase of kine, and noble steeds.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The man who offers holy oil and burnt oblations unto you,
Agni and Soma, shall enjoy great strength, with offspring, all his life.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Agni and Soma, famed is that your. prowess wherewith ye stole the kine, his food, from Paṇi.
Ye caused the brood of Bṛsaya to perish; ye found the light, the single light for many.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Agni and Soma, joined in operation ye have set up the shining lights in heaven.
From curse and from reproach, Agni and Soma, ye freed the rivers that were bound in fetters.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  One of you Mātariśvan brought from heaven, the Falcon rent the other from the mountain.
Strengthened by holy prayer Agni and Soma have made us ample room for sacrificing.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Taste, Agni, Soma, this prepared oblation; accept it, Mighty Ones, and let it please you.
Vouchsafe us good protection and kind favour: grant to the sacrificer health and riches.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Whoso with oil and poured oblation honours, with God-devoted heart, Agni and Soma,—
Protect his sacrifice, preserve him from distress, grant to the sacrificer great felicity.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Invoked together, mates in wealth, Agni-Soma, accept our hymns:
Together be among the Gods.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Agni and Soma, unto him who worships you with holy oil
Shine forth an ample recompense.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Agni and Soma, be ye pleased with these oblations brought to you,
And come, together, nigh to us.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Agni and Soma, cherish well our horses, and let our cows be fat who yield oblations.
Grant power to us and to our wealthy patrons, and cause our holy rites to be successful.

<span id="h94"></span>

## HYMN XCIV. Agni

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FOR Jātavedas worthy of our praise will we frame with our mind this eulogy as ’twere a car.
For good, in his assembly, is this care of ours. Let us not, in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The man for whom thou sacrificest prospereth, dwelleth without a foe, gaineth heroic might.
He waxeth strong, distress never approacheth him. Let us not, in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  May we have power to kindle thee. Fulfil our thoughts. In thee the Gods eat the presented offering,
Bring hither the Ādityas, for we long for them. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  We will bring fuel and prepare burnt offerings, reminding thee at each successive festival.
Fulfil our thought that so we may prolong our lives. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  His ministers move forth, the guardians of the folk, protecting quadruped and biped with their rays.
Mighty art thou, the wondrous herald of the Dawn. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Thou art Presenter and the chief Invoker, thou Director, Purifier, great High Priest by birth.
Knowing all priestly work thou perfectest it, Sage. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Lovely of form art thou, alike on every side; though far, thou shinest brightly as if close at hand.
O God, thou seest through even the dark of night. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Gods, foremost be his car who pours libations out, and let our hymn prevail o’er evil-hearted men.
Attend to this our speech and make it prosper well. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Smite with thy weapons those of evil speech and thought, devouring demons, whether near or tar away.
Then to the singer give free way for sacrifice. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  When to thy chariot thou hadst yoked two red steeds and two ruddy steeds, wind-sped, thy roar was like a bull's.
Thou with smoke-bannered flame attackest forest trees. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Then at thy roar the very birds are terrified, when, eating-up the grass, thy sparks fly forth abroad.
Then is it easy for thee and thy car to pass. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  He hath the Power to soothe Mitra and Varuṇa: wonderful is the Maruts’ wrath when they descend.
Be gracious; let their hearts he turned to us again. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Thou art a God, thou art the wondrous Friend of Gods, the Vasu of the Vasus, fair in sacrifice.
Under, thine own most wide protection may we dwell. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  This is thy grace that, kindled in thine own abode, invoked with Soma thou soundest forth most benign,
Thou givest wealth and treasure to the worshipper. Let us not in thy friendship, Agni, suffer harm.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  To whom thou, Lord of goodly riches, grantest freedom from every sin with perfect wholeness,
Whom with good strength thou quickenest, with children and wealth—may we be they, Eternal Being.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Such, Agni, thou who knowest all good fortune, God, lengthen here the days of our existence.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<span id="h95"></span>

## HYMN XCV. Agni

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  To fair goals travel Two unlike in semblance: each in succession nourishes an infant.
One bears a Godlike Babe of golden colour; bright and fair-shining, is he with the other.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Tvaṣṭar's ten daughters, vigilant and youthful, produced this Infant borne to sundry quarters.
They bear around him whose long flames are pointed, fulgent among mankind with native splendour.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Three several places of his birth they honour, in mid-air, in the heaven, and in the waters.
Governing in the east of earthly regions, the seasons hath he stablished in their order.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Who of you knows this secret One? The Infant by his own nature hath brought forth his Mothers.
The germ of many, from the waters' bosom he goes forth, wise and great, of Godlike nature.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Visible, fair, he grows in native brightness uplifted in the lap of waving waters.
When he was born both Tvaṣṭar's worlds were frightened: they turn to him and reverence the Lion.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The Two auspicious Ones, like women, tend him: like lowing cows they seek him in their manner.
He is the Lord of Might among the mighty; him, on the right, they balm with their oblations.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Like Savitar his arms with might he stretches; awful, he strives grasping the world's two borders.
He forces out from all a brilliant vesture, yea, from his Mothers draws he forth new raiment.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  He makes him a most noble form of splendour, decking him in his home with milk and waters.
The Sage adorns the depths of air with wisdom: this is the meeting where the Gods are worshipped.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Wide through the firmament spreads forth triumphant the far-resplendent strength of thee the Mighty.
Kindled by us do thou preserve us, Agni, with all thy self-bright undiminished succours.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  In dry spots he makes stream, and course, and torrent, and inundates the earth with floods that glisten.
All ancient things within his maw he gathers, and moves among the new fresh-sprouting grasses.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Fed with our fuel, purifying Agni, so blaze to us auspiciously for glory.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<span id="h96"></span>

## HYMN XCVI. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  HE in the ancient way by strength engendered, lo! straight hath taken to himself all wisdom.
The waters and the bowl have made him friendly. The Gods possessed the wealth bestowing Agni.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  At Āyu's ancient call he by his wisdom gave all this progeny of men their being,
And, by refulgent light, heaven and the waters. The Gods possessed the wealth. bestowing Agni.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Praise him, ye Āryan folk, as chief performer of sacrifice adored and ever toiling,
Well-tended, Son of Strength, the Constant Giver. The Gods possessed the wealth bestowing Agni.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  That Mātariśvan rich in wealth and treasure, light-winner, finds a pathway for his offspring.
Guard of our folk, Father of earth and heaven. The Gods possessed the wealth bestowing Agni.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Night and Dawn, changing each the other's colour, meeting together suckle one same Infant:
Golden between the heaven and earth he shineth. The Gods possessed the wealth bestowing Agni.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Root of wealth, gathering-place of treasures, banner of sacrifice, who grants the suppliant's wishes:
Preserving him as their own life immortal, the Gods possessed the wealth-bestowing Agni.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Now and of old the home of wealth, the mansion of what is born and what was born aforetime,
Guard of what is and what will be hereafter,—the Gods possessed the wealth bestowing Agni.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  May the Wealth-Giver grant us conquering riches; may the Wealth-Giver grant us wealth with heroes.
May the Wealth-Giver grant us food with offspring, and length of days may the Wealth-Giver send us.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Fed with our fuel, purifying Agni, so blaze to us auspiciously for glory.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<span id="h97"></span>

## HYMN XCVII. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  CHASING with light our sin away, O Agni, shine thou wealth on us.
May his light chase our sin away.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  For goodly fields, for pleasant homes, for wealth we sacrifice to thee.
May his light chase our sin away.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Best praiser of all these be he; foremost, our chiefs who sacrifice.
May his light chase our sin away.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  So that thy worshippers and we, thine, Agni, in our sons may live.
May his light chase our sin away.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  As ever-conquering Agni's beams of splendour go to every side,
May his light chase our sin away.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  To every side thy face is turned, thou art triumphant everywhere.
May his light chase our sin away.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  O thou whose face looks every way, bear us past foes as in a ship.
May his light chase our sin away.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  As in a ship, convey thou us for our advantage o’er the flood.
May his light chase our sin away.

<span id="h98"></span>

## HYMN XCVIII. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  STILL in Vaiśvānara's grace may we continue: yea, he is King supreme o’er all things living.
Sprung hence to life upon this All he looketh. Vaiśvānara hath rivalry with Sūrya.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Present in heaven, in earth, all-present Agni,—all plants that grow on ground hath he pervaded.
May Agni, may Vaiśvānara with vigour, present, preserve us day and night from foemen.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Be this thy truth, Vaiśvānara, to us-ward: let wealth in rich abundance gather round us.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<span id="h99"></span>

## HYMN XCIX. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FOR Jātavedas let us press the Soma: may he consume the wealth of the malignant.
May Agni carry us through all our troubles, through grief as in a boat across the river.

<span id="h100"></span>

## HYMN C. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY he who hath his home with strength, the Mighty, the King supreme of earth and spacious heaven,
Lord of true power, to he invoked in battles,—may Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Whose way is unattainable like Sūrya's: he in each fight is the strong Vṛtra-slayer,
Mightiest with his Friends in his own courses. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Whose paths go forth in their great might resistless, forthmilking, as it were, heaven's genial moisture.
With manly strength triumphant, foe-subduer,—may Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Among Aṅgirases he was the chiefest, a Friend with friends, mighty amid the mighty.
Praiser mid praisers, honoured most of singers. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Strong with the Rudras as with his own children, in manly battle conquering his foemen ’
With his close comrades doing deeds of glory,—may Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Humbler of pride, exciter of the conflict, the Lord of heroes, God invoked of many,
May he this day gain with our men the sunlight. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  His help hath made him cheerer in the battle, the folk have made him guardian of their comfort.
Sole Lord is he of every holy service. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  To him the Hero, on high days of prowess, heroes for help and booty shall betake them.
He hath found light even in the blinding darkness. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  He with his left hand checketh even the mighty, and with his right hand gathereth up the booty.
Even with the humble he acquireth riches. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  With hosts on foot and cars he winneth treasures: well is he known this day by all the people.
With manly might he conquereth those who hate him. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  When in his ways with kinsmen or with strangers he speedeth to the fight, invoked of many,
For gain of waters, and of sons and grandsons, may Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Awful and fierce, fiend-slayer, thunder-wielder, with boundless knowledge, hymned by hundreds, mighty,
In strength like Soma, guard of the Five Peoples, may Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Winning the light, hitherward roars his thunder like the terrific mighty voice of Heaven.
Rich gifts and treasures evermore attend him. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Whose home eternal through his strength surrounds him on every side, his laud, the earth and heaven,
May he, delighted with our service, save us. May Indra, girt by Maruts, be our succour.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  The limit of whose power not Gods by Godhead, nor mortal men have reached, nor yet the Waters.
Both Earth and Heaven in vigour he surpasseth. May Indra, girt by Maruts, he our succour.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  The red and tawny mare, blaze-marked, high standing, celestial who, to bring Ṛjrāśva riches,
Drew at the pole the chariot yoked with stallions, joyous, among the hosts of men was noted.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  The Vārṣāgiras unto thee, O Indra, the Mighty One, sing forth this laud to please thee,
Ṛjrāśva with his fellows, Ambarīṣa, Surādhas, Sahadeva, Bhayamāna.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  He, much invoked, hath slain Dasyus and Śimyus, after his wont, and laid them low with arrows.
The mighty Thunderer with his fair-complexioned friends won the land, the sunlight, and the waters.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  May Indra evermore be our protector, and unimperilled may we win the booty.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_110">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CI. — CX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
