---
title: "HYMN XCI. — C."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_7_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_7_110">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CI. — CIV.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN XCI. Vāyu.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WERE not in sooth, the Gods aforetime blameless, whose pleasure was increased by adoration?
For Vāyu and for man in his affliction they caused the Morning to arise with Sūrya.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Guardians infallible, eager as envoys' preserve us safe through many months and autumns.
Addressed to you, our fair praise, Indra-Vāyu, implores your favour and renewed well-being.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Wise, bright, arranger of his teams, he. seeketh men with rich food whose treasures are abundant.
They have arranged them of one mind with Vāyu: the men have wrought all noble operations.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  So far as native power and strength permit you, so far as men behold whose eyes have vision,
O ye pure-drinkers, drink with us pure Soma: sit on this sacred grass, Indra and Vāyu.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Driving down teams that bear the lovely Heroes, hitherward, Indra-Vāyu, come together.
To you this prime of savoury juice is offered: here loose your horses and be friendly-minded.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Your hundred and your thousand teams, O Indra and Vāyu, all-munificent, which attend you,
With these most gracious-minded come ye hither, and drink, O Heroes of the meath we offer.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Like coursers seeking fame will we Vasisthas, O Indra-Vāyu, with our fair laudations,
Exerting all our powe-,, call you to aid us. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

## HYMN XCII. Vāyu

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  O VĀYU, drinker of the pure, be near us: a thousand teams are thine, Allbounteous Giver.
To thee the rapture-bringing juice is offered, whose first draught, God, thou takest as thy portion.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Prompt at the holy rites forth came the presser with Soma-draughts for Indra and for Vāyu,
When ministering priests with strong devotion bring to you Twain the first taste of the Soma.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The teams wherewith thou seekest him who offers, within his home, O Viyu, to direct him,
Therewith send wealth: to us with full enjoyment, a hero son and gifts of kine and horses.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Near to the Gods and making Indra joyful, devout and ofFering precious gifts to Vāyu,
Allied with princes, smiting down the hostile, may we with heroes conquer foes in battle.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  With thy yoked teams in hundreds and in thousands come to our sacrifice and solemn worship.
Come, Vāyu, make thee glad at this libation. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

## HYMN XCIII. Indra-Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SLAYERS of enemies, Indra and Agni, accept this day our new-born pure laudation.
Again, again I call you prompt to listen, best to give quickly strength to him who craves it.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  For ye were strong to gain, exceeding mighty, growing together, waxing in your vigour.
Lords of the pasture filled with ample riches, bestow upon us strength both fresh and lasting.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Yea when the strong have entered our assembly, and singers seeking with their hymns your favour,
They are like steeds who come into the race-course, those men who call aloud on Indra-Agni.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The singer, seeking with his hymns your favour, begs splendid riches of their first possessor.
Further us with new bounties, Indra-Agni, armed with strong thunder, slayers of the foeman.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  When two great hosts, arrayed against each other, meet clothed with brightness, in the fierce encounter
Stand ye beside the godly, smite the godless; and still assist the men who press the Soma.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  To this our Soma-pressing, Indra-Agni, come ye prepared to show your loving-kindness,
For not at any time have ye despised us. So may I draw you with all strengthenings hither.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  So Agni, kindled mid this adoration, invite thou Mitra, Varuṇa, and Indra.
Forgive whatever sin we have committed may Aryaman and Aditi remove it.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  While we accelerate these our sacrifices, may we win strength from both of you, O Agni:
Ne’er may the Maruts, Indra, Viṣṇu slight us. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

## HYMN XCIV. Indra-Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  As rain from out the cloud, for you, Indra and Agni, from my soul
This noblest praise hath been produced.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Do ye, O Indra-Agni, hear the singer's call: accept his songs.
Ye Rulers, grant his heart's desire.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Give us not up to poverty, ye Heroes, Indra-Agni, nor
To slander and reproach of men.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  To Indra and to Agni we bring reverence, high and holy hymn,
And, craving help, softwords with prayer.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  For all these holy singers here implore these Twain to succour them,
And priests that they may win them strength.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Eager to laudyou, we with songs invoke you, bearing sacred food,
Fain for success in sacrifice.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Indra and Agni, come to us with favour, ye who conquer men:
Let not the wicked master us.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  At no time let the injurious blow of hostile mortal fall on us:
O Indra-Agni, shelter us.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Whatever wealth we crave of you, in gold, in cattle, or in steeds,
That, Indra-Agni, let us gain;
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  When heroes prompt in worship call Indra and Agni, Lords of steeds,
Beside the Soma juice effused.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Call hither with the song and lauds those who best slay the foemen, those
Who take delight in hymns of praise.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Slay ye the wicked man whose thought is evil of the demon kind.
Slay him who stays the waters, slay the Serpent with your deadly dart.

## HYMN XCV. Sarasvatī.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THIS stream Sarasvatī with fostering current comes forth, our sure defence, our fort of iron.
As on a car, the flood flows on, surpassing in majesty and might all other waters.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Pure in her course from mountains to the ocean, alone of streams Sarasvatī hath listened.
Thinking of wealth and the great world of creatures, she poured for Nahuṣa her milk and fatness.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Friendly to man he grew among the women, a strong young Steer amid the Holy Ladies.
He gives the fleet steed to our wealthy princes, and decks their bodies for success in battle.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  May this Sarasvatī be pleased and listen at this our sacrifice, auspicious Lady,
When we with reverence, on our knees, implore her close-knit to wealth, most kind to those she loveth.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  These offerings have ye made with adoration: say this, Sarasvatī, and accept our praises;
And, placing us under thy dear protection, may we approach thee, as a tree, for shelter.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  For thee, O Blest Sarasvatī, Vasiṣṭha hath here unbarred the doors d sacred Order.
Wax, Bright One, and give strength to him who lauds thee. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

## HYMN XCVI. Sarasvatī.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I SING a lofty song, for she is mightiest, most divine of Streams.
Sarasvatī will I exalt with hymns and lauds, and, O Vasiṣṭha, Heaven and Earth.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  When in the fulness of their strength the Pūrus dwell, Beauteous One, on thy two grassy banks,
Favour us thou who hast the Maruts for thy friends: stir up the bounty of our chiefs.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  So may Sarasvatī auspicious send good luck; she, rich in spoil, is never niggardly in thought,
When praised in jamadagni's way and lauded as Vasiṣṭha lauds.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  We call upon Sarasvān, as unmarried men who long for wives,
As liberal men who yearn for sons.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Be thou our kind protector, O Sarasvān, with those waves of thine
Laden with sweets and dropping oil.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  May we enjoy Sarasvān's breast, all-beautiful, that swells with streams,
May we gain food and progeny.

## HYMN XCVIL Bṛhaspati.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WHERE Heaven and Earth combine in men's assembly, and ttose who love the Gods delight in worship,
Where the libations are effused for Indra, may he come first to drink and make him stronger.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  We crave the heavenly grace of Gods to guard us-so may Bṛhaspati, O friends, exalt us-
That he, the Bounteous God, may find us sintess, who giveth from a distance like a father.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  That Brahmaṇaspati, most High and Gracious, I glorify with offerings and with homage.
May the great song of praise divine, reach Indra who is the King of prayer the Gods’ creation.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  May that Bṛhaspati who brings all blessings, most dearly loved, be seated by our altar.
Heroes and wealth we crave; may he bestow them, and bear us safe beyond the men who vex us.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  To us these Deathless Ones, erst born, have granted this laud of ours which gives the Immortal pleasure.
Let us invoke Bṛhaspati, the foeless, the clear-voiced God, the Holy One of households
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Him, this Bṛhaspati, his red-hued horses, drawing together, full of strength, bring hither.
Robed in red colour like the cloud, they carry the Lord of Might whose friendship gives a dwelling.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  For he is pure, with hundred wings, refulgent, with sword of gold, impetuous, winning sunlight.
Sublime Bṛhaspati, easy of access granteth his friends most bountiful refreshment.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Both Heaven and Earth, divine, the Deity's Parents, have made Bṛhaspati increase in grandeur.
Glorify him, O friends, who merits glory: may he give prayer fair way and easy passage.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  This, Brahmaṇaspati, is your laudation prayer hath been made to thunderwielding Indra.
Favour our songs, wake up our thought and spirit: destroy the godless and our foemen's malice.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Ye Twain are Lords of wealth in earth and heaven, thou, O Bṛhaspati, and thou, O Indra.
Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds you. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

## HYMN XCVIII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  PRIESTS, offer to the Lord of all the people the milked-out stalk of Soma, radiant-coloured.
No wild-bull knows his drinking-place like Indra who ever seeks him who hath pressed the Soma,
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou dost desire to drink, each day that passes, the pleasant food which thou hast had aforetime,
O Indra, gratified in heart and spirit, drink eagerly the Soma set before thee.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Thou, newly-born, for strength didst drink the Soma; the Mother told thee of thy future greatness.
O Indra, thou hast filled mid-air's wide region, and given the Gods by battle room and freedom.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  When thou hast urged the arrocrant to combat, proud in their strength of arm, we will subdue them.
Or, Indra, when thou fightest girt by heroes, we in the glorious fray with thee will conquer.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  I will declare the earliest deeds of Indra, and recent acts which Maghavan hath accomplished.
When he had conquered godless wiles and magic, Soma became his own entire possession.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Thine is this world of flocks and herds around thee, which with the eye of Sūrya thou beholdest.
Thou, Indra, art alone the Lord of cattle; may we enjoy the treasure which thou givest.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Ye Twain are Lords of wealth in earth and heaven, thou, O Bṛhaspati, and thou, O Indra.
Mean though he be, give wealth to him who lauds you. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

## HYMN XCIX. Viṣṇu.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MEN come not nigh thy majesty who growest beyond all bound and measure with thy body.
Both thy two regions of the earth, O Viṣṇu, we know: thou God, knowest the highest also.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  None who is born or being born, God Viṣṇu, hath reached the utmost limit of thy grandeur.
The vast high vault of heaven hast thou supported, and fixed earth's eastern pinnacle securely.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Rich in sweet food be ye, and rich in milch-kine, with fertile pastures, fain to do men service.
Both these worlds, Viṣṇu, hast thou stayed asunder, and firmly fixed the earth with pegs around it.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Ye have made spacious room for sacrificing by generating Sūrya, Dawn, and Agni.
O Heroes, ye have conquered in your battles even the bull-jawed Dāsa's wiles and magic.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Ye have destroyed, thou, Indra, and thou Viṣṇu, Śambara's nine-and-ninety fenced castles.
Ye Twain smote down a hundred times a thousand resistless heroes of the royal Varcin.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  This is the lofty hymn of praise, exalting the Lords of Mighty Stride, the strong and lofty.
I laud you in the solemn synods, Viṣṇu: pour ye food on us in our camps, O Indra.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  O Viṣṇu, unto thee my lips cry Vaṣaṭ! Let this mine offering, Sipivista, please thee.
May these my songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

## HYMN C. Viṣṇu.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  NE’ER doth the man repent, who, seeking profit, bringeth his gift to the far-striding Viṣṇu.
He who adoreth him with all his spirit winneth himself so great a benefactor.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou, Viṣṇu, constant in thy courses, gavest good-will to all men, and a hymn that lasteth,
That thou mightst move us to abundant comfort of very splendid wealth with store of horses.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Three times strode forth this God in all his grandeur over this earth bright with a hundred splendours.
Foremost be Viṣṇu, stronger than the strongest: for glorious is his name who lives for ever.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Over this earth with mighty step strode Viṣṇu, ready to give it for a home to Manu.
In him the humble people trust for safety: he, nobly born, hath made them spacious dwellings.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  To-day I laud this name, O gipivista, I, skilled in rules, the name of thee the Noble.
Yea, I the poor and weak praise thee the Mighty who dwellest in the realm beyond this region.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  What was there to be blamed in thee, O Viṣṇu, when thou declaredst, I am Sipivista?
Hide not this form from us, nor keep it secret, since thou didst wear another shape in battle.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  O Viṣṇu, unto thee my lips cry Vaṣaṭ! Let this mine offering, Sipivista, please thee.
May these my songs of eulogy exalt thee. Preserve us evermore, ye Gods, with blessings.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_7_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_7_110">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CI. — CIV.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
