---
title: "HYMN CI. — CX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XCI. — C.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_120">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXI. — CXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN CI. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  SING, with oblation, praise to him who maketh glad, who with Ṛjiśvan drove the dusky brood away.
Fain for help, him the strong whose right hand wields the bolt, him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Indra, who with triumphant wrath smote Vyaṁsa down, and Śambara, and Pipru the unrighteous one;
Who extirpated Śuṣṇa the insatiate,—him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  He whose great work of manly might is heaven and earth, and Varuṇa and Sūrya keep his holy law;
Indra, whose law the rivers follow as they flow,—him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  He who is Lord and Master of the steeds and kine, honoured—the firm and sure—at every holy act;
Stayer even of the strong who pours no offering out,—him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  He who is Lord of all the world that moves and breathes, who for the Brahman first before all found the Cows;
Indra who cast the Dasyus down beneath his feet,—him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Whom cowards must invoke and valiant men of war, invoked by those who conquer and by those who flee;
Indra, to whom all beings turn their constant thought,—him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Refulgent in the Rudras’ region he proceeds, and with the Rudras through the wide space speeds the Dame.
The hymn of praise extols Indra the far-renowned: him girt by Maruts we invoke to be our Friend.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  O girt by Maruts, whether thou delight thee in loftiest gathering-place or lowly dwelling,
Come thence unto our rite, true boon-bestower: through love of thee have we prepared oblations.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  We, fain for thee, strong Indra, have pressed Soma, and, O thou sought with prayer, have made oblations.
Now at this sacrifice, with all thy Maruts, on sacred grass, O team-borne God, rejoice thee.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Rejoice thee with thine own Bay Steeds, O Indra, unclose thy jaws and let thy lips be open.
Thou with the fair cheek, let thy Bay Steeds bring thee: gracious to us, he pleased with our oblation.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Guards of the camp whose praisers are the Maruts, may we through Indra, get ourselves the booty.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

## HYMN CII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  To thee the Mighty One I bring this mighty hymn, for thy desire hath been gratified by my laud.
In Indra, yea in him victorious through his strength, the Gods have joyed at feast and when the Soma flowed.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The Seven Rivers bear his glory far and wide, and heaven and sky and earth display his comely form.
The Sun and Moon in change alternate run their course, that we, O Indra, may behold and may have faith.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Maghavan, grant us that same car to bring us spoil, thy conquering car in which we joy in shock of fight.
Thou, Indra, whom our hearts praise highly in the war, grant shelter, Maghavan, to us who love thee well.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Encourage thou our side in every fight: may we, with thee for our ally, conquer the foeman's host.
Indra, bestow on us joy and felicity break down, O Maghavan, the vigour of our foes.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  For here in divers ways these men invoking thee, holder of treasures, sing hymns to win thine aid.
Ascend the car that thou mayest bring spoil to us, for, Indra, thy fixt winneth the victory.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  His arms win kine, his power is boundless in each act best, with a hundred helps, waker of battle's din
Is Indra: none may rival him in mighty strength. Hence, eager for the spoil the people call on him.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Thy glory, Maghavan, exceeds a hundred yea, more than a hundred, than a thousand mid the folk,
The great bowl hath inspirited thee boundlessly: so mayst thou slay the Vṛtras, breaker-down of forts!
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Of thy great might there is a three counterpart, the three earths, Lord men and the three realms of light.
Above this whole world, Indra, thou hast waxen great: without a foe art thou, nature, from of old.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  We invocate thee first among the Deities: thou hast become a mighty Conquer in fight.
May Indra fill with spirit this our singer's heart, and make our car impetuous, foremost in attack.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Thou hast prevailed, and hast not kept the booty back, in trifling battles in those of great account.
We make thee keen, the Mighty One, succour us: inspire us, Maghavan, when we defy the foe.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  May Indra evermore be our Protector, and unimperilled may we win the booty.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

## HYMN CIII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THAT highest Indra-power of thine is distant: that which is here sages possessed aforetime.
This one is on the earth, in heaven the other, and both unite as flag with flag in battle.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  He spread the wide earth out and firmly fixed it, smote with his thunderbolt and loosed the waters.
Maghavan with his puissance struck down Ahi, rent Rauhiṇa to death and slaughtered Vyaṁsa.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Armed with his bolt and trusting in his prowess he wandered shattering the forts of Dāsas.
Cast thy dart, knowing, Thunderer, at the Dasyu; increase the Ārya's might and glory, Indra.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  For him who thus hath taught these human races, Maghavan, bearing a fame-worthy title,
Thunderer, drawing nigh to slay the Dasyus, hath given himself the name of Son for glory.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  See this abundant wealth that he possesses, and put your trust in Indra's hero vigour.
He found the cattle, and he found the horses, he found the plants, the forests and the waters.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  To him the truly strong, whose deeds are many, to him the strong Bull let us pour the Soma.
The Hero, watching like a thief in ambush, goes parting the possessions of the godless.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Well didst thou do that hero deed, O Indra, in waking with thy bolt the slumbering Ahi.
in thee, delighted, Dames divine rejoiced them, the flying Maruts and all Gods were joyful.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  As thou hast smitten Śuṣṇa, Pipru, Vṛtra and Kuyava, and Śambara's forts, O Indra.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

## HYMN CIV. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE altar hath been made for thee to rest on: come like a panting courser and be seated.
Loosen thy flying Steeds, set free thy Horses who bear thee swiftly nigh at eve and morning.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  These men have come to Indra for assistance: shall he not quickly come upon these pathways?
May the Gods quell the fury of the Dāsa, and may they lead our folk to happy fortune.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  He who hath only wish as his possession casts on himself, casts foam amid the waters.
Both wives of Kuyava in milk have bathed them: may they be drowned within the depth of Śiphā.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  This hath his kinship checked who lives beside us: with ancient streams forth speeds and rules the Hero,
Añjasī, Kuliśī, and Virapatnī, delighting him, bear milk upon their waters.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Soon as this Dasyu's traces were discovered, as she who knows her home, he sought the dwelling.
Now think thou of us, Maghavan, nor cast us away as doth a profligate his treasure.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Indra, as such, give us a share of sunlight, of waters, sinlessness, and reputation.
Do thou no harm to our yet unborn offspring: our trust is in thy mighty Indra-power.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Now we, I think, in thee as such have trusted: lead us on, Mighty One, to ample riches.
In no unready house give us, O Indra invoked of many, food and drink when hungry.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Slay us not, Indra; do not thou forsake us: steal not away the joys which we delight in.
Rend not our unborn brood, strong Lord of Bounty! our vessels with the life that is within them.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Come to us; they have called thee Soma-lover: here is the pressed juice. Drink thereof for rapture.
Widely-capacious, pour it down within thee, and, invocated, hear us like a Father.

## HYMN CV. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WITHIN the waters runs the Moon, he with the beauteous wings in heaven.
Ye lightnings with your golden wheels, men find not your abiding-place. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Surely men crave and gain their wish. Close to her husband clings the wife.
And, in embraces intertwined, both give and take the bliss of love. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  O never may that light, ye Gods, fall from its station in the sky.
Ne’er fail us one like Soma sweet, the spring of our felicity. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  I ask the last of sacrifice. As envoy he shall tell it forth.
Where is the ancient law divine? Who is its new diffuser now? Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Ye Gods who yonder have your home in the three lucid realms of heaven,
What count ye truth and what untruth? Where is mine ancient call on you? Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  What is your firm support of Law? What Varuṇa's observant eye?
How may we pass the wicked on the path of mighty Aryaman? Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  I am the man who sang of old full many a laud when Soma flowed.
Yet torturing cares consume me as the wolf assails the thirsty deer. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Like rival wives on every side enclosing ribs oppress me sore.
O Śatakratu, biting cares devour me, singer of thy praise, as rats devour the weaver's threads. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Where those seven rays are shining, thence my home and family extend.
This Tṛta Āptya knoweth well, and speaketh out for brotherhood. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  May those five Bulls which stand on high full in the midst of mighty heaven,
Having together swiftly borne my praises to the Gods, return. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  High in the mid ascent of heaven those Birds of beauteous pinion sit.
Back from his path they drive the wolf as he would cross the restless floods. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Firm is this new-wrought hymn of praise, and meet to be told forth, O Gods.
The flowing of the floods is Law, Truth is the Sun's extended light. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Worthy of laud, O Agni, is that kinship which thou hast with Gods.
Here seat thee like a man: most wise, bring thou the Gods for sacrifice. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Here seated, man-like as a priest shall wisest Agni to the Gods
Speed onward our oblations, God among the Gods, intelligent. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Varuṇa makes the holy prayer. To him who finds the path we pray.
He in the heart reveals his thought. Let sacred worship rise anew. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  That pathway of the Sun in heaven, made to be highly glorified,
Is not to be transgressed, O Gods. O mortals, ye behold it not. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Tṛta, when buried in the well, calls on the Gods to succour him.
That call of his Bṛhaspati heard and released him from distress. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  A ruddy wolf beheld me once, as I was faring on my path.
He, like a carpenter whose back is aching crouched and slunk away. Mark this my woe, ye Earth and Heaven.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Through this our song may we, allied with Indra, with all our heroes conquer in the battle.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

## HYMN CVI. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  CALL we for aid on Indra, Mitra, Varuṇa and Agni and the Marut host and Aditi.
Even as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, rescue us from all distress.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Come ye Ādityas for our full prosperity, in conquests of the foe, ye Gods, bring joy to us.
Even as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, rescue us from all distress.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  May the most glorious Fathers aid us, and the two Goddesses, Mothers of the Gods, who strengthen Law.
Even as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, rescue us from all distress.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  To mighty Narāśaṁsa, strengthening his might, to Pūṣan, ruler over men, we pray with hymns.
Even as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, rescue us from all distress.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Bṛhaspati, make us evermore an easy path: we crave what boon thou hast for men in rest and stir.
Like as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, rescue us from all distress.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Sunk in the pit the Ṛṣi Kutsa called, to aid, Indra the Vṛtra-slayer, Lord of power and might.
Even as a chariot from a difficult ravine, bountiful Vasus, rescue us from all distress.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  May Aditi the Goddess guard us with the Gods: may the protecting God keep us with ceaseless care.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

## HYMN CVII. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE sacrifice obtains the Gods’ acceptance: be graciously inclined to us, Ādityas.
Hitherward let your favour be directed, and be our best deliverer from trouble.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  By praise-songs of Aṅgirases exalted, may the Gods come to us with their protection.
May Indra with his powers, Maruts with Maruts, Aditi with Ādityas grant us shelter.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  This laud of ours may Varuṇa and Indra, Aryaman Agni, Savitar find pleasant.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

## HYMN CVIII. Indra-Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  ON that most wondrous car of yours, O Indra and Agni, which looks round on all things living,
Take ye your stand and come to us together, and drink libations of the flowing Soma.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  As vast as all this world is in its compass, deep as it is, with its far-stretching surface,
So let this Soma be, Indra and Agni, made for your drinking till your soul be sated.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  For ye have won a blessed name together: yea, with one aim ye strove, O Vṛtra-slayers.
So Indra-Agni, seated here together, pour in, ye Mighty Ones, the mighty Soma.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Both stand adorned, when fires are duly kindled, spreading the sacred grass, with lifted ladles.
Drawn by strong Soma juice poured forth around us, come, Indra-Agni, and display your favour.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The brave deeds ye have done, Indra and Agni, the forms ye have displayed and mighty exploits,
The ancient and auspicious bonds of friendship,—for sake of these drink of the flowing Soma.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  As first I said when choosing you, in battle we must contend with Asuras for this Soma.
So came ye unto this my true conviction, and drank libations of the flowing Soma.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  If in your dwelling, or with prince or Brahman, ye, Indra-Agni, Holy Ones, rejoice you,
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink libation of the flowing Soma.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  If with, the Yadus, Turvaśas, ye sojourn, with Druhyus, Anus, Pūrus, Indra-Agni!
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink libations of the flowing Soma.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Whether, O Indra-Agni, ye be dwelling in lowest earth, in central, or in highest.
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink libations of the flowing Soma.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Whether, O Indra-Agni, ye be dwelling in highest earth, in central, or in lowest,
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink libations of the flowing Soma.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Whether ye be in heaven, O Indra-Agni, on earth, on mountains, in the herbs, or waters,
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink libations of the flowing Soma.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  If, when the Sun to the mid-heaven hath mounted, ye take delight in food, O Indra-Agni,
Even from thence, ye mighty Lords, come hither, and drink libations of the flowing Soma.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Thus having drunk your fill of our libation, win us all kinds of wealth, Indra and Agni.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

## HYMN CIX. Indra-Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  LONGING for weal I looked around, in spirit, for kinsmen, Indra-Agni, or for brothers.
No providence but yours alone is with me so have I wrought for you this hymn for succour.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  For I have heard that ye give wealth more freely than worthless son-in-law or spouse's brother.
So offering to you this draught of Soma, I make you this new hymn, Indra and Agni,
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Let us not break the cords: with this petition we strive to gain the powers of our forefathers.
For Indra-Agni the strong drops are joyful, for here in the bowl's lap are both the press-stones.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  For you the bowl divine, Indra and Agni, presses the Soma gladly to delight you.
With hands auspicious and fair arms, ye Aśvins, haste, sprinkle it with sweetness in the waters.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  You, I have heard, were mightiest, Indra-Agni, when Vṛtra fell and when the spoil was parted.
Sit at this sacrifice, ye ever active, on the strewn grass, and with the juice delight you.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Surpassing all men where they shout for battle, ye Twain exceed the earth and heaven in greatness.
Greater are ye than rivers and than mountains, O Indra-Agni, and all things beside them.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Bring wealth and give it, ye whose arms wield thunder: Indra and Agni, with your powers protect us.
Now of a truth these be the very sunbeams wherewith our fathers were of old united.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Give, ye who shatter forts, whose hands wield thunder: Indra and Agni, save us in our battles.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

## HYMN CX. Ṛbhus.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE holy work I wrought before is wrought again: my sweetest hymn is sung to celebrate your praise.
Here, O ye Ṛbhus, is this sea for all the Gods: sate you with Soma offered with the hallowing word.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  When, seeking your enjoyment onward from afar, ye, certain of my kinsmen, wandered on your way,
Sons of Sudhanvan, after your long journeying, ye came unto the home of liberal Savitar.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Savitar therefore gave you immortality, because ye came proclaiming him whom naught can hide;
And this the drinking-chalice of the Asura, which till that time was one, ye made to be fourfold.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  When they had served with zeal at sacrifice as priests, they, mortal as they were, gained immortality.
The Ṛbhus, children of Sudhanvan, bright as suns, were in a year's course made associate with prayers.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The Ṛbhus, with a rod measured, as ’twere a field, the single sacrificial chalice. wide of mouth,
Lauded of all who saw, praying for what is best, desiring glorious fame among Immortal Gods.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  As oil in ladles, we through knowledge will present unto the Heroes of the firmament our hymn,—
The Ṛbhus who came near with this great Father's speed, and rose to heaven's high sphere to eat the strengthening food.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Ṛbhu to us is Indra freshest in his might, Ṛbhu with powers and wealth is giver of rich gifts.
Gods, through your favour may we on the happy day quell the attacks of those who pour no offerings forth.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Out of a skin, O Ṛbhus, once ye formed a cow, and brought the mother close unto her calf again.
Sons of Sudhanvan, Heroes, with surpassing skill ye made your aged Parents youthful as before.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Help us with strength where spoil is won, O Indra: joined with the Ṛbhus give us varied bounty.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XCI. — C.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_120">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXI. — CXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
