---
title: "HYMN CLXXXI. — CXC."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_180">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CLXXI. — CLXXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_200">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXCI. — CXCI.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN CLXXXI. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  VASIṢṬHA mastered the Rathantara, took it from radiant Dhātar, Savitar, and Viṣṇu,
Oblation, portion of fourfold oblation, known by the names of Saprathas and Prathas.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  These sages found what lay remote and hidden, the sacrifice's loftiest secret essence.
From radiant Dhātar, Savitar, and Viṣṇu, from Agni, Bharadvāja brought the Brhat.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  They found with mental eyes the earliest Yajus, a pathway to the Gods, that had descended.
From radiant Dhātar, Savitar, and Viṣṇu, from Sūrya did these sages bring the Gharma.

## HYMN CLXXXII. Bṛhaspati.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  BṚHASPATI lead us safely over troubles and turn his evil thought against the sinner;
Repel the curse, and drive away ill-feeling, and give the sacrificer peace and comfort!
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  May Narāśaṁsa aid us at Prayāja: blest be our Anuyāja at invokings.
May he repel the curse, and chase ill-feeling, and give the sacrificer peace and comfort.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  May he whose head is flaming burn the demons, haters of prayer, so that the arrow slay them.
May he repel the curse and chase ill-feeling, and give the sacrificer peace and comfort.

## HYMN CLXXXIII. The Sacrificer, Etc.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I SAW thee meditating in thy spirit what sprang from Fervour and hath thence developed.
Bestowing offspring here, bestowing riches, spread in thine offspring, thou who cravest children.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  I saw thee pondering in thine heart, and praying that in due time thy body might be fruitful.
Come as a youthful woman, rise to meet me: spread in thine offspring, thou who cravest children.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  In plants and herbs, in all existent beings I have deposited the germ of increase.
All progeny on earth have I engendered, and sons in women who will be hereafter.

## HYMN CLXXXIV.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY Viṣṇu form and mould the womb, may Tvaṣṭar duly shape the forms,
Prajāpati infuse the stream, and Dhātar lay the germ for thee.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  O Sinīvālī, set the germ, set thou the germ, Sarasvatī:
May the Twain Gods bestow the germ, the Aśvins crowned with lotuses.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  That which the Aśvins Twain rub forth with the attrition-sticks of gold,—
That germ of thine we invocate, that in the tenth month thou mayst bear.

## HYMN CLXXXV. Aditi.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  GREAT, unassailable must he the heavenly favour of Three Gods,
Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  O'er these, neither at home nor yet abroad or pathways that are Strange,
The evil-minded foe hath power
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Nor over him,. the man on whom the Sons of Aditi bestow Eternal light that he may live.

## HYMN CLXXXVI. Vāyu.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FILLING our hearts with health and joy, may Vāta breathe his balm on us
May he prolong our days of life.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou art our Father, Vāta, yea, thou art a Brother and a friend,
So give us strength that we may live.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The store of Amṛta laid away yonder, O Vāta, in thine home,—
Give us thereof that we may live.

## HYMN CLXXXVII. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  To Agni send I forth my song, to him the Bull of all the folk:
So may he bear us past our foes.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Who from the distance far away shines brilliantly across the wastes:
So may he bear us past our foes.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The Bull with brightly-gleaming flame who utterly consumes the fiends
So may he bear us past our foes.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Who looks on all existing things and comprehends them with his view:
So may he bear us past our foes.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Resplendent Agni, who was born in farthest region of the air:
So may he bear us past our foes.

## HYMN CLXXXVIII. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Now send ye Jātavedas forth, send hitherward the vigorous Steed
To seat him on our sacred grass.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  I raise the lofty eulogy of Jātavedas, raining boons,
With sages for his hero band.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  With flames of Jātavedas which carry oblation to the Gods,
May he promote our sacrifice.

## HYMN CLXXXIX. Sūrya.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THIS spotted Bull hath come, and sat before the Mother in the east,
Advancing to his Father heaven.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Expiring when he draws his breath, she moves along the lucid spheres:
The Bull shines out through all the sky.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Song is bestowed upon the Bird: it rules supreme through thirty realms
Throughout the days at break of morn.

## HYMN CXC. Creation.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FROM Fervour kindled to its height Eternal Law and Truth were born:
Thence was the Night produced, and thence the billowy flood of sea arose.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  From that same billowy flood of sea the Year was afterwards produced,
Ordainer of the days nights, Lord over all who close the eye.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Dhātar, the great Creator, then formed in due order Sun and Moon.
He formed in order Heaven and Earth, the regions of the air, and light.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_180">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CLXXI. — CLXXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_200">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXCI. — CXCI.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
