---
title: "HYMN LXXI. — LXXX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_70">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXI. — LXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_90">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN LXXI. Jnanam

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WHEN-men, Bṛhaspati, giving names to objects, sent out Vāk's first and earliest utterances,
All that was excellent and spotless, treasured within them, was disclosed through their affection.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Where, like men cleansing corn-flour in a cribble, the wise in spirit have created language,
Friends see and recognize the marks of friendship: their speech retains the blessed sign imprinted.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  With sacrifice the trace of Vāk they foIlowed, and found her harbouring within the Ṛṣis.
They brought her, dealt her forth in many places: seven singers make her tones resound in concert.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  One man hath ne’er seen Vāk, and yet he seeth: one man hath hearing but hath never heard her.
But to another hath she shown her beauty as a fond well-dressed woman to her husband.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  One man they call a laggard, dull in friendship: they never urge him on to deeds of valour.
He wanders on in profitless illusion: the Voice he heard yields neither fruit,nor blossom.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  No part in Vāk hath he who hath abandoned his own dear friend who knows the truth of friendship.
Even if he hears her still in vain he listens: naught knows he of the path of righteous action.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Unequal in the quickness of their spirit are friends endowed alike with eyes and hearing.
Some look like tanks that reach the mouth or shoulder, others like pools of water fit to bathe in.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  When friendly Brahmans sacrifice together with mental impulse which the heart hath fashioned,
They leave one far behind through their attainments, and some who count as Brahmans wander elsewhere.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Those men who step not back and move not forward, nor Brahmans nor preparers of libations,
Having attained to Vāk in sinful fashion spin out their thread in ignorance like spinsters.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  All friends are joyful in the friend who cometh in triumph, having conquered in assembly.
He is their blame-averter, food-provider prepared is he and fit for deed of vigour.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  One plies his constant task reciting verses. one sings the holy psalm in Sakvari measures.
One more, the Brahman, tells the lore of being, and one lays down the rules of sacrificing.

## HYMN LXXII. The Gods.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  LET US with tuneful skill proclaim these generations of the Gods,
That one may see them when these hymns are chanted in a future age.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  These Brahmaṇaspati produced with blast and smelting, like a Smith,
Existence, in an earlier age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Existence, in the earliest age of Gods, from Non-existence sprang.
Thereafter were the regions born. This sprang from the Productive Power.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Earth sprang from the Productive Power the regions from the earth were born.
Dakṣa was born of Aditi, and Aditi was Dakṣa's Child.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  For Aditi, O Dakṣa, she who is thy Daughter, was brought forth.
After her were the blessed Gods born sharers of immortal life.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  When ye, O Gods, in yonder deep closeclasping one another stood,
Thence, as of dancers, from your feet a thickening cloud of dust arose.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  When, O ye Gods, like Yatis, ye caused all existing things to grow,
Then ye brought Sūrya forward who was lying hidden in the sea.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Eight are the Sons of Adid who from her body sprang to life.
With seven she went to meet the Gods she cast Martanda far away.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  So with her Seven Sons Aditi went forth to meet the earlier age.
She brought Martanda thitherward to spring to life and die again.

## HYMN LXXIII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THOU wast born mighty for victorious valour, exulting, strongest, full of pride and courage.
There, even there, the Maruts strengthened Indra when. his most rapid Mother stirred the Hero.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  There with fiend's ways e’en Pṛśni was seated: with much laudation they exalted Indra.
As if encompassed by the Mighty-footed, from darkness, near at hand, forth came the Children.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  High are thy feet when on thy way thou goest: the strength thou foundest here hath lent thee vigour.
Thousand hyenas in thy mouth thou holdest. O Indra, mayst thou turn the Aśvins hither.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Speeding at once to sacrifice thou comest for friendship thou art bringing both Nāsatyas.
Thou hadst a thousand treasures in possession. The Aśvins, O thou Hero, gave thee riches.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Glad, for the race that rests on holy Order, with friends who hasten to their goal, hath Indra
With these his magic powers assailed the Dasyu: he cast away the gloomy mists, the darkness.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Two of like name for him didst thou demolish, as Indra striking down the car of Uṣas.
With thy beloved lofty Friends thou camest, and with the assurance of thine heart thou slewest.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  War-loving Namuci thou smotest, robbing the Dāsa of his magic for the Ṛṣi.
For man thou madest ready pleasant pathways, paths leading as it were directly God-ward.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  These names of thine thou hast fulfilled completely: as Lord, thou boldest in thine arm, O Indra.
In thee, through thy great might, the Gods are joyful: the roots of trees hast thou directed upward.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  May the sweet Soma juices make him happy to cast his quoit that lies in depth of waters.
Thou from the udder which o’er earth is fastened hast poured the milk into the kine and herbage.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  When others call him offspring of the Courser, my meaning is that Mighty Power produced him.
He came from Manyu and remained in houses: whence he hath sprung is known to Indra only.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Like birds of beauteous wing the Priyamedhas, Ṛṣis, imploring, have come nigh to Indra:
Dispel the darkness and fill full our vision deliver us as men whom snares entangle.

## HYMN LXXIV. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I AM prepared to laud with song or worship the Noble Ones who are in earth and heaven,
Or Coursers who have triumphed in, the contest, or those who famed, have won the prize with glory.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Their call, the call of Gods, went up to heaven: they kissed the ground with glory-seeking spirit,
There where the Gods look on for happy fortune, and like the kindly heavens bestow their bounties.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  This is the song of those Immortal Beings who long for treasures in their full perfection.
May these, completing prayers and sacrifices, bestow upon us wealth where naught is wanting.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Those living men extolled thy deed, O Indra, those who would fain burst through the stall of cattle,
Fain to milk her who bare but once, great, lofty, whose Sons are many and her streams past number.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Sacivan, win to your assistance Indra who never bends, who overcomes his foemen.
Ṛbhukṣan, Maghavan, the hymn's upholder, who, rich in food, bears man's kind friend, the thunder.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Since he who won of old anew hath triumphed, Indra hath earned his name of Vṛtra-slaycr.
He hath appeared, the mighty Lord of Conquest. What we would have him do let him accomplish.

## HYMN LXXV. The Rivers.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE singer, O ye Waters in Vivasvān's place, shall tell your grandeur forth that is beyond compare.
The Rivers have come forward triply, seven and seven. Sindhu in might surpasses all the streams that flow.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Varuṇa cut the channels for thy forward course, O Sindhu, when thou rannest on to win the race.
Thou speedest o’er precipitous ridges of the earth, when thou art Lord and Leader of these moving floods.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  His roar is lifted up to heaven above the earth: he puts forth endless vigour with a flash of light.
Like floods of rain that fall in thunder from the cloud, so Sindhu rushes on bellowing like a bull.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Like mothers to their calves, like milch kine with their milk, so, Sindhu, unto thee the roaring rivers run.
Thou leadest as a warrior king thine army's wings what time thou comest in the van of these swift streams.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Favour ye this my laud, O Gan!gā, Yamunā, O Sutudri, Paruṣṇī and Sarasvatī:
With Asikni, Vitasta, O Marudvrdha, O Ārjīkīya with Susoma hear my call.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  First with Trstama thou art eager to flow forth, with Rasā, and Susartu, and with Svetya here,
With Kubha; and with these, Sindhu and Mehatnu, thou seekest in thy course Krumu and Gomati.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Flashing and whitely-gleaming in her mightiness, she moves along her ample volumes through the realms,
Most active of the active, Sindhu unrestrained, like to a dappled mare, beautiful, fair to see.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Rich in good steeds is Sindhu, rich in cars and robes, rich in gold, nobly-fashioned, rich in ample wealth.
Blest Silamavati and young Urnavati invest themselves with raiment rich in store of sweets.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Sindhu hath yoked her car, light-rolling, drawn by steeds, and with that car shall she win booty in this fight.
So have I praised its power, mighty and unrestrained, of independent glory, roaring as it runs.

## HYMN LXXVI. Press-stones.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I GRASP at you when power and strength begin to dawn: bedew ye, Indra and the Maruts, Heaven and Earth,
That Day and Night, in every hall of sacrifice, may wait on us and bless us when they first spring forth.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Press the libation out, most excellent of all: the Pressing-stone is grasped like a hand-guided steed.
So let it win the valour that subdues the foe, and the fleet courser's might that speeds to ample wealth.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Juice that this Stone pours out removes defect of ours, as in old time it brought prosperity to man.
At sacrifices they established holy rites on Tvaṣṭar's milk-blent juice bright with the hue of steeds.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Drive ye the treacherous demons far away from us: keep Nirrti afar and banish Penury.
Pour riches forth for us with troops of hero sons, and bear ye up, O Stones, the song that visits Gods.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  To you who are more mighty than the heavens themselves, who, finishing your task with more than Vibhvan's speed,
More rapidly than Vāyu seize the Soma juice, better than Agni give us food, to you I sing.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Stirred be the glorious Stones: let it press out the juice, the Stone with heavenly song that reaches up to heaven,
There where the men draw forth the meath for which they long, sending their voice around in rivalry of speed.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The Stones press out the Soma, swift as car-borne men, and, eager for the spoil, drain forth the sap thereof
To fill the beaker, they exhaust the udder's store, as the men purify oblations with their lips.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Ye, present men, have been most skilful in your work, even ye, O Stones who pressed Soma for Indra's drink.
May all ye have of fair go to the Heavenly Race, and all your treasure to the earthly worshipper.

## HYMN LXXVII. Maruts.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  As with their voice from cloud they sprinkle treasure so are the wise man's liberal sacrifices.
I praise their Company that merits worship as the good Martits' priest to pay them honour.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The youths have wrought their ornaments for glory through many nights,—this noble band of Maruts.
Like stags the Sons of Dyatis have striven onward, the Sons of Aditi grown strong like pillars.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  They who extend beyond the earth and heaven, by their own mass, as from the cloud spreads Sūrya;
Like mighty Heroes covetous of glory, like heavenly gallants who destroy the wicked.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  When ye come nigh, as in the depth of waters, the earth is loosened, as it were, and shaken.
This your all-feedin sacrifice approaches: come all united, fraught, as ’twere with viands.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Ye are like horses fastened to the chariot poles, luminous with your beams, with splendour as at dawn;
Like self-bright falcons, punishers of wicked men, like hovering birds urged forward, scattering rain around.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  When ye come forth, O Maruts, from the distance, from the great treasury of rich possessions,
Knowing, O Vasus, boons that should be granted, even from afar drive back the men who hate us.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  He who, engaged in the rite's final duty brings, as a man, oblation to the Maruts,
Wins him life's wealthy fulness, blest with heroes: he shall be present, too, where Gods drink Soma.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  For these are helps adored at sacrifices, bringing good fortune by their name Ādityas.
Speeding on cars let them protect our praises, delighting in our sacrifice and worship.

## HYMN LXXVIII. Maruts.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Ye by your hymns are like high-thoughted singers, skilful, inviting Gods with sacrifices;
Fair to behold, like Kings, with bright adornment, like spotless gallants, leaders of the people:
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Like fire with flashing flame, breast-bound with chains of gold, like tempest-blasts, self-moving, swift to lend your aid;
As best of all foreknowers, excellent to guide, like Somas, good to guard the man who follows Law.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Shakers of all, like gales of wind they travel, like tongues of burning fires in their effulgence.
Mighty are they as warriors clad in armour, and, like the Fathers' prayers, Most Bounteous Givers.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Like spokes of car-wheels in one nave united, ever victorious like heavenly Heroes,
Shedding their precious balm like youthful suitors, they raise their voice and chant their psalm as singers.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  They who are fleet to travel like the noblest steeds, long to obtain the prize like bounteous charioteers,
Like waters speeding on with their precipitous floods, like omniform Aṅgirases with Sāma-hymns.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Born from the stream, like press-stones are the Princes, for ever like the stones that crush in pieces;
Sons of a beauteous Dame, like playful children, like a great host upon the march with splendour.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Like rays of Dawn, the visitors of sacrifice, they shine with ornaments as eager to be bright.
Like rivers hasting on, glittering with their spears, from far away they measure out the distances.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Gods, send us happiness and make us wealthy, letting us singers prosper, O ye Maruts.
Bethink you of our praise and of our friendship: ye from of old have riches to vouchsafe us.

## HYMN LXXIX. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I HAVE beheld the might of this Great Being. Immortal in the midst of tribes of mortals.
His jaws now open and now shut together: much they devour, insatiately chewing.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  His eyes are turned away, his head is hidden: unsated with his tongue he eats the fuel.
With hands upraised, with reverence in the houses, for him they quickly bring his food together.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Seeking, as ’twere, his Mother's secret bosom, he, like a child, creeps on through wide-spread bushes.
One he finds glowing like hot food made ready, and kissing deep within the earth's recmes.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  This holy Law I tell you, Earth and Heaven: the Infant at his birth dovours his Parents.
No knowledge of the God have I, a mortal. Yea, Agni knoweth best, for he hath wisdom.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  This man who quickly gives him food, who offers his gifts of oil and butter and supports him, -
Him with his thousand eyes he closely looks on: thou showest him thy face from all sides, Agni.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Agni, hast thou committed sin or treason among the Gods? In ignorance I ask thee.
Playing, not playing, he gold-hued and toothless, hath cut his food up as the knife a victim.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  He born in wood hath yoked his horses rushing in all directions, held with reins that glitter.
The well-born friend hath carved his food with Vasus: in all his limbs he hath increased and prospered.

## HYMN LXXX. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  AGNI bestows the fleet prize-winning courser: Agni, the hero famed and firm in duty.
Agni pervades and decks the earth and heaven, and fills the fruitful dame who teems with heroes.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Blest be the wood that feeds the active Agni: within the two great worlds hath Agni entered.
Agni impels a single man to battle, and with him rends in pieces many a foeman.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Agni rejoiced the car of him who praised lim, and from the waters burnt away jarutha.
Agni saved Atri in the fiery cavem, and made Nrmedha rich with troops of children.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Agni hath granted wealth that decks the hero, and sent the sage who wins a thousand cattle.
Agni hath made oblations rise to heaven: to every place are Agni's laws extended.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  With songs of praise the Ṛṣis call on Agni; on Agni, heroes worsted in the foray.
Birds flying in the region call on Agni around a thousand cattle Agni wanders.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Races of human birth pay Agni worship, men who have sprung from Nahus' line adore him.
Stablished in holy oil is Agni's pasture, on the Gandharva path of Law and Order.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The Ṛbhus fabricated prayer for Agni, and we with mighty hymns have called on Agni.
Agni, Most Youthful God, protect the singer: win us by worship, Agni, great possessions.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_70">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXI. — LXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_90">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
