---
title: "HYMN CXI. — CXX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_110">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CI. — CX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_130">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXXI. — CXXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h111"></span>

## HYMN CXI. Ṛbhus.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WORKING with skill they wrought the lightly rolling car: they wrought the Bays who bear Indra and bring great gifts.
The Ṛbhus for their Parents made life young again; and fashioned for the calf a mother by its side.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  For sacrifice make for us active vital power for skill and wisdom food with noble progeny.
Grant to our company this power most excellent, that with a family all-heroic we may dwell.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Do ye, O Ṛbhus, make prosperity for us, prosperity for car, ye Heroes, and for steed.
Grant us prosperity victorious evermore,
conquering foes in battle, strangers or akin.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Indra, the Ṛbhus' Lord, I invocate for aid, the Ṛbhus, Vājas, Maruts to the Soma draught.
Varuṇa, Mitra, both, yea, and the Aśvins Twain: let them speed us to wealth, wisdom, and victory.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  May Ṛbhu send prosperity for battle, may Vāja conquering in the fight protect us.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<span id="h112"></span>

## HYMN CXII. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  To give first thought to them, I worship Heaven and Earth, and Agni, fair bright glow, to hasten their approach.
Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids wherewith in fight ye speed the war-cry to the spoil.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Ample, unfailing, they have mounted as it were an eloquent car that ye may think of us and give.
Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids wherewith ye help our thoughts to further holy acts.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Ye by the might which heavenly nectar giveth you are in supreme dominion Lords of all these folk.
Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids wherewith ye, Heroes, made the barren cow give milk.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The aids wherewith the Wanderer through his offspring's might, or the Two-Mothered Son shows swiftest mid the swift;
Wherewith the sapient one acquired his triple lore,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Wherewith ye raised from waters, prisoned and fast bound, Rebha, and Vandana to look upon the light;
Wherewith ye succoured Kaṇva as he strove to win,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Wherewith ye rescued Antaka when languishing deep in the pit, and Bhujyu with unfailing help.
And comforted Karkandhu, Vayya, in their woe,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Wherewith ye gave Śucanti wealth and happy home, and made the fiery pit friendly for Atri's sake;
Wherewith ye guarded Purukutsa, Pṛśnigu,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvin;, with those aids.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Mighty Ones, with what powers ye gave Parāvṛj aid what time ye made the blind and lame to see and walk;
Wherewith ye set at liberty the swallowed quail,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Wherewith ye quickened the most sweet exhaustless flood, and comforted Vasiṣṭha, ye who ne’er decay;
And to Śrutarya, Kutsa, Narya gave your help,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Wherewith ye helped, in battle of a thousand spoils, Viśpalā seeking booty, powerless to move.
Wherewith ye guarded friendly Vaśa, Aśva's son,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Whereby the cloud, ye Bounteous Givers, shed sweet rain for Dīrghaśravas, for the merchant Auśija,
Wherewith ye helped Kakṣīvān, singer of your praise,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Wherewith ye made Rasā swell full with water-floods, and urged to victory the car without a horse;
Wherewith Triśoka drove forth his recovered cows,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Wherewith ye, compass round the Sun when far away, strengthened Mandhātar in his tasks as lord of lands,
And to sage Bharadvāja gave protecting help,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Wherewith, when Śambara was slain, ye guarded well great Atithigva, Divodāsa, Kaśoju,
And Trasadasyu when the forts were shattered down,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Wherewith ye honoured the great drinker Vamra, and Upastuta and Kali when he gained his wife,
And lent to Vyaśva and to Pṛthi favouring help,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Wherewith, O Heroes, ye vouchsafed deliverance to Śayu, Atri, and to Manu long ago;
Wherewith ye shot your shafts in Syūmaraśmi's cause.—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Wherewith Paṭharvā, in his majesty of form, shone in his course like to a gathered kindled fire;
Wherewith ye helped Śāryāta in the mighty fray,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Wherewith, Aṅgirases! ye triumphed in your heart, and onward went to liberate the flood of milk;
Wherewith ye helped the hero Manu with new strength,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Wherewith ye brought a wife for Vimada to wed, wherewith ye freely gave the ruddy cows away;
Wherewith ye brought the host of kind Gods to Sudās—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Wherewith ye bring great bliss to him who offers gifts, wherewith ye have protected Bhujyu, Adhrigu,
And good and gracious Subharā and Ṛtastup,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Wherewith ye served Kṛśānu where the shafts were shot, and helped the young man's horse to swiftness in the race;
Wherewith ye bring delicious honey to the bees,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  Wherewith ye speed the hero as he fights for kine in hero battle, in the strife for land and sons,
Wherewith ye safely guard his horses and his car,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins with those aids.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  Wherewith ye, Lords of Hundred Powers, helped Kutsa, son of Ārjuni, gave Turvīti and Dabhīti strength,
Favoured Dhvasanti and lent Puruṣanti help,—Come hither unto us, O Aśvins, with those aids.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  Make ye our speech effectual, O ye Aśvins, and this our hymn, ye mighty Wonder-Workers.
In luckless game I call on you for succour: strengthen us also on the field of battle.
<p id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup>  With, undiminished blessings, O ye Aśvins, for evermore both night and day protect us.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<span id="h113"></span>

## HYMN CXIII. Dawn.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  This light is come, amid all lights the fairest; born is the brilliant, far-extending brightness.
Night, sent away for Savitar's uprising, hath yielded up a birth-place for the Morning.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The Fair, the Bright is come with her white offspring; to her the Dark One hath resigned her dwelling.
Akin, immortal, following each other, changing their colours both the heavens move onward.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Common, unending is the Sisters' pathway; taught by the Gods, alternately they travel.
Fair-formed, of different hues and yet one-minded, Night and Dawn clash not, neither do they travel.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Bright leader of glad sounds, our eyes behold her; splendid in hue she hath unclosed the portals.
She, stirring up the world, hath shown us riches: Dawn hath awakened every living creature.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Rich Dawn, she sets afoot the coiled-up sleeper, one for enjoyment, one for wealth or worship,
Those who saw little for extended vision. All living creatures hath the Dawn awakened.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  One to high sway, one to exalted glory, one to pursue his gain, and one his labour:
All to regard their different vocations, all moving creatures hath the Dawn awakened.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  We see her there, the Child of Heaven apparent, the young Maid, flushing in her shining raiment.
Thou sovran Lady of all earthly treasure, flush on us here, auspicious Dawn, this morning.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  She first of endless morns to come hereafter, follows the path of morns that have departed.
Dawn, at her rising, urges forth the living him who is dead she wakes not from his slumber.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  As thou, Dawn, hast caused Agni to be kindled, and with the Sun's eye hast revealed creation.
And hast awakened men to offer worship, thou hast performed, for Gods, a noble service.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  How long a time, and they shall be together,—Dawns that have shone and Dawns to shine hereafter?
She yearns for former Dawns with eager longing, and goes forth gladly shining with the others.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Gone are the men who in the days before us looked on the rising of the earlier Morning.
We, we the living, now behold her brightness and they come nigh who shall hereafter see her.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Foe-chaser, born of Law, the Law's protectress, joy-giver, waker of all pleasant voices,
Auspicious, bringing food for Gods’ enjoyment, shine on us here, most bright, O Dawn, this morning.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  From days eternal hath Dawn shone, the Goddess, and shows this light to-day, endowed with riches.
So will she shine on days to come immortal she moves on in her own strength, undecaying.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  In the sky's borders hath she shone in splendour: the Goddess hath thrown off the veil of darkness.
Awakening the world with purple horses, on her well-harnessed chariot Dawn approaches.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Bringing all life-sustaining blessings with her, showing herself she sends forth brilliant lustre.
Last of the countless mornings that have vanished, first of bright morns to come hath Dawn arisen.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Arise! the breath, the life, again hath reached us: darkness hath passed away and light approacheth.
She for the Sun hath left a path to travel we have arrived where men prolong existence.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Singing the praises of refulgent Mornings with his hymn's web the priest, the poet rises.
Shine then to-day, rich Maid, on him who lauds thee, shine down on us the gift of life and offspring.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Dawns giving sons all heroes, kine and horses, shining upon the man who brings oblations,—
These let the Soma-presser gain when ending his glad songs louder than the voice of Vāyu.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Mother of Gods, Aditi's form of glory, ensign of sacrifice, shine forth exalted.
Rise up, bestowing praise on our devotion all-bounteous, make us chief among the people.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Whatever splendid wealth the Dawns bring with them to bless the man who offers praise and worship,
Even that may Mitra, Varuṇa vouchsafe us, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<span id="h114"></span>

## HYMN CXIV. Rudra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  To the strong Rudra bring we these our songs of praise, to him the Lord of Heroes with the braided hair,
That it be well with all our cattle and our men, that in this village all be healthy and well-fed.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Be gracious unto us, O Rudra, bring us joy: thee, Lord of Heroes, thee with reverence will we serve.
Whatever health and strength our father Manu won by sacrifice may we, under thy guidance, gain.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  By worship of the Gods may we, O Bounteous One, O Rudra, gain thy grace, Ruler of valiant men.
Come to our families, bringing them bliss: may we, whose heroes are uninjured, bring thee sacred gifts,
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Hither we call for aid the wise, the wanderer, impetuous Rudra, perfecter of sacrifice.
May he repel from us the anger of the Gods: verily we desire his favourable grace.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Him with the braided hair we call with reverence down, the wild-boar of the sky, the red, the dazzling shape.
May he, his hand filled full of sovran medicines, grant us protection, shelter, and a home secure.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  To him the Maruts’ Father is this hymn addressed, to strengthen Rudra's might, a song more sweet than sweet.
Grant us, Immortal One, the food which mortals eat: be gracious unto me, my seed, my progeny.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  O Rudra, harm not either great or small of us, harm not the growing boy, harm not the full-grown man.
Slay not a sire among us, slay no mother here, and to our own dear bodies, Rudra, do not harm.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Harm us not, Rudra, in our seed and progeny, harm us not in the living, nor in cows or steeds,
Slay not our heroes in the fury of thy wrath. Bringing oblations evermore we call to thee.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Even as a herdsman I have brought thee hymns of praise: O Father of the Maruts, give us happiness,
Blessed is thy most favouring benevolence, so, verily, do we desire thy saving help.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Far be thy dart that killeth men or cattle: thy bliss be with us, O thou Lord of Heroes.
Be gracious unto us, O God, and bless us, and then vouchsafe us doubly-strong protection.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  We, seeking help, have spoken and adored him: may Rudra, girt by Maruts, hear our calling.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<span id="h115"></span>

## HYMN CXV. Sūrya.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE brilliant presence of the Gods hath risen, the eye of Mitra, Varuṇa and Agni.
The soul of all that moveth not or moveth, the Sun hath filled the air and earth and heaven.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Like as a young man followeth a maiden, so doth the Sun the Dawn, refulgent Goddess:
Where pious men extend their generations, before the Auspicious One for happy fortune.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Auspicious are the Sun's Bay-coloured Horses, bright, changing hues, meet for our shouts of triumph.
Bearing our prayers, the sky's ridge have they mounted, and in a moment speed round earth and heaven.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  This is the Godhead, this might of Sūrya: he hath withdrawn what spread o’er work unfinished.
When he hath loosed his Horses from their station, straight over all Night spreadeth out her garment.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  In the sky's lap the Sun this form assumeth that Varuṇa and Mitra may behold it.
His Bay Steeds well maintain his power eternal, at one time bright and darksome at another.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  This day, O Gods, while Sūrya is ascending, deliver us from trouble and dishonour.
This prayer of ours may Varuṇa grant, and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<span id="h116"></span>

## HYMN CXVI. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I TRIM like grass my song for the Nāsatyas and send their lauds forth as the wind drives rain-clouds,
Who, in a chariot rapid as an arrow, brought to the youthful Vimada a consort.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Borne on by rapid steeds of mighty pinion, or proudly trusting in the Gods’ incitements.
That stallion ass of yours won, O Nāsatyas, that thousand in the race, in Yama's contest.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Yea, Aśvins, as a dead man leaves his riches, Tugra left Bhujyu in the cloud of waters.
Ye brought him back in animated vessels, traversing air, unwetted by the billows.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Bhujyu ye bore with winged things, Nāsatyas, which for three nights, three days full swiftly travelled,
To the sea's farther shore, the strand of ocean, in three cars, hundred-footed, with six horses.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Ye wrought that hero exploit in the ocean which giveth no support, or hold or station,
What time ye carried Bhujyu to his dwelling, borne in a ship with hundred oars, O Aśvins.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The white horse which of old ye gave Aghāśva, Aśvins, a gift to be his wealth for ever,—
Still to be praised is that your glorious present, still to be famed is the brave horse of Pedu.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  O Heroes, ye gave wisdom to Kakṣīvān who sprang from Pajra's line, who sang your praises.
Ye poured forth from the hoof of your strong charger a hundred jars of wine as from a strainer.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Ye warded off with cold the fire's fierce burning; food very rich in nourishment ye furnished.
Atri, cast downward in the cavern, Aśvins ye brought, with all his people, forth to comfort.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Ye lifted up the well, O ye Nāsatyas, and set the base on high to open downward.
Streams flowed for folk of Gotama who thirsted, like rain to bring forth thousandfold abundance.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Ye from the old Cyavāna, O Nāsatyas, stripped, as ’twere mail, the skin upon
his body,
Lengthened his life when all had left him helpless, Dasras! and made him lord of youthful maidens.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Worthy of praise and worth the winning, Heroes, is that your favouring succour O Nāsatyas,
What time ye, knowing well his case, delivered Vandana from the pit like hidden treasure.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  That mighty deed of yours, for gain, O Heroes, as thunder heraldeth the rain, I publish,
When, by the horse's head, Atharvan's offspring Dadhyac made known to you the Soma's sweetness.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  In the great rite the wise dame called, Nāsatyas, you, Lords of many treasures, to assist her.
Ye heard the weakling's wife, as ’twere an order, and gave to her a son Hiraṇyahasta.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Ye from the wolf's jaws, as ye stood together, set free the quail, O Heroes, O Nāsatyas.
Ye, Lords of many treasures, gave the poet his perfect vision as he mourned his trouble.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  When in the time of night, in Khela's battle, a leg was severed like a wild bird's pinion,
Straight ye gave Viśpalā a leg of iron that she might move what time the conflict opened.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  His father robbed Ṛjrāśva of his eyesight who for the she-wolf slew a hundred wethers.
Ye gave him eyes, Nāsatyas, Wonder-Workers, Physicians, that he saw with sight uninjured.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  The Daughter of the Sun your car ascended, first reaching as it were the goal with coursers.
All Deities within their hearts assented, and ye, Nāsatyas, are close linked with glory.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  When to his house ye came, to Divodāsa, hasting to Bharadvāja, O ye Aśvins,
The car that came with you brought splendid riches: a porpoise and a bull were yoked together.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Ye, bringing wealth with rule, and life with offspring, life rich in noble heroes; O Nāsatyas,
Accordant came with strength to Jahnu's children who offered you thrice every day your portion.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Ye bore away at night by easy pathways Jāhuṣa compassed round on every quarter,
And, with your car that cleaves the toe asunder, Nāsatyas never decaying! rent the mountains.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  One morn ye strengthened Vaśa for the battle, to gather spoils that might be told in thousands.
With Indra joined ye drove away misfortunes, yea foes of Pṛthuśravas, O ye mighty.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  From the deep well ye raised on high the water, so that Ṛcatka's son, Sara, should drink it;
And with your might, to help the weary Śayu, ye made the barren cow yield milk, Nāsatyas.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  To Viśvaka, Nāsatyas! son of Kṛṣṇa, the righteous man who sought your aid and praised you,
Ye with your powers restored, like some lost creature, his son Viṣṇāpū for his eyes to look on.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  Aśvins, ye raised, like Soma in a ladle Rebha, who for ten days and ten nights, fettered.
Had lain in cruel bonds, immersed and wounded, suffering sore affliction, in the waters.
<p id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup>  1 have declared your wondrous deeds, O Aśvins: may this be mine, and many kine and heroes.
May I, enjoying lengthened life, still seeing, enter old age as ’twere the house I live in.

<span id="h117"></span>

## HYMN CXVII. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  AŚVINS, your ancient priest invites you hither to gladden you with draughts of meath of Soma.
Our gift is on the grass, our song apportioned: with food and strength come hither, O Nāsatyas.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  That car of yours, swifter than thought, O Aśvins, which drawn by brave steeds cometh to the people,
Whereon ye seek the dwelling of the pious,—come ye thereon to our abode, O Heroes.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Ye freed sage Atri, whom the Five Tribes honoured, from the strait pit, ye Heroes with his people,
Baffling the guiles of the malignant Dasyu, repelling them, ye Mighty in succession.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Rebha the sage, ye mighty Heroes, Aśvins! whom, like a horse, vile men had sunk in water,—
Him, wounded, with your wondrous power ye rescued: your exploits of old time endure for ever.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Ye brought forth Vandana, ye Wonder-Workers, for triumph, like fair gold that hath been buried,
Like one who slumbered in destruction's bosom, or like the Sun when dwelling in the darkness.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Kakṣīvān, Pajra's son, must laud that exploit of yours, Nāsatyas, Heroes, ye who wander!
When from the hoof of your strong horse ye showered a hundred jars of honey for the people.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  To Kṛṣṇa's son, to Viśvaka who praised you, O Heroes, ye restored his son Viṣṇāpū.
To Ghoṣā, living in her father's dwelling, stricken in years, ye gave a husband, Aśvins.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Ruṣatī, of the mighty people, Aśvins, ye gave to Śyāva of the line of Kaṇva.
This deed of yours, ye Strong Ones should be published, that ye gave glory to the son of Nṛṣad.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  O Aśvins, wearing many forms at pleasure, on Pedu ye bestowed a fleet-foot courser,
Strong, winner of a thousand spoils, resistless the serpent slayer, glorious, triumphant.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  These glorious things are yours, ye Bounteous Givers; prayer, praise in both worlds are your habitation.
O Aśvins, when the sons of Pajra call you, send strength with nourishment to him who knoweth.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Hymned with the reverence of a son, O Aśvins ye Swift Ones giving booty to the singer,
Glorified by Agastya with devotion, established Viśpalā again, Nāsatyas.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Ye Sons of Heaven, ye Mighty, whither went ye, sought ye, for his fair praise the home of Kāvya.
When, like a pitcher full of gold, O Aśvins, on the tenth day ye lifted up the buried?
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Ye with the aid of your great powers, O Aśvins, restored to youth the ancient man Cyavāna.
The Daughter of the Sun with all her glory, O ye Nāsatyas, chose your car to bear her.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Ye, ever-youthful Ones, again remembered Tugra, according to your ancient manner:
With horses brown of hue that flew with swift wings ye brought back Bhujyu from the sea of billows.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  The son of Tugra had invoked you, Aśvins; borne on he went uninjured through the ocean.
Ye with your chariot swift as thought, well-harnessed, carried him off, O Mighty Ones, to safety.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  The quail had invocated you, O Aśvins, when from the wolf's devouring jaws ye freed her.
With conquering car ye cleft the mountain's ridges: the offspring of Viśvāc ye killed with poison.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  He whom for furnishing a hundred wethers to the she-wolf, his wicked father blinded,—
To him, Ṛjrāśva, gave ye eyes, O Aśvins; light to the blind ye sent for perfect vision.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  To bring the blind man joy thus cried the she-wolf: O Aśvins, O ye Mighty Ones, O Heroes,
For me Ṛjrāśva, like a youthful lover, hath. cut piecemeal one and a hundred wethers.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Great and weal-giving is your aid, O Aśvins, ye, objects of all thought, made whole the cripple.
Purandhi also for this cause invoked you, and ye, O mighty, came to her with succours.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Ye, Wonder-Workers, filled with milk for Śayu the milkless cow, emaciated, barren;
And by your powers the child of Purumitra ye brought to Vimada to be his consort.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Ploughing and sowing barley, O ye Aśvins, milking out food for men, ye Wonder-Workers,
Blasting away the Dasyu with your trumpet, ye gave far-spreading light unto the Ārya.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  Ye brought the horse's head, Aśvins, and gave it unto Dadhyac the offspring of Atharvan.
True, he revealed to you, O Wonder-Workers, sweet Soma, Tvaṣṭar's secret, as your girdle.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  O Sages, evermore I crave your favour: be gracious unto all my prayers, O Aśvins.
Grant me, Nāsatyas, riches in abundance, wealth famous and accompanied with children.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  With liberal bounty to the weakling's consorts ye, Heroes, gave a son Hiraṇyahasta;
And Śyāva, cut into three several pieces, ye brought to life again, O bounteous Aśvins.
<p id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup>  These your heroic exploits, O ye Aśvins, done in the days. of old, have men related.
May we, addressing prayer to you, ye Mighty, speak with brave sons about us to the synod.

<span id="h118"></span>

## HYMN CXVIII. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FLYING, with falcons, may your chariot, Aśvins, most gracious, bringing friendly
help, come hither,—
Your chariot, swifter than the mind of mortal, fleet as the wind, three-seated O ye Mighty.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Come to us with your chariot triple seated, three-wheeled, of triple form, that rolleth lightly.
Fill full our cows, give mettle to our horses, and make each hero son grow strong, O Aśvins.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  With your well-rolling car, descending swiftly, hear this the press-stone's song, ye Wonder-Workers.
How then have ancient sages said, O Aśvins, that ye most swiftly come to stay affliction?
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  O Aśvins, let your falcons bear you hither, yoked to your chariot, swift, with flying pinions,
Which, ever active, like the airy eagles, carry you, O Nāsatyas, to the banquet.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The youthful Daughter of the Sun, delighting in you, ascended there your chariot, Heroes.
Borne on their swift wings let your beauteous horses, your birds of ruddy hue, convey you near us.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Ye raised up Vandana, strong Wonder-Workers! with great might, and with power ye rescued Rebha.
From out the sea ye saved the son of Tugra, and gave his youth again unto Cyavāna.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  To Atri, cast down to the fire that scorched him, ye gave, O Aśvins, strengthening food and favour.
Accepting his fair praises with approval, ye gave his eyes again to blinded Kaṇva.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  For ancient Śayu in his sore affliction ye caused his cow to swell with milk, O Aśvins.
The quail from her great misery ye delivered, and a new leg for Viśpalā provided.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  A white horse, Aśvins, ye bestowed on Pedu, a serpent-slaying steed sent down by Indra,
Loud-neighing, conquering the foe, high-mettled, firm-limbed and vigorous, winning thousand treasures.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Such as ye are, O nobly born, O Heroes, we in our trouble call on you for succour.
Accepting these our songs, for our wellbeing come to us on your chariot treasure-laden.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Come unto us combined in love, Nāsatyas come with the fresh swift vigour of the falcon.
Bearing oblations I invoke you, Aśvins, at the first break of everlasting morning.

<span id="h119"></span>

## HYMN CXIX. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  HITHER, that I may live, I call unto the feast your wondrous car, thought-swift, borne on by rapid steeds.
With thousand banners, hundred treasures, pouring gifts, promptly obedient, bestowing ample room.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Even as it moveth near my hymn is lifted up, and all the regions come together to sing praise.
I sweeten the oblations; now the helpers come. Ūrjānī hath, O Aśvins, mounted on your car.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  When striving man with man for glory they have met, brisk, measureless, eager for victory in fight,
Then verily your car is seen upon the slope when ye, O Aśvins, bring some choice boon to the prince.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Ye came to Bhujyu while he struggled in the flood, with flying birds, self-yoked, ye bore him to his sires.
Ye went to the far-distant home, O Mighty Ones; and famed is your great aid to Divodāsa given.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Aśvins, the car which you had yoked for glorious show your own two voices urged directed to its goal.
Then she who came for friendship, Maid of noble birth, elected you as Husbands, you to be her Lords.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Rebha ye saved from tyranny; for Atri's sake ye quenched with cold the fiery pit that compassed him.
Ye made the cow of Śayu stream refreshing milk, and Vandana was holpen to extended life.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Doers of marvels, skilful workers, ye restored Vandana, like a car, worn out with length of days.
From earth ye brought the sage to life in wondrous mode; be your great deeds done here for him who honours you.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Ye went to him who mourned in a far distant place, him who was left forlorn by treachery of his sire.
Rich with the light of heaven was then the help ye gave, and marvellous your succour when ye stood by him.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  To you in praise of sweetness sang the honey-bee: Auśija calleth you in Soma's rapturous joy.
Ye drew unto yourselves the spirit of Dadhyac, and then the horse's head uttered his words to you.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  A horse did ye provide for Pedu, excellent, white, O ye Aśvins, conqueror of combatants,
Invincible in war by arrows, seeking heaven worthy of fame, like Indra, vanquisher of men.

<span id="h120"></span>

## HYMN CXX. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  AŚVINS, what praise may win your grace? Who may be pleasing to you both?
How shall the ignorant worship you?
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Here let the ignorant ask the means of you who know—for none beside you knoweth aught—
Not of a spiritless mortal man.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Such as ye: are, all-wise, we call you. Ye wise, declare to us this day accepted prayer.
Loving you well your servant lauds you.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Simply, ye Mighty Ones, I ask the Gods of that wondrous oblation hallowed by the mystic word.
Save us from what is stronger, fiercer than ourselves.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Forth go the hymn that shone in Ghoṣā Bhṛgu's like, the song wherewith the son of Pajra worships you,
Like some wise minister.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Hear ye the song of him who hastens speedily. O Aśvins, I am he who sang your praise.
Hither, ye Lords of Splendour, hither turn your eyes.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  For ye were ever nigh to deal forth ample wealth, to give the wealth that ye had gathered up.
As such, ye Vasus, guard us well, and keep us safely from the wicked wolf.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Give us not up to any man who hateth us, nor let our milch-cows stray, whose udders give us food,
Far from our homes without their calves.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  May they who love you gain you for their Friends. Prepare ye us for opulence with strengthening food,
Prepare us for the food that floweth from our cows
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  I have obtained the horseless car of Aśvins rich in sacrifice,
And I am well content therewith.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  May it convey me evermore: may the light chariot pass from men
To men unto the Soma draught.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  It holdeth slumber in contempt. and the rich who enjoyeth not:
Both vanish quickly and are lost.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_110">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CI. — CX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_130">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXXI. — CXXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
