---
title: "HYMN LXI. — LXX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_60">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LI. —  LX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_80">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN LXXI. — LXXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h61"></span>

## HYMN LXI. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE welcome speaker in the storm of battle uttered with might this prayer to win the Aśvins,
When the most liberal God, for Paktha, rescued his parents, and assailed the seven Hotras.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Cyavāna, purposing deceptive presents, with all ingredients, made the altar ready.
Most sweet-voiced Tūrvayāṇa poured oblations like floods of widely fertilizing water.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  To his oblations, swift as thought, ye hurried, and welcomed eagerly the prayers he offered.
With arrows in his hand the Very Mighty forced from him all obedience of a servant.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  I call on you the Sons of Dyaus, the Aśvins, that a dark cow to my red kine be added.
Enjoy my sacrifice, come to my viands contented, not deceiving expectation. ’
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Membrum suum virile, quod vrotentum fuerat, mas ille retraxit. Rursus illud quod in juvenem filiam sublatum fuerat, non aggressurus, ad se rerahit.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Quum jam in medio connessu, semiperfecto opere, amorem in puellam pater impleverat, ambo discedentes seminis paulum in terrae superficiem sacrorum sede effusum emiserunt.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Quum pater suam nilam adiverat, cum eā congressus suum semen supra viram effudit. Tum Dii benigni precem (brahma) progenuerunt, et Vastoshpatim, legum sacrarum custodem, formaverunt.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Ille tauro similis spumam in certamine jactavit, tunc discedens pusillaximis huc profectus est. Quasi dextro pede claudus processit, “inutiles fuerunt illi mei complexus,” ita locutus.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  ‘The fire, burning the people, does not approach quickly (by day): the naked (_Rākṣasas_ approach) not Agni by night; the giver of fuel, and the giver of food, he, the upholder (of the rite), is born, overcoming enemies by his might.’
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Uttering praise to suit the rite Navagvas came speedily to win the damsel's friendship.
They who approached the twice-strong stable's keeper, meedless would milk the rocks that naught had shaken.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Swift was new friendship with the maid they quickly accepted it as genuine seed and bounty.
Milk which the cow Sabardughā had yielded was the bright heritage which to thee they offered.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  When afterwards they woke and missed the cattle, the speaker thus in joyful mood addressed them:
Matchless are singers through the Vasu's nature; he bringeth them all food and all possessions.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  His followers then who dwelt in sundry places came and desired too slay the son of Nṛṣad.
Resistless foe, be found the hidden treasure of Śuṣṇa multiplied in numerous offspring.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Thou, called Effulgence, in whose threefold dwelling, as in the light of heaven, the Gods are sitting,
Thou who art called Agni or Jātavedas, Priest, hear us, guileless Priest of holy worship.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  And, Indra, bring, that I may laud and serve them, those Two resplendent glorious Nāsatyas,
Blithe, bounteous, man-like, to the sacrificer, honoured among our men with offered viands.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  This King is praised and honoured as Ordainer: himself the bridge, the Sage speeds o’er the waters.
He hath stirred up Kakṣīvān, stirred up Agni, as the steed's swift wheel drives the felly onward.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Vaitarana, doubly kinsman, sacrificer, shall milk the cow who ne’er hath calved, Sabardhu,
When I encompass Varuṇa and Mitra with lauds, and Aryaman in safest shelter.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Their kin, the Prince in heaven, thy nearest kinsman, turning his thought to thee thus speaks in kindness:
This is our highest bond: I am his offspring. How many others came ere I succeeded?
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Here is my kinship, here the place I dwell in: these are my Gods; I in full strength am present.
Twice-born am I, the first-born Son of Order: the Cow milked this when first she had her being.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  So mid these tribes he rests, the friendly envoy, borne on two paths, refulgent Lord of fuel.
When, like a line, the Babe springs up erectly, his Mother straight hath borne him strong to bless us.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Then went the milch-kine forth to please the damsel, and for the good of every man that liveth.
Hear us, O wealthy Lord; begin our worship. Thou hast grown mighty through Āśvaghna's virtues.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  And take thou notice of us also, Indra, for ample riches, King whose arm wields thunder!
Protect our wealthy nobles, guard our princes unmenaced near thee, Lord of Tawny Coursers.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  When he goes forth, ye Pair of Kings, for booty, speeding to war and praise to please the singer,—
I was the dearest sage of those about him,—let him lead these away and bring them safely.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  Now for this noble man's support and comfort, singing with easy voice we thus implore thee:
Impetuous be his son and fleet his courser: and may I be his priest to win him glory.
<p id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup>  If, for our strength, the priest with adoration to win your friendship made the laud accepted,
That laud shall be a branching road to virtue for every one to whom the songs are suited.
<p id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup>  Glorified thus, with holy hymns and homage:—Of noble race, with Waters, God-attended—
May he enrich us for our prayers and praises: now can the cow be milked; the path is open.
<p id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup>  Be to us, then, ye Gods who merit worship, be ye of one accord our strong protection,
Who went on various ways and brought us vigour, ye who are undeceivable explorers.

<span id="h62"></span>

## HYMN LXII. Viśvedevas, Etc.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  YE, who, adorned with guerdon through the sacrifice, have won you Indra's friendship and eternal life,
Even to you be happiness, Aṅgirases. Welcome the son of Manu, ye who are most wise.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The Fathers, who drave forth the wealth in cattle, have in the year's courses cleft Vala by Eternal Law:
A lengthened life be yours, O ye Aṅgirases. Welcome the son of Manu, ye who are most wise.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Ye raised the Sun to heaven by everlasting Law, and spread broad earth, the Mother, out on every side.
Fair wealth of progeny be yours, Aṅgirases. Welcome the son of Manu, ye who are most wise.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  This kinsman in your dwellingplace speaks pleasant words: give car to this, ye Ṛṣis, children of the Gods.
High Brahman dignity be yours, Aṅgirases. Welcome the son of Manu, ye who are most wise.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Distinguished by their varied form, these Ṛṣis have been deeply moved.
These are the sons of Aṅgirases: from Agni have they sprung to life.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Distinguished by their varied form, they sprang from Agni, from the sky.
Navagva and Daśagva, noblest Aṅgiras, he giveth bounty with the Gods.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  With Indra for associate the priests have cleared the stable full of steeds and kine,
Giving to me a thousand with their eightmarked cars, they gained renown among the Gods.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  May this man's sons be multiplied; like springing corn may Manu grow,
Who gives at once in bounteous gift a thousand kine, a hundred steeds.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  No one attains to him, as though a man would grasp the heights of heaven.
Savarnya's sacrificial meed hath broadened like an ample flood.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Yadu and Turva, too, have given two Dāsas, well-disposed, to serve,
Together with great store of kine.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Blest be the hamlet's chief, most liberal Manu, and may his bounty rival that of Sūrya.
May the God let Ssvarni's life be leng
thened, with whom, unwearied, we have lived and prospered.

<span id="h63"></span>

## HYMN LXIII. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY they who would assume kinship from far away, Vivasvān's generations, dearly loved of men,
Even the Gods who sit upon the sacred grass of Nahuṣa's son Yayāti, bless and comfort us.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  For worthy of obeisance, Gods, are all your names, worthy of adoration and of sacrifice.
Ye who were born from waters, and from Aditi, and from the earth, do ye here listen to my call.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  I will rejoice in these Ādityas for my weal, for whom the Mother pours forth water rich in balm,
And Dyaus the Infinite, firm as a rock, sweet milk,—Gods active, strong through lauds, whose might the Bull upholds.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Looking on men, ne’er slumbering, they by their deserts attained as Gods to lofty immortality.
Borne on refulgent cars, sinless, with serpents' powers, they robe them, for our welfare, in the height of heaven.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Great Kings who bless us, who have come to sacrifice, who, ne’er assailed, have set their mansion in the sky,—
These I invite with adoration and with hymns, mighty Ādityas, Aditi, for happiness.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Who offereth to you the laud that ye accept, O ye All-Gods of Manu, many as ye are?
Who, Mighty Ones, will prepare for you the sacrifice to bear us over trouble to felicity?
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Ye to whom Manu, by seven priests, with kindled fire, offered the first oblation with his heart and soul,
Vouchsafe us, ye Ādityas, sheitcr free from fear, and make us good and easy paths to happiness.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Wise Deities, who have dominion o’er the world, ye thinkers over all that moves not and that moves,
Save us from uncommitted and committed sin, preserve us from all sin to-day for happiness.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  In battles we invoke Indra still swift to hear, and all the holy Host of Heaven who banish grief,
Agni, Mitra, and Varuṇa that we may gain, Dyays, Bhaga, Maruts, Prthivi for happiness:
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Mightily-saving Earth, incomparable Heaven the good guide Aditi who gives secure defence
The well-oared heavenly Ship that lets no waters in, free from defect, will we ascend for happiness.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Bless us, all Holy Ones, that we may have your help, guard and protect us from malignant injury.
With fruitful invocation may we call on you, Gods, who give ear to us for grace, for happiness.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Keep all disease afar and sordid sacrifice, keep off the wicked man's malicious enmity.
Keep far away from us all hatred, O ye Gods, and give us ample shelter for our happiness.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Untouched by any evil, every mortal thrives, and, following the Law, spreads in his progeny.
Whom ye with your good guidance, O Ādityas, lead safely through all his pain and grief to happiness.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  That which ye guard and grace in battle, O ye Gods, ye Maruts, where the prize is wealth, where heroes win,
That conquering Car, O Indra, that sets forth at dawn, that never breaks, may we ascend for happiness.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Vouchsafe us blessing in our paths and desert tracts, blessing in waters and in battle, for the light;
Blessing upon the wombs that bring male children forth, and blessing, O ye Maruts, for the gain of wealth.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  The noblest Svasti with abundant riches, who comes to what is good by distant pathway,—
May she at home and far away preserve us, and dwell with us under the Gods’ protection
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Thus hatb the thoughtful sage, the son of Plati, praised you, O Aditi and all Ādityas,
Men are made rich by those who are Immortal: the Heavenly Folk have been extolled by Gaya.

<span id="h64"></span>

## HYMN LXIV. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WHAT God, of those who hear, is he whose well-praised name we may record in this our sacrifice; and how?
Who will be gracious? Who of many give us bliss? Who out of all the Host will come to lend us aid?
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The will and thoughts within my breast exert their power: they yearn with love, and fly to all the regions round.
None other comforter is found save only these: my longings and my hopes are fixt upon the Gods.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  To Narāśaṁsa and to Pūṣan I sing forth, unconcealable Agni kindied by the Gods.
To Sun and Moon, two Moons, to Yama in the heaven, to Trita, Vāta, Dawn, Night, and the Atvins Twain.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  How is the Sage extolled whom the loud singers praise? What voice, what hymn is used to laud Bṛhaspati?
May Aja-Ekapād with Rkvans swift to hear, and Ahi of the Deep listen unto our call.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Aditi, to the birth of Dakṣa and the vow thou summonest the Kings Mitra and Varuṇa.
With course unchecked, with many chariots Aryaman comes with the seven priests to tribes of varied sort.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  May all those vigorous Coursers listen to our cry, hearers of invocation, speeding on their way;
Winners of thousands where the priestly meed is won, who gather of themselves great wealth in every race.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Bring ye Purandbi, bring Vāyu who yokes his steeds, for friendship bring ye Pūṣan with your songs of praise:
They with one mind, one thought attend the sacrifice, urged by the favouring aid of Savitar the God.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The thrice-seven wandering Rivers, yea, the mighty floods, the forest trees, the mountains, Agni to our aid,
Kṛśānu, Tisya, archers to our gathering-place, and Rudra strong amid the Rudras we invoke.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Let the great Streams come hither with their mighty help, Sindhu, Sarasvatī, and Sarayu with waves.
Ye Goddess Floods, ye Mothers, animating all, promise us water rich in fatness and in balm.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  And let Brhaddiva, the Mother, hear our call, and Tvaṣṭar, Father, with the Goddesses and Dames.
Ṛbhukṣan, Vāja, Bhaga, and Rathaspati, and the sweet speech of him who labours guard us well!
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Pleasant to look on as a dwelling rich in food is the blest favour of the Maruts, Rudra's Sons.
May we be famed among the folk for wealth in kine. and ever come to you, ye Gods, with sacred food.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  The thought which ye, O Maruts, Indra and ye Gods have given to me, and ye, Mitra and Varuṇa,—
Cause this to grow and swell like a milchcow with milk. Will ye not bear away my songs upon your car?
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  O Maruts, do ye never, never recollect and call again to mind this our relationship?
When next we meet together at the central point, even there shall Aditi confirm our brotherhood.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  The Mothers, Heaven and Earth, those mighty Goddesses, worthy of sacrifice, ecune with the race of Gods.
These Two with their support uphold both Gods and men, and with the Fathers pour the copious genial stream.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  This invocation wins all good that we desire Bṛhaspati, highly-praised Aramati, are here,
Even where the stone that presses meath rings loudly out, and where the sages make their voices heard with hymns.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Thus hath the sage, skilled in loud singers' duties, desiring riches, yearning after treasure,
Gaya, the priestly singer, with his praises and hymns contented the Celestial people.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Thus hath the thoughtful sage the son of Plati, praised you, O Aaiti and all Ādityas.
Men are made rich by those who are Immortal: the Heavenly Folk have been extolled by Gaya.

<span id="h65"></span>

## HYMN LXV. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY Agni, Indra, Mitra, Varuṇa consent, Aryaman, Vāyu, Pūṣan, and Sarasvatī,
Ādityas, Maruts, Viṣṇu, Soma, lofty Sky, Rudra and Aditi, and Brahmaṇaspati.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Indra and Agni, Hero-lords when Vṛtra fell, dwelling together, speeding emulously on,
And Soma blent with oil, putting his greatness forth, have with their power filled full the mighty firmament.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Skilled in the Law I lift the hymn of praise to these, Law-strengtheners, unassailed, and great in majesty.
These in their wondrous bounty send the watery sea: may they as kindly Friends send gifts to make us great.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  They with their might have stayed Heaven, Earth, and Prthivi, the Lord of Light, the firmament, -the lustrous spheres.
Even as fleet-foot steeds who make their masters glad, the princely Gods are praised, most bountiful to man.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Bring gifts to Mitra and to Varuṇa who, Lords of all, in spirit never fail the worshipper,
Whose statute shines on high through everlasting Law, whose places of sure refuge are the heavens and earth.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The cow who yielding milk goes her appointed way hither to us as leader of holy rites,
Speaking aloud to Varuṇa and the worshipper, shall with oblation serve Vivasvān and the Gods.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The Gods whose tongue is Agni dwell in heaven, and sit, aiders of Law, reflecting, in the seat of Law.
They propped up heaven and then brought waters with their might, got sacrifice and in a body made it fair.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Born in the oldest time, the Parents dwelling round are sharers of one mansion in the home of Law.
Bound by their common vow Dyaus, Prthivi stream forth the moisture rich in oil to Varuṇa the Steer.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Parjanya, Vāta, mighty, senders of the rain, Indra and Vāyu, Varuṇa, Mitra, Aryaman:
We call on Aditi, Ādityas, and the Gods, those who are on the earth, in waters, and in heaven.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Tvaṣṭar and Vāyu, those who count as Ṛbhus, both celestial Hotar-priests, and Dawn for happiness,
Winners of wealth, we call, and wise Bṛhaspati, destroyer of our foes, and Soma Indra's Friend.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  They generated prayer, the cow, the horse, the plants, the forest trees, the earth, the waters, and the hills.
These very bounteous Gods made the Sun mount to heaven, and spread the righteous laws of Āryas o’er the land.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  O Aśvins, ye delivered Bhujyu from distress, ye animated Śyāva, Vadhrmati's son.
To Vimada ye brought his consort Kamadyu, and gave his lost Viṣṇāpū back to Viśvaka.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Thunder, the lightning's daughter, Aja-Ekapād, heaven's bearer, Sindhu, and the waters of the sea:
Hear all the Gods my words, Sarasvatī give ear together with Purandhi and with Holy Thoughts.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  With Holy Thoughts and with Purandhi may all Gods, knowing the Law immortal, Manu's Holy Ones,
Boon-givers, favourers, finders of light, and Heaven, with gracious love accept my songs, my prayer, my hymn.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Immortal Gods have I, Vasiṣṭha, lauded, Gods set on high above all other beings.
May they this day grant us wide space and freedom: ye Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.

<span id="h66"></span>

## HYMN LXVI. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I CALL the Gods of lofty glory for our weal, the makers of the light, well-skilled in sacrifice;
Those who have waxen mightily, Masters of all wealth, Immortal, strengthening Law, the Gods whom Indra leads.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  For the strong band of Maruts will we frame a hymn: the chiefs shall bring forth sacrifice for Indra's troop,
Who, sent by Indra and advised by Varuṇa, have gotten for themselves a share of Sūrya's light
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  May Indra with the Vasus keep our dwelling safe, and Aditi with Ādityas lend us sure defence.
May the God Rudra with the Rudras favour us, and Tvaṣṭar with the Dames further us to success.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Aditi, Heaven and Earth, the great eternal Law, Indra, Viṣṇu, the Maruts, and the lofty Sky.
We call upon Ādityas, on the Gods, for help, on Vasus, Rudras, Savitar of wondrous deeds.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  With Holy Thoughts Sarasvān, firm-lawed Varuṇa, great Vāyu, Pūṣan, Viṣṇu, and the Aśvins Twain,
Lords of all wealth, Immortal, furtherers of prayer, grant us a triply-guarding refuge from distress.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Strong be the sacrifice, strong be the Holy Ones, strong the preparers of oblation, strong the Gods.
Mighty be Heaven and Earth, true to eternal Law, strong be Parjanya, strong be they who laud the Strong.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  To win us strength I glorify the Mighty Twain, Agni and Soma, Mighty Ones whom many laud.
May these vouchsafe us shelter with a triple guard, these whom the strong have served in worship of the Gods.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Potent, with firm-fixt laws, arranging sacrifice, visiting solemn rites in splendour of the day,
Obeying Order, these whose priest is Agni, free from falsehood, poured the waters out when Vṛtra died.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  The Holy Ones engendered, for their several laws, the heavens and earth, the waters, and the plants and trees.
They filled the firmament with heavenly light for help: the Gods embodied Wish and made it beautiful.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  May they who bear up heaven, the Ṛbhus deft of hand, and Vāta and Parjanya of the thundering Bull,
The waters and the plants, promote the songs we sing: come Bhaga, Rati, and the Vaijns to my call.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Sindhu, the sea, the region, and the firmament, the thunder, and the ocean, Aja-Ekapād,
The Dragon of the Deep, shall listen to my words, and all the Deities and Princes shall give ear.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  May we, be yours, we men, to entertain the Gods: further our sacrifice and give it full success.
Ādityas, Rudras, Vasus, givers of good gifts, quicken the holy hymns which we are singing now
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  I follow with success upon the path of Law the two celestial Hotars, Priests of oldest time.
We pray to him who dwelleth near, Guard of the Field, to all Immortal Gods who never are remiss.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Vasiṣṭha's sons have raised their voices, like their sire. Ṛṣi-like praying to the Gods for happiness.
Like friendly-minded kinsmen, come at our desire, O Gods, and shake down treasures on us from above.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Immortal Gods have I, Vasiṣṭha, lauded, Gods set on high above all other beings.
May they this day grant us wide space and freedom: ye Gods, preserve us evermore with blessings.

<span id="h67"></span>

## HYMN LXVII. Bṛhaspati.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THIS holy hymn, sublime and sevenheaded, sprung from eternal Law, our sire discovered.
Ayasya, friend of all men, hath engendered the fourth hymn as he sang his laud to Indra.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thinking aright, praising eternal Order, the sons of Dyaus the Asura, those heroes,
Aṅgirases, holding the rank of sages, first honoured sacrifice's holy statute.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Girt by his friends who cried with swanlike voices, bursting the stony barriers of the prison,
Bṛhaspati spake in thunder to the cattle, and uttered praise and song when he had found them.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Apart from one, away from two above him, he drave the kine that stood in bonds of falsehood.
Bṛhaspati, seeking light amid the darkness, drave forth the bright cows: three he made apparent.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  When he had cleft the lairs and western castle, he cut off three from him who held the waters.
Bṛhaspati discovered, while he thundered like Dyaus, the dawn, the Sun, the cow, the lightning.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  As with a hand, so with his roaring Indra cleft Vala through, the guardian of the cattle.
Seeking the milk-draught with sweatshining comrades he stole the Paṇi's kine and left him weeping.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  He with bright faithful Friends, winners of booty, hath rent the milker of the cows asunder.
Bṛhaspati with wild boars strong and mighty, sweating with heat, hath gained a rich possession.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  They, longing for the kine, with faithful spirit incited with their hymns the Lord of cattle.
Bṛhaspati freed the radiant cows with comrades self-yoked, averting shame from one another.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  In our assembly with auspicious praises exalting him who roareth like a lion,
Maywe, in every fight where heroes conquer, rejoice in strong Bṛhaspati the Victor.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  When he had won him every sort of booty and gone to heaven and its most lofty mansions,
Men praised Bṛhaspati the Mighty, bringing the light within their mouths from sundry places.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Fulfil the prayer that begs for vital vigour: aid in your wonted manner even the humble.
Let all our foes be turned and driven backward. Hear this, O Heaven and Earth, ye All-producers.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Indra with mighty strength cleft asunder the head of Arbuda the watery monster,
Slain Ahi, and set free the Seven Rivers. O Heaven and Earth, with all the Gods protect us.

<span id="h68"></span>

## HYMN LXVIII. Bṛhaspati.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  LIKE birds who keep their watch, plashing in water, like the loud voices of the thundering rain-cloud,
Like merry streamlets bursting from the mountain, thus to Bṛhaspati our hymns have sounded.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The Son of Aṅgirases, meeting the cattle, as Bhaga, brought in Aryaman among us.
As Friend of men he decks the wife and husband: as for the race, Bṛhaspati, nerve our coursers.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Bṛhaspati, having won them from the mountains, strewed down, like barley out of winnowing- baskets,
The vigorous, wandering cows who aid the pious, desired of all, of blameless form, well-coloured.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  As the Sun dews with meath the seat of Order, and casts a flaming meteor down from heaven.
So from the rock Bṛhaspati forced the cattle, and cleft the earth's skin as it were with water.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Forth from mid air with light he dravc the darkness, as the gale blows a lily from the fiver.
Like the wind grasping at the cloud of Vala, Bṛhaspati gathered to himself the cattle,
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Bṛhaspati, when he with fiery lightnings cleft through the weapon of reviling Vala,
Consumedḥim as tongues cat what teeth have compassed: he threw the prisons of the red cows open.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  That secret name borne by the lowing cattle within the cave Bṛhaspati discovered,
And drave, himself, the bright kine from the mountain, like a bird's young after the egg's disclosure.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  He looked around on rock-imprisoned sweetness as one who eyes a fish in scanty water.
Bṛhaspati, cleaving through with varied clamour, brought it forth like a bowl from out the timber.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  He found the light of heaven, and fire, and Morning: with lucid rays he forced apart the darkness.
As from a joint, Bṛhaspati took the marrow of Vala as he gloried in his cattle.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  As trees for foliage robbed by winter, Vala mourned for the cows Bṛhaspati had taken.
He did a deed ne’er done, ne’er to be equalled, whereby the Sun and Moon ascend alternate.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Like a dark steed adorned with pearl, the Fathers have decorated heaven With constellations.
They set the light in day, in night the darkness. Bṛhaspati cleft the rock and found the cattle.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  This homage have we.offered to the Cloud God who thunders out to many in succession.
May this Bṛhaspati vouchsafe us fulness of life with kine and horses, men, and heroes.

<span id="h69"></span>

## HYMN LXIX. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Auspicious is the aspect of Vadhryasva's fire good is its guidance, pleasant are its visitings.
When first the people Of Sumitra kindle it, with butter poured thercon it crackles and shines bright.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Butter is that which makes Vadhryaiva's fire growstrong: the butter is its food, the butter makes it fat.
It spreads abroad when butter hath been offered it, and balmed with streams of butter shines forth like the Sun.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Still newest is this face of thine, O Agni, which Manu and Sumitra have enkindled.
So richly shine, accept our songs with favour, so give us strengthening food, so send us glory.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Accept this offering, Agni, whom aforetime Vadhryasva, hath entreated and enkindled.
Guard well our homes and ople, guard our bodies, protect thy girt to us which thou hast granted.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Be splendid, guard us Kinsman of Vadhryasva: let not the enmity of men o’ercome thee,
Like the bold hero Cyavāna, I Sumitra tell forth the title of Vadhryaiva's Kinsman.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  All treasures hast thou won, of plains and mountains, and quelled the Dāsas' and Āryas' hatred.
Like the bold hero Cyavāna, O Agni, mayst thou subdue the men who long for battle.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Deft Agni hath a lengthened thread, tall oxen, a thousand heifers, numberless devices.
Decked by the men, splendid among the splendid, shine brightly forth amid devout Sumitras.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Thine is the teeming cow, O Jātavedas, who pours at once her ceaseless flow, Sabardhuk,
Thou. art lit up by men enriched with guerdon, O Agni, by the pious-souled Sumitras.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Even Immortal Gods, O Jātavedas, Vadhryasva's Kinsman, have declared thy grandeur.
When human tribes drew near with supplication thou conqueredst with men whom thou hadst strengthened.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Like as a father bears his son, O Agni, Vadhryasva bare thee in his lap and served thee.
Thou, Youngest God, having enjoyed his fuel, didst vanquish those of old though they were mighty.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Vadhryasva's Agni evermore hath vanquished his foes with heroes who had pressed the Soma.
Lord of bright rays, thou burntest up the battle, subduing, as our help, e’en mighty foemen.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  This Agni of Vadhryasva, Vṛtra-slayer, lit from of old, must be invoked with homage.
As such assail our enemies, Vadhryasva, whether the foes be strangers or be kinsmen.

<span id="h70"></span>

## HYMN LXX. Āprīs.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  ENJOY, O Agni, this my Fuel, welcome the oil-filled ladle where we pour libation.
Rise up for worship of the Gods, wise Agni, on the earth's height, while days are bright with beauty.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  May he who goes before the Gods come hither with steeds whose shapes are varied, Narasarhsa.
May he, most Godlike, speed our offered viands with homage God-ward on the path of Order.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Men with oblations laud most constant Agni, and pray him to perform an envoy's duty.
With lightly-rolling car and best draught-horses, bring the Gods hither and sit down as Hotar.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  May the delight of Gods spread out transversely: may it be with us long in length and fragrant.
O Holy Grass divine, with friendly spirit bring thou the willing Gods whose Chief is Indra.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Touch ye the far-extending height of heaven or spring apart to suit the wide earth's measure.
Yearning, ye Doors, with those sublime in greatness, seize eagerly the heavenly Car that cometh.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Here in this shrine may Dawn and Night, the Daughters of Heaven, the skilful Goddesses, be seated.
In your wide lap, auspicious, willing Ladies may the Gods seat them with a willing spirit.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Up stands the stone, high burns the fire enkindled: Aditi's lap contains the Friendly Natures
Ye Two Chief Priests who serve at this our worship, may ye, more skilled, win for us rich possessions.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  On our wide grass, Three Goddesses be seated: for you have we prepared and made it pleasant.
May Iḷā, she whose foot drops oil, the Goddess, taste, man-like, sacrifice and well-set presents.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Since thou, God Tvaṣṭar, hast made beauty perfect, since hou hast been the Aṅgirases' Companion,
Willing, most wealthy, Giver of possessions, grant us the Gods’ assembly, thou who knowest.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Well-knowing, binding with thy cord, bring hither, Lord of the Wood, the Deities' assembly.
The God prepare and season our oblations may Heaven and Earth be gracious to my calling.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Agni, bring hither Varuṇa to help us, Indra from heaven, from air's mid-realm the Maruts.
On sacred grass all Holy ones be seated and let the Immortal Gods rejoice in Svāhā.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_60">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LI. —  LX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_80">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN LXXI. — LXXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
