---
title: "HYMN XCI. — C."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_9_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_9_110">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CI. — CX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h91"></span>

## HYMN XCI. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  As for a chariot-race, the skilful Speaker, Chief, Sage, Inventor, hath, with song, been started.
The sisters ten upon the fleecy summit drive on the Car-horse to the resting places.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The drop of Soma, pressed by wise Nahusyas, becomes the banquet of the Heavenly People-
Indu, by hands of mortal men made beauteous, immortal, with the sheep and cows and waters.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Steer roaring unto Steer, this Pavamana, this juice runs to the white milk of the milch-cow.
Through thousand fine hairs goes the tuneful Singer, like Sūra by his fair and open pathways.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Break down the, strong seats even of the demons: cleansing thee, Indu, robd thyself in vigour.
Rend with thy swift bolt, coming from above them, those who are near and those who yet are distant.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Prepare the forward paths in ancient manner for the new bymn, thou Giver of all bounties.
Those which are high and hard for foes to conquer may we gain from thee, Active! Food-bestower!
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  So purifying thee vouchsafe us waters, heaven's light, and cows, offipring and many children.
Give us health, ample land, and lights, O Soma, and grant us long to look upon the sunshine.

<span id="h92"></span>

## HYMN XCII. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE gold-hued juice, poured out upon the filter, is started like a car sent forth to conquer.
He hath gained song and vigour while they cleansed him, and hath rejoiced the Gods with entertainments.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  He who beholdeth man hath reached the filter: bearing his name, the Sage hath sought his dwelling.
The Ṛṣis came to him, seven holy singers, when in the bowls he settled as Invoker.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Shared by all Gods, mobt wise, propitious, Soma goes, while they cleanse him, to his constant station.
Let him rejoice in all his lofty wisdom to the Five Tribes the Sage attains with labour.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  In thy mysterious place, O Pavamana Soma, are all the Gods, the Thrice-Eleven.
Ten on the fleecy height, themselves, self-prompted, and seven fresh rivers, brighten and adorn thee.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Now let this be the truth of Pavamana, there where all singers gather them together,
That he hath given us room and made the daylight, hath holpen Manu and repelled the Dasyu.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  As the priest seeks the station rich in cattle, like a true King who goes to great assemblies,
Soma hath sought the beakers while they cleansed him, and like a wild bull, in the wood hath settled.

<span id="h93"></span>

## HYMN XCIII. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  TEN sisters, pouring out the rain together, swift-moving thinkers of the sage, adorn him.
Hither hath run the gold-hued Child of Sūrya and reached the vat like a fleet vigorous courser.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Even as a youngling crying to his mothers, the bounteous Steer hath flowed along to waters.
As youth to damsel, so with milk he hastens on to the. chose meeting-place, the beaker.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Yea, swollen is the udder of the milch-cow: thither in streams goes very sapient Indu.
The kine make ready, as with new-washed treasures, the Head and Chief with milk within the vessels.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  With all the Gods, O Indu Pavamana, while thou art roaring send us wealth in horses.
Hither upon her car come willing Plenty, inclined to us, to give us of her treasures.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Now unto us mete riches, while they cleansethee, all-glorious, swelling wealth, with store of heroes.
Long be his life who worships, thee, O Indu. May he, enriched with prayer, come soon and early.

<span id="h94"></span>

## HYMN XCIV. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WHEN beauties strive for him as for a charger, then strive the songs like soldiers for the sunlight.
Acting the Sage, he flows enrobed in waters and song as ’twere a stall that kine may prosper.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The worlds expand to hirn who from aforetime found light to spread the law of life eternal.
The swelling songs, like kine within the stable, in deep devotion call aloud on Indu.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  When the sage bears his holy wisdom round him, like a car visiting all worlds, the Hero,
Becoming fame, mid Gods, unto the mortal, wealth to the skilled, worth praise mid the Ever-present,
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  For glory born be hath come forth to glory: he giveth life and glory to the singers.
They, clothed in glory, have become immortal. He, measured in his course, makes frays successful.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Stream to us food and vigour, kine and horses: give us broad lights and fill thGods with rapture.
All ther are easy things for thee to master thou, Pavamana Soma, quellest foemen.

<span id="h95"></span>

## HYMN XCV Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Loud neighs the Tawny Steed when started, settling deep in the wooden vessel while they cleanse him.
Led by the men he takes the milk for raiment: then shall he, through his powers, engender praise-songs.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  As one who rows drives on his boat, he, Gold-hued, sends forth his voice, loosed on the path of Order.
As God, the secret names of Gods he utters, to be declared on sacred grass more widely.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Hastening onward like the waves of waters, our holy hymns are pressing nigh to Soma.
To him they come with lowly adoration, and, longing, enter him who longs to meet them.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  They drain the stalk, the Steer who dwells on mountains, even as a Bull who decks him on the upland.
Hymns follow and attend him as he bellows: Trita bears Varuṇa aloft in ocean.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Sending thy voice out as Director, loosen the Invoker's thought, O Indu, as they cleanse thee.
While thou and Indra rule for our advantage, may we be masters of heroic vigour.

<span id="h96"></span>

## HYMN XCVI. Soma Pavamana

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  IN forefront of the cars forth goes the Hero, the Leader, winning spoil: his host rejoices.
Soma endues his robes of lasting colours, and blesses, for his friends, their calls on Indra.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Men decked with gold adorn his golden tendril, incessantly with steed-impelling homage.
The Friend of Indra mounts his car well-knowing, he comes thereon to meet the prayer we offer.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  O God, for service of the Gods flow onward, for food sublime, as Indra's drink, O Soma.
Making the floods, bedewing earth and heaven, come from the vast, comfort us while we cleanse thee
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Flow for prosperity and constant Vigour, flow on for happiness and high perfection.
This is the wish of these friends assembled: this is my wish, O Soma Pavamana.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Father of holy hymns, Soma flows onward the Father of the earth, Father of heaven:
Father of Agni, Sūrya's generator, the Father who begat Indra and Viṣṇu.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Brahman of Gods, the Leader of the poets, Ṛṣi of sages, Bull of savage creatures,
Falcon amid the vultures, Axe of forests, over the cleansing sieve goes Soma singing.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  He, Soma Pavamana, like a river, hath stirred the wave of voice, our songs and praises.
Beholding these inferior powers in cattle, he rests among them as a Steer well-knowing.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  As Gladdener, Warrior never harmed in battle, with thousand genial streams, pour strength and vigour.
As thoughtful Pavamana, urge O Indu, speeding the kine, the plant's wave on to Indra.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Dear, grateful to the Gods, on to the beaker moves Soma, sweet to Indra, to delight him.
With hundred powers, with thousand currents, Indu, like a strong car-horse, goes to the assembly.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Born in old time as finder-out of treasures, drained with the stone, decking himself in waters,
Warding off curses, King of all existence, he shall find way for prayer the while they cleanse him.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  For our sage fathers, Soma Pavamana, of old performed, by thee, their sacred duties.
Fighting unvanquished, open the enclosures: enrich us with large gifts of steeds and heroes.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  As thou didst flow for Manu Life-bestowing, Foe-queller, Comforter, rich in oblations,
Even thus flow onward now conferring riches: combine with Indra, and bring forth thy weapons.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Flow onward, Soma, rich in sweets and holy,. enrobed in waters on the fleecy summit.
Settle in vessels that are full of fatness, as cheering and most gladdening drink for Indra.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Pour, hundred-streamed, winner of thousands, mighty at the Gods’ banquet, Pour the rain of heaven,
While thou with rivers roarest in the beaker, and blent with milk prolongest our existence.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  Purified with our holy hymns, this Soma o’ertakes malignities like some strong charger,
Like fresh milk poured by Aditi, like passage in ample room, or like a docile car-horse.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Cleansed by the pressers, armed with noble weapons, stream to us the fair secret name thou bearest.
Pour booty, like a horse, for love of glory God, Soma, send us kine, and send us Vāyu.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  They deck him at his birth, the lovely Infant, the Maruts with their troop adorn the Car-horse.
By songs a Poet and a Sage by wisdom, Soma joes singing through the cleansing filter.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Light-winner, Ṛṣi-mindcd, Ṛṣi-maker, hymned in a thousand hymns, Leader of sages,
A Steer who strives to gain his third form, Soma is, like Virāj, resplendent as a Singer.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  Hawk seated in the bowls, Bird wide-extended, the Banner seeking kine and wielding weapons,
Following close the sea, the wave of waters, the great Bull tells his fourth form and declares it.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Like a fair youth who decorates his body, a courser rushing to the gain of riches,
A steer to herds, so, flowing to the pitcher, he with a roar hath passed into the beakers.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  Flow on with might as Pavamana, Indu flow loudly roaring through the fleecy filter.
Enter the beakers sporting, as they cleanse thee, and let thy gladdening juice make Indra joyful.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  His streams have been effused in all their fulness, and he hath entered, balmed with milk, the goblets.
Singing his psalm, well-skilled in song, a Chanter, be comes as ’twere to his friend's sister roaring.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  Chasing our foes thou comest, Pavamana Indu, besting, as lover to his darling.
As a bird flies and settles in the forest, thus Soma settles, purified, in goblets.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  With full stream and abundant milk, O Soma, thy beams come, like a woman, as they cleanse thee.
He, gold-hued, rich in boons, brought to the waters, hath roared within the goblet of the pious.

<span id="h97"></span>

## HYMN XCVII. Soma Pavamana

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MADE pure by this man's urgent zeal and impulse the God hath to the Gods his juice imparted.
He goes, effused and singing, to the filter, like priest to measured seats supplied with cattle.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Robed in fair raiment meet to wear in battle, a mighty Sage pronouncing invocations.
Roll onward to the beakers as they cleanse thee, far-seeing at the feast of Gods, and watchful.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Dear, he is brightened on the fleecy summit, a Prince among us, nobler than the noble.
Roar out as thou art purified, run forward. Do ye preserve us evermore with blessings.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Let us sing praises to the Gods: sing loudly, send ye the Soma forth for mighty riches.
Let him flow, sweetly-flavoured, through the filter, and let our pious one rest in the pitcher.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Winning the friendship of the Deities, Indu flows in a thousand streams to make them joyful.
Praised by the men after the ancient statute, he hath come nigh, for our great bliss, to Indra.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Flow, Gold-hued, cleansing thee, to enrich the singer: let thy juice go to Indra to support him.
Come nigh, together with the Gods, for bounty. Do ye preserve us evermore with blessings.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The God declares the Deities' generations, like Uśanā, proclaiming lofty wisdom.
With brilliant kin, far-ruling, sanctifying, the Boar advances, singing, to the places.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The Swans, the Vrsaganas from anear us have brought their restless spirit to our dwelling.
Friends come to Pavamana meet for praises, and sound in concert their resistless music.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  He follows the Wide-strider's rapid movement: cows low, as ’twere, to him who sports at pleasure.
He with the sharpened horns brings forth abundance: the Silvery shines by night, by day the Golden.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Strong Indu, bathed in milk, flows on for Indra, Soma exciting strength, to make him joyful.
He quells malignities and slays the demons, the King of mighty power who brings us comfort.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Then in a stream he flows, milked out with press-stones, mingled with sweetness, through the fleecy filter-
Indu rejoicing in the love of Indra, the God who gladdens, for the God's enjoyment.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  As he is purified he pours out treasures, a God bedewing Gods with his own juices.
Indu hath, wearing qualities by seasons, on the raised fleece engaged, the ten swift fingers.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  The Red Bull bellowing to the kine advances, causing the heavens and earth to roar and tbunder.
Well is he beard like Indra's shout in battle: letting this voice be known he hastens hither.
<p id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup>  Swelling with milk, abounding in sweet flavours, urging the meath-rich plant thou goest onward.
Raising a shout thou flowest as they cleanse thee, when thou, O Soma, art effused for Indra.
<p id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup>  So flow thou on inspiriting, for rapture, aiming deatb-shafts at him who stays the waters,
Flow to us wearing thy resplendent colour, effused and eager for the kine, O Soma.
<p id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup>  Pleased with us, Indu, send us as thou flowest good easy paths in ample space and comforts.
Dispelling, as ’twere with a club, misfortunes, run o’er the height, run o’er the fleecy summit.
<p id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup>  Pour on us rain celestial, quickly streaming, refreshing, fraught with health and ready bounty.
Flow, Indu, send these Winds thy lower kinsmen, setting them free like locks of hair unbraided.
<p id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup>  Part, like a knotted tangle, while they cleanse thee, O Soma, righteous and unrighteous conduct.
Neigh like a tawny courser who is loosened, come like a youth, O God, a house-possessor.
<p id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup>  For the God's service, for delight, O Indu, run o’er the height, run o'ver the fleecy summit.
With thousand streams, inviolate, sweet-scented, flow on for gain of strength that conquers heroes.
<p id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup>  Without a car, without a rein to guide them, unyoked, like coursers started in the contest,
These brilliant drops of Soma juice run forward. Do ye, O Deities, come nigh to drink them.
<p id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup>  So for our banquet of the Gods, O Indu, pour down the rain of heaven into the vessels.
May Soma grant us riches sought with longing, mighty, exceeding strong, with store of heroes.
<p id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup>  What time the loving spirit's word had formed him Chief of all food, by statute of the Highest,
Then loudly lowing came the cows to Indu, the chosen, well-loved Master in the beaker.
<p id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup>  The Sage, Celestial, liberal, raining bounties, pours as he flows the Genuine for the Truthful.
The King shall be effectual strength's upholder: he by the ten bright reins is mostly guided.
<p id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup>  He who beholds mankind, made pure with filters, the King supreme of Deities and mortals,
From days of old is Treasure-Lord of riches: he, Indu, cherishes fair well-kept Order.
<p id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup>  Haste, like a steed, to vittory for glory, to Indra's and to Vāyu's entertainment.
Give us food ample, thousandfold: be, Soma, the finder-out of riches when they cleanse thee.
<p id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup>  Effused by us let God-delighting Somas bring as they flow a home with noble heroes.
Rich in all boons like priests acquiring favour, the worshippers of heaven, the best of Cheerers.
<p id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup>  So, God, for service of the Gods flow onward, flow, drink of Gods, for ample food, O Soma.
For we go forth to war against the mighty make heaven and earth well stablished by thy cleansing.
<p id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup>  Thou, yoked by strong men, neighest like a courser, swifter than thought is, like an awful lion.
By paths directed hitherward, the straightest, send thou us happiness, Indu, while they cleanse thee.
<p id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup>  Sprung from the Gods, a hundred streams, a thousand, have been effused: sages prepare and purge them.
Bring us from heaven the means of winnning, Indu; thou art-forerunnner of abundant riches.
<p id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup>  The streams of days, were poured as ’twere from heaven: the wise King doth not treat his friend unkindly.
Like a son following his father's wishes, grant to this family success and safety.
<p id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup>  Now are thy streams poured forth with all their sweetness, when, purified. thou goest through the filter.
The race of kine is thy gift, Pavarridna: when born thou madest Sūrya rich with brightness.
<p id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup>  Bright, bellowing aiong the path of Order, thou shinest as the form of life eternal.
Thou flowest on as gladdening drink for Indra, sending thy voice out with the hymns of sages.
<p id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup>  Pouring out streams at the Gods’ feast with service, thou, Soma, lookest down, a heavenly Eagle.
Enter the Soma-holding beaker, Indu, and with a roar approach the ray of Sarya.
<p id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup>  Three are the voices that the Courser utters: he speaks the thought of prayer, the law of Order.
To the Cow's Master come the Cows inquiring: the hymns with eager longing come to Soma.
<p id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup>  To Soma come the Cows, the Milch-kine longing, to Soma sages with their hvmns inquiring.
Soma, effused, is purified and blended our hymns and Tṛṣṭup songs unite in Soma.
<p id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup>  Thus, Soma, as we pour thee into vessels, while thou art purified flow for our welfare.
Pass into Indra with a mighty roaring make the voice swell, and generate abundance.
<p id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup>  Singer of true songs, ever-watchful, Soma hath settled in the ladles when they cleanse him.
Him the Adhvaryus, paired and eager, follow, leaders of sacrifice and skilful-handed.
<p id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup>  Cleansed near the Sun as ’twere he as Creator hath filled full heaven and earth, and hath disclosed them.
He by whose dear help men gain all their wishes shall yield the precious meed as to a victor.
<p id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup>  He, being cleansed, the Strengthener and Increaser, Soma the Bounteous, helped us with his lustre,
Wherewith our sires of old who knew the footsteps found light and stole the cattle from the mountain.
<p id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup>  In the first vault of heaven loud roared the Ocean, King of all being, generating creatures.
Steer, in the filter, on the fleecy summit, Soma, the Drop effused, hath waxen mighty.
<p id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup>  Soma the Steer, in that as Child of Waters he chose the Gods, performed that great achievement.
He, Pavamana, granted strength to Indra; he, Indu, generated light in Sūrya.
<p id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup>  Make Vāyu glad,, for furtherance and bounty: cheer Varuṇa and Mitra, as they cleanse thee.
Gladden the Gods, gladden the host of Maruts: make Heaven and Earth rejoice, O God, O Soma.
<p id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup>  Flow onward righteous slayer of the wicked, driving away our enemies and sickness,
Blending thy milk with milk which cows afford us. We are thy friends, thou art the Friend of Indra.
<p id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup>  Pour us a fount of meath, a spring of treasure; send us a hero son and happy fortune.
Be sweet to India when they cleanse thee, Indu, and pour down riches on us from the ocean.
<p id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup>  Strong Soma, pressed, like an impetuous courser, hath flowed in stream as a flood speeding downward.
Cleansed, he hath settled in his wooden dwelling: Indu hath flowed with milk and with the waters.
<p id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup>  Strong, wise, for thee who longest for his coming this Soma here flows to the bowls, O Indra.
He, chariot-borne, sun-bright, and truly potent, was poured forth like the longing of the pious.
<p id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup>  He, purified with ancient vital vigour, pervading all his Daughter's forms and figures,
Finding his threefold refuge in the waters, goes singing, as a priest, to the assemblies.
<p id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup>  Now, chariot-borne, flow unto us, God Soma, as thou art purified flow to the saucers,
Sweetest in waters, rich in meath, and holy, as Savitar the God is, truthfulminded.
<p id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup>  To feast him, flow mid song and hymn, to Vāyu, flow purified to Varuṇa and Mitra.
Flow to the song-inspiring car-borne Hero, to mighty Indra, him who wields the thunder.
<p id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup>  Pour on us garments that shall clothe us meetly, send, purified, miIch-kine, abundant yielders.
God Soma, send us chariot-drawing horses that they may bring us treasures bright and golden.
<p id="v51"><sup><small>51</small></sup>  Send to us in a stream celestial riches, send us, when thou art cleansed, what earth containeth,
So that thereby we may acquire possessions and Rsihood in Jamadagni's manner.
<p id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup>  Pour forth this wealth with this purification: flow onward to the yellow lake, O Indu.
Here, too, the Ruddy, wind-swift, full of wisdom, Shall give a son to him who cometh quickly.
<p id="v53"><sup><small>53</small></sup>  Flow on for us with this purification to the famed ford of thee whose due is glory.
May the Foe-queller shake us down, for triumph, like a tree's ripe fruit, sixty thousand treasures.
<p id="v54"><sup><small>54</small></sup>  Eagerly do we pray for those two exploits, at the blue lake and Prsana, wrought in battle.
He sent our enemies to sleep and slew thern, and turned away the foolish and unfriendly.
<p id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup>  Thou comest unto three extended filters, and hasteriest through each one as they cleanse thee.
Thou art the giver of the gift, a Bhaga, a Maghavan for liberal lords, O Indu.
<p id="v56"><sup><small>56</small></sup>  This Soma here, the Wise, the All-obtainer, flows on his way as King of all existence.
Driving the drops at our assemblies, Indu completely traverses the fleecy filter.
<p id="v57"><sup><small>57</small></sup>  The Great Inviolate are kissing Indu, and singing in his place like eager sages.
The wise men send him forth with ten swift fingers, and balm his form with essence of the waters.
<p id="v58"><sup><small>58</small></sup>  Soma, may we, with thee as Pavamana, pile up together all our spoil in battle.
This boon vouchsafe us Varuṇa and Mitra, and Aditi and Sindhu, Earth and Heaven.

<span id="h98"></span>

## HYMN XCVIII. Soma Pavamana

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  STREAM on us riches that are sought by many, best at winning strength
Riches, O Indu, thousandfold, glorious, conquering the great.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Effused, he hath, as on a car, invested him in fleecy mail:
Onward hath Indu flowed in streams, impelled, surrounded by the wood.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Effused, this Indu hath flowed on, distilling rapture, to the fleece:
He goes erect, as seeking kine in stream, with light, to sacrifice.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  For thou thyself, O Indu, God, to every mortal worshipper
Attractest riches thousandfold, made manifest in hundred forms.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Good Vṛtra-slayer, may we be still nearest to this wealth of thine
Which many crave, nearest to food and happiness, Resistless One!
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Whom, bright with native splendour, crushed between the pair of pressingstones-
The wavy Friend whom Indra loves-the twice-five sisters dip and bathe,
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Him with the fleece they purify, brown, golden-hued, beloved of all,
Who with exhilarating juice goes forth to all the Deities.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Through longing for this sap of yours ye drink what brings ability,
Even him who, dear as heaven's own light, gives to our princes high renown.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Indu at holy rites produced you, Heaven and Earth, the Friends of men,
Hill-haunting God the Goddesses. They bruised him where the roar was loud.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  For Vṛtra-slaying Indra, thou, Soma, art poured that he may drink,
Poured for the guerdon-giving man, poured for the God who sitteth there.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  These ancient Somas, at the break of day, have flowed into the sieve,
Snorting away at early morn these foolish evil-hearted ones.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Friends, may the princes, ye and we, obtain this Most Resplendent One.
Gain him who hath the smell of strength, win him whose home is very strength.

<span id="h99"></span>

## HYMN XCIX. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THEY for the Bold and Lovely One ply manly vigour like a bow:
joyous, in front of songs they weave bright raiment for the Lord Divine.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  And he, made beautiful by night, dips forward into strengthening food',
What time the sacrificer's thoughts speed on his way the Golden-hued.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  We cleanse this gladdening drink of his the juice which Indra chiefly drinks—-
That which kine took into their mouths, of old, and princes take it now.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  To him, while purifying, they have raised the ancient psalm of praise:
And sacred songs which bear the names of Gods have supplicated him.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  They purify him as he drops, courageous, in the fleecy sieve.
Him they instruct as messenger to bear the sage's morning prayer.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Soma, best Cheerer, takes his seat, the while they cleanse him in the bowls.
He as it were impregns the cow, and babbles on, the Lord of Song.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  He is effused and beautified, a God for Gods, by skilful men.
He penetrates the mighty floods collecting all he knows therein.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Pressed, Indu, guided by the men, thou art led to the cleaning sieve.
Thou, yielding Indra highest joy, takest thy seat within the bowls.

<span id="h100"></span>

## HYMN C. Soma Pavamana.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE Guileless Ones are singing praise to Indra's well beloved Friend,
As, in the morning of its life, the mothers lick the new-born calf.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  O Indu, while they cleanse thee bring, O Soma, doubly-waxing wealth
Thou in the worshipper's abode causest all treasures to increase.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Set free the. song which mind hath yoked, even as thunder frees the rain:
All treasures of the earth and heaven, O Soma, thou dost multiply.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Thy stream when thou art pressed runs on like some victorious warrior's steed
Hastening onward through the fleece like a fierce horse who wins the prize.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Flow on, Sage Soma, with thy stream to give us mental power and strength,
Effused for Indra, for his drink, for Mitra and for Varuṇa.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Flow to the filter with thy stream, effused, best winner, thou, of spoil,
O Soma, as most rich in sweets for Indra, Viṣṇu, and the Gods.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The mothers, void of guiles, caress thee Golden-coloured, in the sieve,
As cows, O Pavamana, lick the new-born calf, as Law commands.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Thou, Pavamana, movest on with wondrous rays to great renown.
Striving within the votary's house thou drivest all the glooms away.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Lord of great sway, thou liftest thee above the heavens, above the earth.
Thou, Pavamana hast assumed thy coat of mail in majesty.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_9_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN LXXXI. — XC.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_9_110">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CI. — CX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
