---
title: "HYMN CXI. — CXX."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_110">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CI. — CX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_130">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXXI. — CXXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## HYMN CXI. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  BRING forth your sacred song ye prudent singers, even as are the thoughts of human beings.
Let us draw Indra with true deeds anear us: he loves our songs, the Hero, and is potent.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The hymn shone brightly from the seat of worship: to the kine came the Bull, the Heifer's Offipring
With mighty bellowing hath he arisen, and hath pervaded even the spacious regions.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Indra knows, verily, how to hear our singing, for he, victorious, made a path for Sūrya.
He made the Cow, and be became the Sovran of Heaven, primeval, matchless, and unshaken.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Praised by Aṅgirases, Indra demolished with might the works of the great watery monster
Full many regions, too, hath he pervaded, and by his truth supported earth's foundation.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The counterpart of heaven and earth is Indra: he knoweth all libations, slayeth Śuṣṇa.
The vast sky with the Sun hath he extended, and, best otpillars, stayed it with a pillar.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The Vṛtra-slaver with his bolt felled Vṛtra: the magic of the godless, waxen mighty,
Here hast thou, Bold Assailant, boldly conquered. Yea, then thine arms, O Maghavan, were potent.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  When the Dawns come attendant upon Sūrya their rays discover wealth of divers colours.
The Star of heaven is seen as ’twere approaching: none knoweth aught of it as it departeth.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Far have they gone, the first of all these waters, the waters that flowed forth when Indra sent them.
Where is their spring, and where is their foundation? Where now, ye Waters, is your inmost centre?
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Thou didst free rivers swallowed by the Dragon; and rapidly they set themselves in motion,
Those that were loosed and those that longed for freedom. Excited now to speed they run unresting.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Yearning together they have sped to Sindhu: the Fort-destroyer, praised, of old, hath loved them.
Indra, may thy terrestrial treasures reach us, and our full songs of joy approach thy dwelling.

## HYMN CXII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  DRINK of the juice, O Indra, at thy plea. sure, for thy first draught is early morn's libation.
Rejoice, that thou mayst slay our foes, O Hero, and we with lauds will tell thy mighty exploits.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou hast a car more swift than thought, O Indra; thercon come hither, come to drink the Soma.
Let thy Bay Steeds, thy Stallions, hasten hither, with whom thou cornest nigh and art delighted.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Deck out thy body with the fairest colours, with golden splendour of the Sun adorn it.
O Indra, turn thee hitherward invited by us thy friends; be seated and be joyful.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  O thou whose grandeur in thy festive transports not even these two great worlds have comprehended.
Come, Indra, with thy dear Bay Horses harnessed, come to our dwelling and the food thou lovest.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Pressed for thy joyous banquet is the Soma, Soma whereof thou, Indra, ever drinking,
Hast waged unequalled battles with thy foemen, which prompts the mighty flow of thine abundance.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Found from of old is this thy cup, O Indra: Śatakratu, drink therefrom the Soma.
Filled is the beaker with the meath that gladdens, the beaker which all Deities delight in.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  From many a side with proffered entertainment the folk are calling thee, O Mighty Indra.
These our libations shall for thee be richest in sweet meath: dvink thereof and find them pleasant.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  I will declare thy deeds of old, O Indra, the mighty acts which thou hast first accomplished.
In genuine wrath thou loosenedst the mountain so that the Brahman easily found the cattle.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Lord of the hosts, amid our bands be seated: they call thee greatest Sage among the sages.
Nothing is done, even far away, without thee: great, wondrous, Maghavan, is the hymn I sing thee.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Aim of our eyes be thou, for we implore thee, O Maghavan, Friend of friends and Lord of treasures.
Fight, Warrior strong in truth, fight thou the battle: give us our share of undivided riches.

## HYMN CXTII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE Heavens and the Earth accordant with all Gods encouraged graciously that vigorous might of his.
When he came showing forth his majesty and power, he drank of Soma juice and waxed exceeding strong.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  This majesty of his Viṣṇu extols and lauds, making the stalCthat gives the meath flow forth with inight.
When Indra Maghavan with those who followed him had smitten Vṛtra he deserved the choice of Gods.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  When, bearing warlike weapons, fain to win thee praise, thou mettest Vṛtra, yea, the Dragon, for the fight,
Then all the Maruts who were gathered with dice there extolled, O Mighty One, thy powerful majesty.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Soon as he sprang to life he forced asun. der hosts: forward the Hero looked to manly deed and war.
He cleft the rock, he let concurrent streams flow forth, and with his skilful art stablished the heavens' wide vault.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Indra hath evermore possessed surpassing power: he forced, far from each other, heaven and earth apart.
He hurled impetuous down his iron thunderbolt, a joy to Varuṇa's and Mitra's worshipper.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Then to the mighty powers of Indra, to his wrath, his the fierce Stormer, loud of voice, they came with speed;
What time the Potent One rent Vṛtra with his strength, who held the waters back, whom darkness compassed round.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Even in the first of those heroic acts which they who strove together came with might to execute,
Deep darkness fell upon the slain, and Indra won by victory the right of being first invoked.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Then all the Gods extolled, with eloquence inspired by draughts of Soma juice, thy deeds of manly might.
As Agni eats the dry food with his tcetlv, he ate Vṛtra, the Dragon, maimed by Indra's deadly dart.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Proclaim his many friendships, met with friendship, made with singers, with the skilful and the eloquent.
Indra, when he subdues Dhuni and Cumuri, lists to Dabhīti for his faithful spirit's sake.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Give riches manifold with noble horses, to be remembered while my songs address thee.
May we by easy paths pass all our troubles: find us this day a ford wide and extensive.

## HYMN CXIV. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  Two perfect springs of heat pervade the Threefold, and come for their delight is Mātariśvan.
Craving the milk of heaven the Gods are present: well do they know the praisesong and the Sāman.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The priests beard far away, as they are ordered, serve the three Nirrtis, for well they know them.
Sages have traced the cause that first produced them, dwelling in distant and mysterious chambers.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The Youthful One, well-shaped, with four locks braided, brightened with oil, puts on the ordinances.
Two Birds of mighty power are seated near her, there where the Deities receive their portion.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  One of these Birds hath passed into the sea of air: thence he looks round and views this universal world.
With simple heart I have beheld him from anear: his Mother kisses him and he returns her kiss.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Him with fair wings though only One in nature, wise singers shape, with songs, in many figures.
While they at sacrifices fix the metres, they measure out twelve chalices of Soma.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  While they arrange the four and six-and-thirty, and duly order, up to twelve, the measures,
Having disposed the sacrifice thoughtful sages send the Car forward with the Rc and Sāman.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The Chariot's majesties are fourteen others: seven sages lead it onward with their Voices.
Who will declare to us the ford Apnana, the path whereby they drink first draughts of Soma?
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The fifteen lauds are in a thousand places that is as vast as heaven and earth in measure.
A thousand spots contain the mighty thousand. Vāk spreadeth forth as far as Prayer extendeth.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  What sage hath learned the metres' application? Who hath gained Vāk, the spirit's aim and object?
Which ministering priest is called eighth Hero? Who then hath tracked the two Bay Steeds of Indra?
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Yoked to his chariot-pole there stood the Coursers: they only travel round earth's farthest limits.
These, when their driver in his home is settled, receive the allotted meed of their exertion.

## HYMN CXV. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  VERILY wondrous is the tender Youngling's growth who never draweth nigh to drink his Mothers' milk.
As soon as she who hath no udder bore him, he, faring on his great errand, suddenly grew strong.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Then Agni was his name, most active to bestow, gathering up the trees with his consuming tooth;
Skilled in fair sacrifice, armed with destroying tongue, impetuous as a bull that snorteth in the mead.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Praise him, yourGod who, bird-like, rests upon a tree, scattering drops of juice and pouring forth his flood,
Speaking aloud with flame as with his lips a priest, and broadening his paths like one of high command.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Thou Everlasting, whom, far-striding fain to burn, the winds, uninterrupted, never overcome,
They have approached, as warriors eager for the fight, heroic Trita, guiding him to gain his wish.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  This Agni is the best of Kaṇvas, Kaṇvas' Friend, Conqueror of the foe whether afar or near.
May Agni guard the singers, guard the princes well: may Agni grant to us our princes' gracious help.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Do thou, Supitrya, swiftly following, make thyself the lord of Jātavedas, mightiest of all,
Who surely gives a boon even in thirsty land most powerful, prepared to aid us in the wilds.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Thus noble Agni with princes and mortal men is lauded, excellent for conquering strength with chiefs,
Men who are well-disposed as friends and true to Law, even as the heavens in majesty surpass mankind.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  O Son of Strength, Victorious, with this title Upastuta's most potent voice reveres thee.
Blest with brave sons by thee we will extol thee, and lengthen out the days of our existence.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Thus, Agni, have the sons of Vrstihavya, the Ṛṣis, the Upastutas invoked thee.
Protect them, guard the singers and the princes. With Vaṣaṭ! have they come, with hands uplifted, with their uplifted hands and cries of Glory!

## HYMN CXV1. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  DRINK Soma juice for mighty power and vigour, drink, Strongest One, that thou mayst smite down Vṛtra.
Drink thou, invoked, for strength, and riches: drink thou thy fill of meath and pour it down, O Indra.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Drink of the foodful juice stirred into motion, drink what thou choosest of the flowing Soma.
Giver of weal, be joyful in thy spirit, and turn thee hitherward to bless and prosper.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Let heavenly Soma gladden thee, O Indra, let that effused among mankind delight thee.
Rejoice in that whereby thou gavest freedom, and that whereby thou conquerest thy foemen.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Let Indra come, impetuous, doubly mighty, to the poured juice, the Bull, with two Bay Coursers.
With juices pressed in milk, with meath presented, glut evermore thy bolt, O Foe-destroyer.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Dash down, outffaming their sharp flaming weapons, the strong-holds of the men urged on by demons.
I give thee, Mighty One, great strength and conquest: go, meet thy foes and rend them in the battle.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Extend afar the votary's fame and glory, as the firm archer's strength drives off the foeman.
Ranged on our side, grown strong in might that conquers, never defeated, still increase thy body.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  To thee have we presented this oblation: accept it, Sovran Ruler, free from anger.
Juice, Maghavan, for thee is pressed and ripened: eat, Indra, drink of that which stirs to meet thee.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Eat, Indra, these oblations which approach thee: be pleased with food made ready and with Soma.
With entertainment we receive thee friendly: effectual be the sacrificer's wishes.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  I send sweet speech to Indra and to Agni: with hymns I speed it like a boat through waters.
Even thus, the Gods seem moving round about me, the fountains and bestowers of our riches.

## HYMN CXVII. Liberality.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THE Gods have not ordained hunger to be our death: even to the well-fed man comes death in varied shape.
The riches of the liberal never waste away, while he who will not give finds none to comfort him.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The man with food in store who, when the needy comes in miserable case begging for bread to eat,
Hardens his heart against him-even when of old he did him service-finds not one to comfort him.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Bounteous is he who gives unto the beggar who comes to him in want of food and feeble.
Success attends him in the shout of battle. He makes a friend of him in future troubles.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  No friend is he who to his friend and comrade who comes imploring food, will offer nothing.
Let him depart-no home is that to rest in-, and rather seek a stranger to support him.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Let the rich satisfy the poor implorer, and bend his eye upon a longer pathway.
Riches come now to one, now to another, and like the wheels of cars are ever rolling.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  The foolish man wins food with fruitless labour: that food -I speak the truth- shall be his ruin.
He feeds no trusty friend, no man to love him. All guilt is he who eats with no partaker.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The ploughshare ploughing makes the food that feeds us, and with its feet cuts through the path it follows.
Better the speaking than the silent Brahman: the liberal friend outyalues him who gives not.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  He with one foot hath far outrun the biped, and the two-footed catches the three-footed.
Four-footed creatures come when bipeds call them, and stand and look where five are met together.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  The hands are both alike: their labour differs. The yield of sister milch-kine is unequal.
Twins even diffier in their strength and vigour: two, even kinsmen, differ in their bounty.

## HYMN CXVIII. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  AGNI, refulgent among men thou slayest the devouring fiend,
Bright Ruler in thine own abode.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thou springest up when worshipped well the drops of butter are thy joy
When ladies are brought near to thee.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Honoured with gifts he shines afar, Agni adorable with song:
The dripping ladle balms his face.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Agni with honey in his mouth, honoured with gifts, is balmed with oil,
Refulgent in his wealth of light.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Praised by our hymns thou kindlest thee, Oblation-bearer, for the Gods
As such do mortals call on thee.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  To that Immortal Agni pay worship with oil, ye mortal men,—
Lord of the house, whom none deceives.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  O Agni, burn the Rākṣasas with thine unconquerable flame
Shine guardian of Eternal Law.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  So, Agni, with thy glowing face burn fierce against the female fiends,
Shining among Uruksayas.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Uruksayas have kindled thee, Oblation-bearer, thee, with hymns.
Best Worshipper among mankind.

## HYMN CXIX. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THIS, even this was my resolve, to win a cow, to win a steed:
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Like violent gusts of wind the draughts that I have drunk have lifted me
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The draughts I drank have borne me up, as fleet-foot horses draw a car:
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The hymn hath reached me, like a cow who lows to meet her darling calf:
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  As a wright bends a chariot-seat so round my heart I bend the hymn:
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Not as a mote within the eye count the Five Tribes of men with me:
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The heavens and earth themselves have not grown equal to one half of me
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  I in my grandeur have surpassed the heavens and all this spacious earth
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Aha! this spacious earth will I deposit either here or there
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  In one short moment will I smite the earth in fury here or there:
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  One of my flanks is in the sky; I let the other trail below:
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  1, greatest of the Mighty Ones, am lifted to the firmament:
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  I seek the worshipper's abode; oblation-bearer to the Gods:
Have I not drunk of Soma juice?

## HYMN CXX. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  IN all the worlds That was the Best and Highest whence sprang the Mighty Gods, of splendid valour.
As soon as born he overcomes his foemen, be in whom all who lend him aid are joyful.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Grown mighty in his strength, with ample vigour, he as a foe strikes fear into the Dāsa,
Eager to win the breathing and the breathless. All sang thy praise at banquet and oblation.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  All concentrate on thee their mental vigour, what time these, twice or thrice, are thine assistants.
Blend what is sweeter than the sweet with sweetness: win. quickly with our meath that meath in battle.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Therefore in thee too, thou who winnest riches, at every banquet are the sages joyful.
With mightier power, Bold God, extend thy firmness: let not malignant Yātudhānas harm thee.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Proudly we put our trust in thee in battles, when we behold great wealth the prize of combat.
I with my words impel thy weapons onward, and sharpen with my prayer thy vital vigour.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Worthy of praises, many-shaped, most skilful, most energetic, Āptya of the Aptyas:
He with his might destroys the seven Danus, subduing many who were deemed his equals.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Thou in that house which thy protection guardeth bestowest wealth, the higher and the lower.
Thou stablishest the two much-wandering Mothers, and bringest many deeds to their completion.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Brhaddiva, the foremost of light-winners, repeats these holy prayers, this strength of Indra.
He rules the great self-luminous fold of cattle, and all the doors of light hath he thrown open.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Thus hath Brhaddiva, the great Atharvan, spoken to Indra as himself in person.
The spotless Sisters, they who are his Mothers, with power exalt him and impel him onward.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_110">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CI. — CX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_130">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXXI. — CXXX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
