---
title: "HYMN CXXXI. —"
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_130">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CXXI. — CXXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_150">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXLI. — CXL.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h131"></span>

## HYMN CXXXI. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  To Indra Dyaus the Asura hath bowed him down, to Indra mighty Earth with wide-extending tracts, to win the light, with wide-spread tracts.
All Gods of one accord have set Indra in front preeminent.
For Indra all libations must be set apart, all man's libations set apart.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  In all libations men with hero spirit urge the Universal One, each seeking several light, each fain to win the light apart.
Thee, furthering like a ship, will we set to the chariot-pole of strength,
As men who win with sacrifices Indra's thought, men who win Indra with their lauds.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Couples desirous of thine aid are storming thee, pouring their presents forth to win a stall of kine, pouring gifts, Indra, seeking thee.
When two men seeking spoil or heaven thou bringest face to face in war,
Thou showest, Indra, then the bolt thy constant friend, the Bull that ever waits on thee.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  This thine heroic power men of old time have known, wherewith thou breakest down, Indra, autumnal forts, breakest them down with conquering might.
Thou hast chastised, O Indra, Lord of Strength, the man who worships not,
And made thine own this great earth and these water-floods; with joyous heart these water-floods.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  And they have bruited far this hero-might when thou, O Strong One, in thy joy helpest thy suppliants, who sought to win thee for their Friend.
Their battle-cry thou madest sound victorious in the shocks of war.
One stream after another have they gained from thee, eager for glory have they gained.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Also this morn may he be well inclined to us, mark at our call our offerings and our song of praise, our call that we may win the light.
As thou, O Indra Thunder-armed, wilt, as the Strong One, slay the foe,
Listen thou to the prayer of me a later sage, hear thou a later sage's prayer.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  O Indra, waxen strong and well-inclined to us, thou very mighty, slay the man that is our foe, slay the man, Hero! with thy bolt.
Slay thou the man who injures us: hear thou, as readiest, to hear.
Far be malignity, like mischief on the march, afar be all malignity.

<span id="h132"></span>

## HYMN CXXXII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  HELPED, Indra Maghavan, by thee in war of old, may we subdue in fight the men who strive with us, conquer the men who war with us.
This day that now is close at hand bless him who pours the Soma juice.
In this our sacrifice may we divide the spoil, showing our strength, the spoil of war.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  In war which wins the light, at the free-giver's call, at due oblation of the early-rising one, oblation of the active one,
Indra slew, even as we know—whom each bowed head must reverence.
May all thy bounteous gifts be gathered up for us, yea, the good gifts of thee the Good.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  This food glows for thee as of old at sacrifice, wherein they made thee chooser of the place, for thou choosest the place of sacrifice.
Speak thou and make it known to us: they see within with beams of light.
Indra, indeed, is found a seeker after spoil, spoil-seeker for his own allies.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  So now must thy great deed be lauded as of old, when for the Aṅgirases thou openedst the stall, openedst, giving aid, the stall.
In the same manner for us here fight thou and be victorious:
To him who pours the juice give up the lawless man, the lawless who is wroth with us.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  When with wise plan the Hero leads the people forth, they conquer in the ordered battle, seeking fame, press, eager, onward seeking fame.
To him in time of need they sing for life with offspring and with strength.
Their hymns with Indra find a welcome place of rest: the hymns go forward to the Gods.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Indra and Parvata, our champions in the fight, drive ye away each man who fain would war with us, drive him far from us with the bolt.
Welcome to him concealed afar shall he the lair that he hath found.
So may the Render rend our foes on every side, rend them, O Hero, everywhere.

<span id="h133"></span>

## HYMN CXXXIII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WITH sacrifice I purge both earth and heaven: I burn up great she-fiends who serve not Indra,
Where throttled by thy hand the foes were slaughtered, and in the pit of death lay pierced and mangled.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  O thou who castest forth the stones crushing the sorceresses’ heads,
Break them with thy wide-spreading foot, with thy wide-spreading mighty foot.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Do thou, O Maghavan, beat off these sorceresses' daring strength.
Cast them within the narrow pit. within the deep and narrow pit.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Of whom thou hast ere now destroyed thrice-fifty with thy fierce attacks.
That deed they count a glorious deed, though small to thee, a glorious deed.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  O Indra, crush and bray to bits the fearful fiery-weaponed fiend:
Strike every demon to the ground.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Tear down the mighty ones. O Indra, hear thou us. For heaven hath glowed like earth in fear, O Thunder-armed, as dreading fierce heat, Thunder-armed!
Most Mighty mid the Mighty Ones thou speedest with strong bolts of death,
Not slaying men, unconquered Hero with the brave, O Hero, with the thrice-seven brave.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  The pourer of libations gains the home of wealth, pouring his gift conciliates hostilities, yea, the hostilities of Gods.
Pouring, he strives, unchecked and strong, to win him riches thousandfold.
Indra gives lasting wealth to him who pours forth gifts, yea, wealth he gives that long shall last.

<span id="h134"></span>

## HYMN CXXXIV. Vāyu.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  VĀYU, let fleet-foot coursers bring thee speedily to this our feast, to drink first of the juice we pour, to the first draught of Soma juice.
May our glad hymn, discerning well, uplifted, gratify thy mind.
Come with thy team-drawn car, O Vāyu, to the gift, come to the sacrificer's gift.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  May the joy-giving drops, O Vāyu gladden thee, effectual, well prepared, directed to the heavens, strong, blent with milk and seeking heaven;
That aids, effectual to fulfil, may wait upon our skilful power.
Associate teams come hitherward to grant our prayers: they shall address the hymns we sing.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Two red steeds Vāyu yokes, Vāyu two purple steeds, swift-footed, to the chariot, to the pole to draw, most able, at the pole, to draw.
Wake up intelligence, as when a lover wakes his sleeping love.
Illumine heaven and earth, make thou the Dawns to shine, for glory make the Dawns to shine.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  For thee the radiant Dawns in the far-distant sky broaden their lovely garments forth in wondrous beams, bright-coloured in their new-born beams.
For thee the nectar-yielding Cow pours all rich treasures forth as milk.
The Marut host hast thou engendered from the womb, the Maruts from the womb of heaven.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  For thee the pure bright quickly-flowing Soma-drops, strong in their heightening power, hasten to mix themselves, hasten to the water to be mixed.
To thee the weary coward prays for luck that he may speed away.
Thou by thy law protectest us from every world, yea, from the world of highest Gods.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Thou, Vāyu, who hast none before thee, first of all hast right to drink these offerings of Soma juice, hast right to drink the juice out-poured,
Yea, poured by all invoking tribes who free themselves from taint of sin,
For thee all cows are milked to yield the Soma-milk, to yield the butter and the milk.

<span id="h135"></span>

## HYMN CXXXV. Vāyu, Indra-Vāyu.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  STREWN is the sacred grass; come Vāyu, to our feast, with team of thousands, come, Lord of the harnessed team, with hundreds, Lord of harnessed steeds!
The drops divine are lifted up for thee, the God, to drink them first.
The juices rich in sweets have raised them for thy joy, have raised themselves to give thee strength.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Purified by the stones the Soma flows for thee, clothed with its lovely splendours, to the reservoir, flows clad in its refulgent light.
For thee the Soma is poured forth, thy portioned share mid Gods and men.
Drive thou thy horses, Vāyu, come to us with love, come well-inclined and loving us.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Come thou with hundreds, come with thousands in thy team to this our solemn rite, to taste the sacred food, Vāyu, to taste the offerings.
This is thy seasonable share, that comes co-radiant with the Sun.
Brought by attendant priests pure juice is offered up, Vāyu, pure juice is offered up.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  The chariot with its team of horses bring you both, to guard us and to taste the well-appointed food, Vāyu, to taste the offerings!
Drink of the pleasant-flavoured juice: the first draught is assigned to you.
O Vāyu, with your splendid bounty come ye both, Indra, with bounty come ye both.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  May our songs bring you hither to our solemn rites: these drops of mighty vigour have they beautified, like a swift steed of mighty strength.
Drink of them well-inclined to us, come hitherward to be our help.
Drink, Indra-Vāyu, of these Juices pressed with stones, Strength-givers! till they gladden you.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  These Soma juices pressed for you in waters here, borne by attendant priests, are offered up to you: bright, Vāyu, are they offered up.
Swift through the strainer have they flowed, and here are shed for both of you,
Soma-drops, fain for you, over the wether's fleece, Somas over the wether's fleece.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  O Vāyu, pass thou over all the slumberers, and where the press-stone rings enter ye both that house, yea, Indra, go ye both within.
The joyous Maiden is beheld, the butter flows. With richly laden team come to our solemn rite, yea, Indra, come ye to the rite.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Ride hither to the offering of the pleasant juice, the holy Fig-tree which victorious priests surround: victorious be they still for us.
At once the cows yield milk, the barley-meal is dressed. For thee,
O Vāyu, never shall the cows grow thin, never for thee shall they be dry.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  These Bulls of thine, O Vāyu with the arm of strength, who swiftly fly within the current of thy stream, the Bulls increasing in their might,
Horseless, yet even through the waste swift-moving, whom no shout can stay,
Hard to be checked are they, like sunbeams, in their course. hard to be checked by both the hands.

<span id="h136"></span>

## HYMN CXXXVI. Mitra-Varuṇa.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  BRING adoration ample and most excellent, hymn, offerings, to the watchful Twain, the bountiful, your sweetest to the bounteous Ones.
Sovrans adored with streams of oil and praised at every sacrifice.
Their high imperial might may nowhere be assailed, ne’er may their Godhead be assailed.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  For the broad Sun was seen a path more widely laid, the path of holy law hath been maintained with rays, the eye with Bhaga's rays of light.
Firm-set in heaven is Mitra's home, and Aryaman's and Varuṇa's.
Thence they give forth great vital strength which merits praise, high power of life that men shall praise.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  With Aditi the luminous, the celestial, upholder of the people, come ye day by day, ye who watch sleepless, day by day.
Resplendent might have ye obtained, Ādityas, Lords of liberal gifts.
Movers of men, mild both, are Mitra, Varuṇa, mover of men is Aryaman.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  This Soma be most sweet to Mitra, Varuṇa: he in the drinking-feasts, shall have a share thereof, sharing, a God, among the Gods.
May all the Gods of one accord accept it joyfully to-day.
Therefore do ye, O Kings, accomplish what we ask, ye Righteous Ones, whate’er we ask.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Whoso, with worship serves Mitra and Varuṇa, him guard ye carefully, uninjured, from distress, guard from distress the liberal man.
Aryaman guards him well who acts uprightly following his law,
Who beautifies their service with his lauds, who makes it beautiful with songs of praise.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Worship will I profess to lofty Dyaus, to Heaven and Earth, to Mitra and to bounteous Varuṇa, the Bounteous, the Compassionate.
Praise Indra, praise thou Agni, praise Bhaga and heavenly Aryaman.
Long may we live and have attendant progeny, have progeny with Soma's help.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  With the Gods’ help, with Indra still beside us, may we be held self-splendid with the Maruts.
May Agni, Mitra, Varuṇa give us shelter this may we gain, we and our wealthy princes.

<span id="h137"></span>

## HYMN CXXXVII. Mitra-Varuṇa.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  WITH stones have we pressed out: O come; these gladdening drops are blent with milk, these Soma-drops which gladden you.
Come to us, Kings who reach to heaven, approach us, coming hitherward.
These milky drops are yours, Mitra and Varuṇa, bright Soma juices blent with milk.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Here are the droppings; come ye nigh the Soma-droppings blent with curd, juices expressed and blent with curd.
Now for the wakening of your Dawn together with the Sun-God's rays,
juice waits for Mitra and for Varuṇa to drink, fair juice for drink, for sacrifice.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  As ’twere a radiant-coloured cow, they milk with stones the stalk for you, with stones they milk the Soma-plant.
May ye come nigh us, may ye turn hither to drink the Soma juice.
The men pressed out this juice, Mitra and Varuṇa, pressed out this Soma for your drink.

<span id="h138"></span>

## HYMN CXXXVIII. Pūṣan.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  STRONG Pūṣan's majesty is lauded evermore, the glory of his lordly might is never faint, his song of praise is never faint.
Seeking felicity I laud him nigh to help, the source, of bliss,
Who, Vigorous one, hath drawn to him the hearts of all, drawn them, the Vigorous One, the God.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Thee, then, O Pūṣan, like a swift one on his way, I urge with lauds that thou mayst make the foemen flee, drive, camel-like, our foes afar.
As I, a man, call thee, a God, giver of bliss, to be my Friend,
So make our loudly-chanted praises glorious, in battles make them glorious.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Thou, Pūṣan, in whose friendship they who sing forth praise enjoy advantage, even in wisdom, through thy grace, in wisdom even they are advanced.
So, after this most recent course, we come to thee with prayers for wealth.
Not stirred to anger, O Wide-Ruler, come to us, come thou to us in every fight.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Not stirred to anger, come, Free-giver, nigh to us, to take this gift of ours, thou who hast goats for steeds, Goat-borne! their gift who long for fame.
So, Wonder-Worker! may we turn thee hither with effectual lauds.
I slight thee not, O Pūṣan, thou Resplendent One: thy friendship may not be despised.

<span id="h139"></span>

## HYMN CXXXIX. Viśvedevas.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  HEARD be our prayer! In thought I honour Agni first: now straightway we elect this heavenly company, Indra and Vāyu we elect.
For when our latest thought is raised and on Vivasvān centred well,
Then may our holy songs go forward on their way, our songs as ’twere unto the Gods.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  As there ye, Mitra, Varuṇa, above the true have taken to yourselves the untrue with your mind, with wisdom's mental energy,
So in the seats wherein ye dwell have we beheld the Golden One,
Not with our thoughts or spirit, but with these our eyes, yea, with the eyes that Soma gives.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Aśvins, the pious call you with their hymns of praise, sounding their loud song forth to you, these living men, to their oblations, living men.
All glories and all nourishment, Lords of all wealth! depend on you.
The fellies of your golden chariot scatter drops, Mighty Ones! of your golden car.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Well is it known, O Mighty Ones: ye open heaven; for you the chariot-steeds are yoked for morning rites, unswerving steeds for morning rites,
We set you on the chariot-seat, ye Mighty, on the golden car.
Ye seek mid-air as by a path that leads aright, as by a path that leads direct.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  O Rich in Strength, through your great power vouchsafe us blessings day and night.
The offerings which we bring to you shall never fail, gifts brought by us shall never fail.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  These Soma-drops, strong Indra! drink for heroes, poured, pressed out by pressing-stones, are welling forth for thee, for thee the drops are welling forth.
They shall make glad thy heart to give, to give wealth great and wonderful.
Thou who acceptest praise come glorified by hymns, come thou to us benevolent.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Quickly, O Agni, hear us: magnified by us thou shalt speck for us to the Gods adorable yea, to the Kings adorable:
When, O ye Deities, ye gave that Milch-cow to the Aṅgirases,
They milked her: Aryaman, joined with them, did the work: he knoweth her as well as I.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Ne’er may these manly deeds of yours for us grow old, never may your bright glories fall into decay, never before our time decay.
What deed of yours, new every age, wondrous, surpassing man, rings forth,
Whatever, Maruts! may be difficult to gain, grant us, whate’er is hard to gain.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Dadhyac of old, Aṅgiras, Priyamedha these, and Kaṇva, Atri, Manu knew my birth, yea, those of ancient days and Manu knew.
Their long line stretcheth to the Gods, our birth-connexions are with them.
To these, for their high station, I bow down with song, to Indra, Agni, bow with song.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Let the Invoker bless: let offerers bring choice gifts; Bṛhaspati the Friend doth sacrifice with Steers, Steers that have many an excellence.
Now with our ears we catch the sound of the press-stone that rings afar.
The very Strong hath gained the waters by himself, the strong gained many a resting-place.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  O ye Eleven Gods whose home is heaven, O ye Eleven who make earth your dwelling,
Ye who with might, Eleven, live in waters, accept this sacrifice, O Gods, with pleasure.

<span id="h140"></span>

## HYMN CXL. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  To splendid Agni seated by the altar, loving well his home, I bring the food as ’twere his place of birth.
I clothe the bright One with my hymn as with a robe, him with the car of light, bright-hued, dispelling gloom.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Child of a double birth he grasps at triple food; in the year's course what he hath swallowed grows anew.
He, by another's mouth and tongue a noble Bull, with other, as an elephant, consumes the trees.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The pair who dwell together, moving in the dark bestir themselves: both parents hasten to the babe,
Impetuous-tongued, destroying, springing swiftly forth, one to be watched and cherished, strengthener of his sire.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  For man, thou Friend of men, these steeds of thine are yoked, impatient, lightly running, ploughing blackened lines,
Discordant-minded, fleet, gliding with easy speed, urged onward by the wind and rapid in their course.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Dispelling on their way the horror of black gloom, making a glorious show these flames of his fly forth,
When o’er the spacious tract he spreads himself abroad, and rushes panting on with thunder and with roar.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Amid brown plants he stoops as if adorning them, and rushes bellowing like a bull upon his wives.
Proving his might, he decks the glory of his form, and shakes his horns like one terrific, hard to stay.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  Now covered, now displayed he grasps as one who knows his resting-place in those who know him well.
A second time they wax and gather Godlike power, and blending both together change their Parents' form.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The maidens with long, tresses hold him in embrace; dead, they rise up again to meet the Living One.
Releasing them from age with a loud roar he comes, filling them with new spirit, living, unsubdued.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Licking the mantle of the Mother, far and wide he wanders over fields with beasts that flee apace.
Strengthening all that walk, licking up all around, a blackened path, forsooth, he leaves where’er he goes.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  O Agni, shine resplendent with our wealthy chiefs, like a loud-snorting bull, accustomed to the house.
Thou casting off thine infant wrappings blazest forth as though thou hadst put on a coat of mail for war.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  May this our perfect prayer be dearer unto thee than an imperfect prayer although it please thee well.
With the pure brilliancy that radiates from thy form, mayest thou grant to us abundant store of wealth.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Grant to our chariot, to our house, O Agni, a boat with moving feet and constant oarage,
One that may further well our wealthy princes and all the folk, and be our certain refuge.
<p id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup>  Welcome our laud with thine approval, Agni. May earth and heaven and freely flowing rivers
Yield us long life and food and corn and cattle, and may the red Dawns choose for us their choicest.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_130">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN CXXI. — CXXX.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_1_150">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN CXLI. — CXL.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
