---
title: "HYMN XLI. — L."
description: "The Rig-Veda"
published: true
date: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-13T23:20:32Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_40">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XXXI. — XL.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_60">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN LI. —  LX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="h41"></span>

## HYMN XLI. Aśvins.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THAT general Car of yours, invoked by many a man, that comes to our libations, three-wheeled, meet for lauds,
That circumambient Car, worthy of sacrifice, we call with our pure hymns at earliest flush of dawn.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Ye, O Nāsatyas, mount that early-harnessed Car, that travels early, laden with its freight of balm,
Wherewith ye, Heroes, visit clans who sacrifice, even the poor man's worship where the priest attends.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  If to the deft Adhvaryu with the meath in hand, or to the Kindler firm in strength, the household friend,
Or to the sage's poured libations ye approach, come thence, O Aśvins, now to drink the offered meath.

<span id="h42"></span>

## HYMN XLII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  EVEN as an archer shoots afar his arrow, offer the laud to him with meet adornment.
Quell with your voice the wicked's voice, O sages. Singer, make Indra rest beside the Soma.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Draw thy Friend to thee like a cow at milking: O Singer, wake up Indra as a lover.
Make thou the Hero haste to give us riches even as a vessel filled brimful with treasure.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Why, Maghavan, do they call thee Bounteous; Giver? Quicken me: thou, I hear, art he who quickens.
Śakra, let my intelligence be active, and bring us luck that finds great wealth, O Indra.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Standing, in battle for their rights, together, the people, Indra, in the fray invoke thee.
Him who brings gifts the Hero makes his comrade: with him who pours no juice he seeks not friendship.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Whoso with plenteous food for him expresses strong Somas as much quickly-coming treasure,
For him he overthrows in early morning his swift well-weaponed foes, and slays the tyrant.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  He unto whom we offer praises, Indra, Maghavan, who hath joined to ours his wishes,—
Before him even afar the foe must tremble: low before him must bow all human glories.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  With thy fierce bolt, O God invoked of many, drive to a distance from afar the foeman.
O Indra, give us wealth in corn and cattle, and make thy singer's prayer gain strength and riches.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Indra, the swallower of strong libations rich in the boons they bring, the potent Somas,
He, Maghavan, will not restrict his bounty he brings much wealth unto the Soma-presser.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Yea, by superior play he wins advantage, when he, a gambler, piles his gains in season.
Celestial-natured, he o’erwhelms with riches the devotee who keeps not back his treasure.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  O Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want with store of grain and cattle.
May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions by our own exertion.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Bṛhaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and from below, from sinners!
May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as Friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.

<span id="h43"></span>

## HYMN XLIII. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  IN perfect unison all yearning hymns of mine that find the light of heaven have sung forth Indra's praise.
As wives embrace their lord, the comely bridegroom, so they compass Maghavan about that he may help.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Directed unto thee my spirit never strays, for I have set my hopes on thee, O Much-invoked!
Sit, Wonderful! as King upon the sacred grass, and let thy drinking-place be by the Soma juice.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  From indigence and hunger Indra turns away: Maghavan hath dominion over precious wealth.
These the Seven Rivers flowing on their downward path increase the vital vigour of the potent Steer.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  As on the fair-leafed tree rest birds, to Indra flow the gladdening Soma juices that the bowls contain.
Their face that glows with splendour through their mighty power hath found the shine of heaven for man, the Āryas' light.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  As in the game a gambler piles his winnings, so Maghavan, sweeping all together, gained the Sun
This mighty deed of thine none other could achieve, none, Maghavan, before thee, none in recent time.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Maghavan came by turns to all the tribes of men: the Steer took notice of the people's songs of praise.
The man in whose libations Śakra hath delight by means of potent Somas vanquisheth his foes.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  When Soma streams together unto Indra flow like waters to the river, rivulets to the lake,
In place of sacrifice sages exalt his might, as the rain swells the corn by moisture sent from heaven.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  He rushes through the region like a furious Bull, he who hath made these floods the dames of worthy lords.
This Maghavan hath found light for the man who brings oblation, sheds the juice, and promptly pours his gifts.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Let the keen axe come forth together with the light: here be,.as erst, the teeming cow of sacrifice.
Let the Red God shine bright with his refulgent ray, and let the Lord of heroes glow like heaven's clear sheen.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  O Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want with store of grain and cattle.
May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions by our own exertion.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Bṛhaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and from below, from sinners.
May Indra from the front, and from the centre, as Friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.

<span id="h44"></span>

## HYMN XLIV. Indra.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  MAY Sovran Indra come to the carousal, he who by Holy Law is strong and active,
The overcomer of all conquering forces with his great steer-like power that hath no limit.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Firm-seated is thy car, thy Steeds are docile; thy hand, O King, holds, firmly grasped, the thunder.
On thy fair path, O Lord of men, come quickly: we will increase thy powers when thou hast drunken.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Let strong and mighty Steeds who bear this Mighty Indra, the Lord of men, whose arm wields thunder,
Bring unto us, as sharers of our banquet, the Steer of conquering might, of real vigour.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  So like a Bull thou rushest to the Lord who loves the trough, the Sage, the prop of vigour, in the vat,
Prepare thine energies, collect them in thyself: be for our profit as the Master of the wise.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  May precious treasures come to us-so will I pray. Come to the votary's gift offered with beauteous laud.
Thou art the Lord, as such sit on this holy grass: thy vessels are inviolate as Law commands.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Far went our earlist invocation of the Gods, and won us glories that can never be surpassed.
They who could not ascend the ship of sacrifice, sink down in desolation, trembling with alarm.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  So be the others, evil-hearted, far away, whose horses, difficult to harness, have been yoked.
Here in advance men stand anear to offer gifts, by whom full many a work that brings reward is done.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  He firmly fixed the plains and mountains as they shook. Dyaus thundered forth and made the air's mid-region quake.
He stays apart the two confronting bowls; he sings lauds in the potent Soma's joy when he hath drunk.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  I bear this deftly-fashioned goad of thine, wherewith thou, Maghavan, shalt break the strikers with the hoof.
At this libation mayst thou be well satisfied. Partake the juice, partake the worship, Maghavan.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  O Much-invoked, may we subdue all famine and evil want with store of grain and cattle.
May we allied, as first in rank, with princes obtain possessions by our own exertion.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Bṛhaspati protect us from the rearward, and from above, and from below, from sinners.
May Indra from the front and from the centre, as Friend to friends, vouchsafe us room and freedom.

<span id="h45"></span>

## HYMN XLV. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  FIRST Agni sprang to life from out of Heaven: the second time from us came Jātavedas.
Thirdly the Manly-souled was in the waters. The pious lauds and kindles him the Eternal.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Agni, we know thy three powers in three stations, we know thy forms in many a place divided.
We know what name supreme thou hast in secret: we know the source from which thou hast proceeded.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  The Manly-souled lit thee in sea and waters, man's Viewer lit thee in the breast of heaven,
There as thou stoodest in the third high region the Steers increased thee in the water's bosom.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Agni roared out, like Dyaus what time he thunders: he licked the ground about the plants he flickered.
At once, when born, he looked around enkindled, and lightened heaven and earth within with splendour.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The spring of glories and support of riches, rouser of thoughts and guardian of the Soma,
Good Son of Strength, a King amid the waters, in forefront of the Dawns he shines enkindled.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Germ of the world, ensign of all creation, be sprang to life and filled the earth and heavens.
Even the firm rock he cleft when passing over, when the Five Tribes brought sacrifice to Agni.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  So among mortals was Immortal Agni stablished as holy wise and willing envoy.
He waves the red smoke that he lifts above him, striving to reach the heavens with radiant lustre.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Like gold to look on, far he shone refulgent, beaming imperishable life for glory,
Agni by vital powers became immortal when his prolific Father Dyaus begat him.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Whoso this day, O God whose flames are lovely, prepares a cake, O Agni, mixt with butter,
Lead thou and further him to higher fortune, to bliss bestowed by Gods, O thou Most Youthful.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Endow him, Agni, with a share of glory, at every song of praise sung forth enrich him.
Dear let him be to Sūrya, dear to Agni, preeminent with son and children's children.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  While, Agni, day by day men pay thee worship they win themselves all treasures worth the wishing.
Allied with thee, eager and craving riches, they have disclosed the stable filled with cattle.
<p id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup>  Agni, the Friend of men, the Soma's keeper, Vaiśvānara, hath been lauded by the Ṛṣis.
We will invoke benignant Earth and Heaven: ye Deities, give us wealth with hero children.

<span id="h46"></span>

## HYMN XLVI. Agni.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  STABLISHED for thee, to lend thee vital forces, Giver of wealth, Guard of his servant's body.
The Great Priest, born, who knows the clouds, Abider with men, is seated in the lap of waters.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Worshipping, seeking him with adoration like some lost creature followed by its footprints,
Wise Bhṛgus, yearning in their hearts, pursued him, and found him lurking where the floods are gathered.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  On the Cow's forehead, with laborious searching, Trita, the offspring of Vibhiavas, found him.
Born in our houses, Youthful, joy-bestower, he now becomes the central point of brightness.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Yearning, with homage, they have set and made him blithe Priest among mankind, oblation-bearer,
Leader of rites and Purifier, envoy of men, as sacrifice that still advances.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  The foolish brought the ne’er-bewildered forward, great, Victor, Song-inspirer, Fort-destroyer.
Leading the Youth gold-bearded, like a courser gleaming with wealth, they turned their hymn to profit.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  Holding his station firmly in the houses, Trita sat down within his home surrounded
Thence, as Law bids, departs the Tribes' Companion having collected men with no compulsion.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  His are the fires, eternal, purifying, that make the houses move, whose smoke is shining,
White, waxing in their strength, for ever stirring, and sitting in the wood; like winds are Somas.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  The tongue of Agni bears away the praisesong, and, through his care for Earth, her operations.
Him, bright and radiant, living men have stablished as their blithe Priest, the Chief of Sacrificers.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  That Agni, him whom Heaven and Earth engendered, the Waters. Tvaṣṭar, and with might, the Bhṛgus,
Him Mātariśvan and the Gods have fashioned holy for man and first to be entreated.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  Agni, whom Gods have made oblationbearer, and much-desiring men regard as holy,
Give life to him who lauds thee when he worships, and then shall glorious men in troops adore thee.

<span id="h47"></span>

## HYMN XLVII. Indra Vaikuntha.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  THY right hand have we grasped in ours, O Indra, longing for treasure, Treasure-Lord of treasures!
Because we know thee, Hero, Lord of cattle: vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  Wealth, fully armed, good guard and kind protector, sprung from four seas, the prop and stay of treasures,
Fraught with great bounties, meet for praise and glory; vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Wealth, with good Brahmans, Indra! God-attended, high, wide, and deep, arid based on broad foundations,
Strong, with famed Ṛṣis, conquering our foemen: vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Victorious, winning strength, with hero sages, confirmed in power, most useful, wealth-attracting,
True, Indra! crushing forts and slaying Dasyus: vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Wealthy in heroes and in cars and horses, strength hundredfold and thousandfold, O Indra,
With manly sages, happy troops, Iight-winning: vouchsafe us mighty and resplentdent riches.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  To Saptagu the sage, the holy-minded, to him, Bṛhaspati, the song approaches,
Aṅgiras' Son who must be met with homage: vouchsafe us mighty and reslendent riches.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  My lauds, like envoys, craving loving-kindness, go forth to Indra with their strong entreaty,
Moving his heart and uttered by my spirit: vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Grant us the boon for which I pray, O Indra, a spacious home unmatched among the people.
To this may Heaven and Earth accord approval: vouchsafe us mighty and resplendent riches.

<span id="h48"></span>

## HYMN XLVIII. Indra Vaikuntha.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I WAS the first possessor of all precious gear: the wealth of every man I win and gather up.
On me as on a Father living creatures call; I deal enjoyment to tho. man who offers gifts.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  I, Indra, am Atharvan's stay and firm support: I brought forth kine to Trita from the Dragon's grasp.
I stripped the Dasyus of their manly might, and gave the cattle-stalls to Matarigvan and Dadhyac.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  For me hath Tvaṣṭar forged the iron thunderbolt: in me the Gods have centred intellectual power.
My sheen is like the Sun's insufferably bright: men honour me as Lord for past and future deeds.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  I won myself these herdi of cattle, steeds and kine, and gold in ample store, with my destructive bolt.
I give full many a thousand to the worshipper, what time the Somas and the lauds have made me glad.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Indra am I none ever wins my wealth from me never at any time am I a thrall to death.
Pressing the Soma, ask riches from me alone: ye, Pūrus, in my friendship shall not suffer harm.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  These, breathing loud in fury, two and two, who caused Indra to bring his bolt of thunder to the fray,
The challengers, I struck with deadly weapon down: firm stand what words the God speaks to his worshippers.
This One by stronger might I conquered singly; yea, also two: shall three prevail against me?
Like many sheaves upon the floor I thrash them. How can my foes, the Indraless, revile me?
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Against the Gungus I made Atithigva strong, and kept him mid the folk like Vṛtra-conquering strength,
When I won glory in the great foe-slaying fight, in battle where Karanja fell, and Parṇaya.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  With food for mine enjoyment Sapya Nami came: he joined me as a friend of old in search of kine.
As I bestowed on him an arrow for the fight I made him worthy of the song apd hymn of praise.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  One of the two hath Soma, seen within it; the Herdsman with the bone shows forth the other.
He, fain to fight the Bull whose horns were sharpened, stood fettered in the demon's ample region.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  I, as a God, ne’er violate the statutes of Gods, of Vasus, Rudriyas, Ādityas.
These Gods have formed me for auspicious vigour, unconquered and invincible for ever.

<span id="h49"></span>

## HYMN XLIX.Indra Vaikuntha.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I HAVE enriched the singer with surpassing wealth; I have allowed the holy hymn to strengthen me.
I, furtherer of him who offers sacrifice, have conquered in each fight the men who worship not.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  The People of the heavens, the waters, and the earth have stablished me among the Gods with Indra's name.
I took unto myself the two swift vigorous Bays that speed on divers paths, and the fierce bolt for strength.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  With deadly blows I smote Atka for Kavi's sake; I guarded Kutsa well with these saving helps.
As Śuṣṇa's slayer I brandished the dart of death: I gave not up the Āryan name to Dasyu foes.
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Smadibha, Tugra, and the Vetasus I gave as prey to Kutsa, father-like, to succour him.
I was a worthy King to rule the worshipper, when I gave Tuji dear inviolable gifts.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  I gave up Mṛgaya to Srutarvan as his prey because he ever followed me and kept my laws.
For Āyu's sake I caused Veta to bend and bow, and into Savya's hand delivered Padgrbhi.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  1, I crushed Navavāstva of the lofty car, the Dāsa, as the Vṛtra-slayer kills the fiends;
When straightway on the region's farthest edge I brought the God who makes the lights to broaden and increase.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  I travel round about borne onward in my might by the fleet-footed dappled Horses of the Sun.
When man's libation calls me to the robe of state I soon repel the powerful Dasyu with my blows.
<p id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup>  Stronger am I than Nabus, I who slew the seven: I glorified with might Yadu and Turvaga.
I brought another low, with strength I bent his strength: I let the mighty nine-and-ninety wax in power.
<p id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup>  Bull over all the streams that flow along the earth, I took the Seven Rivers as mine own domain.
I, gifted with great wisdom, spread the floods abroad: by war I found for man the way to high success.
<p id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup>  I set within these cows the white milk which no God, not even Tvaṣṭar's self, had there deposited,—
Much-longed-for, in the breasts, the udders of the kine, the savoury sweets of meath, the milk and Soma juice.
<p id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup>  Even thus hath Indra Maghavan, truly bounteous, sped Gods and men with mighty operation.
The pious glorify all these thine exploits, Lord of Bay Coursers, Strong, and Selfresplendent.

<span id="h50"></span>

## HYMN L. Indra Vaikuntha.

<p id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup>  I LAUD your Mighty One who joyeth in the juice, him who is shared by all men, who created all;
Indra, whose conquering strength is powerful in war, whose fame and manly vigour Heaven and Earth revere.
<p id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup>  He with his friend is active, lauded, good to man, Indra who must be glorified by one like me.
Hero, Lord of the brave, all cars are thy delight, warring with Vṛtra, or for waters, or for spoil.
<p id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup>  Who are the men whom thou wilt further, Indra, who strive to win thy bliss allied with riches?
Who urged thee forward to exert thy power divine, to valour, in the war for waters on their fields?
<p id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup>  Thou, Indra, through the holy prayer art mighty, worthy of sacrifice at all libations.
In every fight thou castest heroes on the ground: thou art the noblest song, O Lord of all the folk.
<p id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup>  Help now, as Highest, those who toil at sacrifice: well do the people know thy great protecting might.
Thou shalt be Everlasing, Giver of success yea, on all these libations thou bestowest strength.
<p id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup>  All these libations thou makest effectual, of which thou art thyself supporter, Son of Power.
Therefore thy vessel is to be esteemed the best, sacrifice, holy text, prayer, and exalted speech.
<p id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup>  They who with flowing Soma pray to thee, O Sage, to pour on them thy gifts of opulence and wealth,
May they come forward, through their spirit, on the path of bliss, in the wild joy of Soma juice effused.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_40">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">HYMN XXXI. — XL.</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Rig_Veda/Book_10_60">
          <span class="pr-2">HYMN LI. —  LX.</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
