


# The Location of Uversa 

By Tom Allen, Oklahoma City, OK  

In the end, we really cannot say just exactly where Uversa is located. It has an indeterminate central location, but interpretations of the language used leave a plethora of cosmographical possibilities. Speculation must be exhaustive in order to guess correctly about the location of Uversa, but even then it is just a guess. In the following quotes, the bolded and underlined areas are for emphasis, and because these are the words we must mostly consider in comprehending the location of Uversa. This discussion will require looking back on these words repeatedly and carefully analyzing their meanings and diction interpretations. These are all of the references to the location of Uversa in _The Urantia Book_. 

> The **whirl** of the ten major sectors, the so-called star drifts, **about the Uversa headquarters** of Orvonton. [[UB 15:3.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p3_13)]
> 
> While each superuniverse government presides **near the center of the evolutionary universes of its space segment**,... While **sharing the light of near-by suns**,... These headquarters worlds belong to one of the **greater systems situated near the astronomical center of their respective superuniverses**. [[UB 15:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_1)]
> 
> Uversa is favorably situated for the work of this colony, not only because of its central location, but also because there are no gigantic living or dead suns near at hand to disturb the energy currents. [[UB 30:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p3_2)]
> 
> The Satania system of inhabited worlds is **far removed from Uversa and that great sun cluster** which functions as the **physical or astronomic center** of the seventh superuniverse. **From Jerusem**, the headquarters of Satania, it is **over two hundred thousand light-years** to the **physical center** of the superuniverse of Orvonton, far, far away in the **dense diameter** of the Milky Way. Satania is on the periphery of the local universe, and Nebadon is now well out towards the edge of Orvonton. From the outermost system of inhabited worlds to the center of the superuniverse is a trifle less than **two hundred and fifty thousand light-years**. [[UB 32:2.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_11)]

Using the model that Orvonton is comprised of the local group of galaxies, at least three possible solutions as to the location of Uversa can be drawn from the clues given in these quotations.   

## Barycenter Solution 

A barycenter is an astronomical term to denote the specific location where the common center of mass around which two or more bodies revolve. The local group has a barycenter in an unknown location. It is conceivable from these quotes that Uversa is “near” the “astronomic center”, or barycenter, “of the evolutionary universes of its space segment”. The barycenter could be the location of Uversa if a “greater system” or “that great sun cluster” is “near the center.” At the center of the Milky Way it is believed that there is situated an immense black hole estimated to be the mass of four million suns named Sagittarius A*. If SagA* can be described as a gigantic living or dead sun, then Uversa could not be located there, especially since the center of the Milky Way is only about twenty five to thirty thousand light years away from us, not over two hundred thousand light years. The physical center, which would be the barycenter, is in the direction of the dense diameter of the Milky Way and could be two hundred thousand light years in the direction of center of our galaxy, or to anywhere in the direction along the diameter from perimeter to perimeter in the line of site on the plane of the Milky Way. The “dense diameter of the Milky Way” is one hundred thousand light years wide. Notice that it does not say “densest.” Thus the dense diameter can be conceived as area spanning 360° around Monmatia. 

Uversa is “near” the center, but how near? The barycenter is an undetermined place that lies somewhere around the Milky Way and the rest of the local group. The word, “near” is so nonspecific that many interpretations are available. The barycenter solution is one of them, depending on how far “near” is. If the barycenter of the local group is two hundred thousand light years in some direction along a one hundred thousand light year dense diameter from Jerusem, and if a great sun cluster is identified along that line of sight, then Uversa would be “near” that cluster. The barycenter solution works conceptually for now, but if the barycenter is well demarcated in the future and is not at the center of a “greater system,” or in the direction of the dense diameter of the Milky Way, then this conclusion must be ruled out. But finding the location of the barycenter is a daunting task.

image Possible directions toward the barycenter all through the “dense diameter” of the Milky Way, with speculation that the direction of the dense diameter is most likely south west, south east or due south toward Andromeda from the current Monmatia position. This is because oms (outermost system) is 50,000 lys away further away than Jerusem. These arrows can be conceived in three dimensions with the arrows pointing in all directions up or down as well. 

Members of the local group are still being located and the mass estimates will long be suspect and uncertain in the near future. Much research must be completed before further revelation will be available. The barycenter would probably be to the south in the picture above if the barycenter is intuitively closer to Andromeda and Triangulum which are in this direction. This is because the “outermost system” (oms) is another fifty thousand light years away. In about one hundred and twenty five million years, oms will be nearer the barycenter than Jerusem and we will be two hundred and fifty million light years from Uversa provided the barycenter and Uversa are somewhat south of the Milky Way. 

What did the revelators mean with the term “dense diameter?” The above illustration gives any number of directions such a diameter can take relative to our sun’s location. Of course it is densest in the direction of Sagittarius, but there is lessened density still in the opposite direction and toward Andromeda. 

More evidence that Uversa is possibly located at the barycenter is the analogous fact that Salvington is located “at the exact energy-mass center of the local universe. But your local universe is not a single astronomic system, though a large system does exist at its physical c e n t e r.” [[UB 32:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_4)] If the Salvington model resembles a similar location for Uversa, then the superuniverse capital could also be located at the exact energy-mass center, or barycenter, of the local group, as is Salvington. The energy- mass center for the Virgo supercluster is not even remotely calculable. 

The “outermost system” of inhabited worlds is two hundred and fifty thousand light years away on the far side of the Milky Way, away from the direction to Uversa and the barycenter. Because the Milky Way is in rotation, or whirling, in about one hundred million years, we will be on the other side of the galaxy and we will perhaps be the outermost system of inhabited worlds. So if the outermost system is fifty thousand more light years away today, the direction toward the barycenter would be more likely in the southerly direction as depicted in the above picture.  

## Hypotenuse Theory 

Some may insist that the physical center in the dense diameter of the Milky Way cannot be interpreted any other way than as the absolute center of the Milky Way, or the location of SagA*. This theory is not likely, but consider that Uversa is directly above or below, “near,” this physical center. This concept is obtusely akin to the barycenter solution but gives another specific direction for the location of Uversa. If the physical center of Uversa is located in a “greater system” directly above or below the center of the galactic bulge, then the hypotenuse of the right angle from Jerusem to Uversa would be 200,000 light years. The distance to the center of the Milky Way from Urantia is about thirty thousand light years. (Jerusem is probably not relatively far away from Urantia.) The vertical value would be 197,000 light years above or below the galactic bulge. Boötes Dwarf I is presently nearly vertical to the center of the Milky Way and is estimated to be 197,000 light years away.  

Only two or three “greater systems” have presently been identified to lie within 200,000 light years (±10). They are Boötes Dwarf I, Small Magellanic Cloud, and Ursa Minor Dwarf.[^1] This solution is not very likely owing to the fact that these dwarf galaxies seem to be rotating around the Milky Way awaiting amalgamation therein, but is interesting to contemplate, pending true direction estimates of rotation and more specific location and proper motion measurements. Another problem with this location, is that SagA* periodically erupts with incredible volumes of cosmic rays which project vertically to the plane of the Milky Way. This “seyfert flare” of X-rays, gamma rays, radio waves probably directly hit the Magellanic clouds around two million years ago with scars of ionization and hydrogen streaming.^2 This is probably not a very stable place for Uversa to be situated. But perhaps Uversa is well insulated from such catastrophes. Of course these greater systems may not be gravitationally bound to the Milky Way and conceptually the Milky Way is revolving around this “great sun cluster.” This theory is likely to be easily dismissed, but at least it is an imaginable solution. 

## Diverting Distance Theory 

The two hundred and fifty thousand light year distance to Uversa can be explained by diverting the distance to the Orvonton capital. Suppose you were to travel from San Francisco to New York City. If you decide to fly, as the crow flies, you would board your plane and about two thousand five hundred miles later you would arrive. Instead, you decide to drive. At the end of your journey you notice you have driven about three thousand miles. This is an 18% difference in distance. This distance would even be less if you drove through an imaginary tunnel that ran in a straight line through the earth’s crust to New York. Perhaps the distance to Uversa is similar in distance measurements. If you went directly to Uversa as the neutrino flies through uncurved space, it may be a significantly shorter distance than if you had to get there through the many routes through our well organized but dispersed superuniverse. Today we know that the distance to the physical center of the Milky Way is approximately twenty five to thirty thousand light years. 

Whatever the “physical center” of the superuniverse of Orvonton turns out to be, barycenter, SagA*, or somewhere else, the distance to the central location of Uversa can be measured differently by imagining that the distance to Uversa as described by the revelators is the route taken by celestial beings, not in the line of sight, but rather diverted around the spiral arms of the Milky Way from Jerusem through Edentia, Salvington, Ensa, and Splandon to Uversa, all of which adds up to over two hundred thousand light years. Such thinking “outside the box” is plausible and cannot be ruled out pending further revelation.   

## So-Called Star Drifts 

The first quote above apparently does not define the location of Uversa as being central to the Milky Way. If the so-called star drifts, as detailed in Chapter 16, are imbedded within the Milky Way and if they whirl about the Uversa headquarters of Orvonton, then the barycenter solution is still the most plausible of all solutions. The whirling could be conceived as the age long orbiting of all the major sectors within the rotating Milky Way, whirling around the barycenter which is near to where Uversa is located. The major sectors of the Milky Way would thus whirl around the SagA* as they all make their way around the more distant barycenter. Of course the location of Uversa is “near” the center, so again, what is the relative definition of “near?” Someday in the distant superuniverse ages of light and life, when Orvonton has completed its growth, the barycenter will perhaps be at the center of the star drift whirl. Does our revelation project such a condition even when the barycenter is presently afar off? Only further revelation has the final answer to these probing questions, although future scientific evolution will be needed to make revelation available. 

Critical interpretation can thus come up with these alternative speculative conclusions as to the location of Uversa if the local group is the model for superuniverse number seven. If the Virgo supercluster is the model for the superuniverse, then the two hundred thousand light years number as the distance to the physical center of Orvonton is exponentially too low. It is very difficult to conceive that analogy can be used to reconcile the huge difference in distances. If Uversa is in the Virgo cluster, then it is estimated on average to be about sixty million light years away. In spite of probable distance miscalculations, the Virgo supercluster is estimated to be one hundred to two hundred million light years in diameter.[^3],[^4] Therefore those who believe that the Virgo supercluster is Orvonton must assume that these distances are fairly reliable, since the papers reveal that spectroscopic estimations are fairly reliable among our superuniverses. [[UB 12:4.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_14)] We could make the supposition that the other six superclusters, which in this model would logically make up the grand universe, are approximately as large. This would extend the grand universe to a circumference of at least seven hundred million to fourteen hundred million light years making the diameter at least two to five hundred million light years. _Urantia Book_ numbers are at strong variance. Even the first outer space level which is assumed to be much larger than the grand universe is revealed to be only about fifty million light years in depth beyond the grand universe.[^5] [[UB 12:1.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_14)]

Local groups closest to us, which are feasibly our associate superuniverses, are from ten to thirty million light years away. These are the distances which seem to be fairly reliable. Comparing the size of superclusters with the specific dimensions given in the Urantia papers, the difference is enormous. Two hundred thousand versus sixty million is not reconcilable outside of analogy, thus believing that the revelators were deliberately in error. Could analogy seek to set up a ratio which if properly analyzed would supply an accurate distance solution? Only the space contraction distance measurement theory could begin literally to compensate for these huge discrepancies. (Chapter 7) True, the English usage is not clear, but it is not unreasonable. Supercluster as superuniverse advocates could agree that distance estimates are grossly in error, but by this huge magnitude? 

Irwin Ginsburgh speculated that because of the current distance estimates of distant galaxies, the Great Attractor, and the small diameter of the first outer space level given in the papers, that the numbers in the Urantia papers are technically wrong by error or by design.^6 This is how he settles his concept of the Milky Way as minor sector. He concludes that these quotes were actually meant to be increased by a factor of one thousand. The two hundred and fifty thousand light year number should have read two hundred and fifty million light years. The twenty-five million light year activity extending into the first outer space level should have read twenty-five billion light years. [[UB 12:1.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_14)] He contends that with current distance understanding, we should just figure out that this is what they meant, but could not tell us. Instead they gave a figure easily transposed to the higher number by a factor of one thousand to make us guess at their analogy with the knowledge that these numbers will bear out satisfactorily in the future. 

Is this the shadow of a hair turning or is it ethically reasonable and responsible for the revelators to have done this? And why? This is a convenient conclusion, but obviates the possibility of conclusively determining true distance cosmology from the numbers given. How many other times would the revelators have done this with the myriad of other numbers given in the papers? The apparently inaccurate one million light year Andromeda distance gave a then humanly perceived value that could be verified in the future as incorrect. No human is saying that we are two hundred thousand light years from Uversa. This does not need to be corrected from inaccurate human calculation. We could not trust any number given in the papers if it is incorrect. If it suited our paradigm, we could say the revelators meant that there are more than one trillion suns illuminating and warming Orvonton instead of more than ten trillion, or Andronover was initiated a billion years ago instead of a trillion. We must work with the numbers we have and not be tempted to rewrite them. 

The following quote indicates that advanced local universes reside in the great central buldge, and may give a hint as to the location of Uversa: 

> The local universes are in closer proximity as they approach Havona; the circuits are greater in number, and there is increased superimposition, layer upon layer. But farther out from the eternal center there are fewer and fewer systems, layers, circuits, and universes. [[UB 15:3.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p3_16)]

This difficult paragraph could be interpreted as follows. The “approach” to Havona is experienced not in physical distance, but in a figurative way. This tells us that the “closer proximity” is in the manner of approaching the relative perfection of Havona. These advanced local universes were the earliest local universes in Orvonton and accumulated near the center of the Milky Way’s watchlike center. These local universes have “increased superimposition.” This is a good description of the center bulge of the Milky Way. Untold local universes, many in light and life, probably abide there. 

If one considers the diverting distance theory to Uversa explained in Chapter 9, and one believes that Uversa is near the center of the Milky Way, then this quote makes sense in terms of physical distance. If Uversa is at the center of the Milky Way, one would need to subscribe to the diverting distance theory postulated in Chapter 9 to overcome the two hundred thousand distance problem which is the distance from Jerusem to Uversa. 

If Uversa is near the middle of the Milky Way, then all the highly evolved local universes superimposed upon one another would be closer to Havona, because the only way to enter Havona is by going from Uversa. 

Analogy can only say that these superimpositions are behavior from the watchlike clumping of galaxies about the Virgo cluster. But if one believes that the Milky Way is a minor sector, then why did this paragraph not mention minor sectors rather than local universes? The last use of the term “universes” probably means local universes, but analogists could interpret it as minor sectors as well. Analogists must postulate that the thousands of Virgo supercluster galaxies are minor sectors. But, of course only one thousand minor sectors are projected in Orvonton. The idea that the thousands of Virgo supercluster galaxies are minor sectors is either inconsistent with the concept of supercluster Orvonton, or an amalgamation theory must be surmised among the many galaxies within the Virgo supercluster. 

A conclusive search to find Uversa will be finalized when we find a “great sun cluster” that is more than two hundred thousand light years away in the direction of the local group barycenter and through the dense diameter of the Milky Way. 

## Notes

[^1]: [http://www.atlasofheuniverse.com/galaxies.html](http://www.atlasofheuniverse.com/galaxies.html) 
[^2]: [http://arxiv.org/pdf/1309.5455vl.pdf](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1309.5455vl.pdf)
[^3]:  [http://heasarc.nasa.gov/docs/cosmic/local_](http://heasarc.nasa.gov/docs/cosmic/local_supercluster_info.heml 
[^4]: [http://www.wisegeek.com/what-is-the-virgo-](http://www.wisegeek.com/what-is-the-virgo-supercluster.htm 
[^5]: Sadler.op. cit. p.233 
[^6]:  [http://urantia-book-org/archive/newsletters/herald/](http://urantia-book-org/archive/newsletters/herald/herald_w1999.pdf p.18 

> Tom Allen is a Registered Nurse and reader of _The Urantia Book_ since 1973. He received a Bachelor degree in Philosophy from Oklahoma State University in 1974, and Bachelor and Master Degrees in Nursing from the University of Oklahoma. He resides in Oklahoma City with his wife Karen and their four boys. Karen and he are members of _Urantia Book Society of Oklahoma_ and host a study group every Sunday night at their home. He sends out frequent comparisons of famous human philosophy quotes and _Urantia Book_ quotes. You may subscribe by sending an email request to tommykaren1@att.net. This article is a chapter from his book, _Superuniverse Speculations on the Scale of Orvonton_, available on Amazon.com.  
> 
> Have you ever thought of writing an article about your experiences with _The Urantia Book_? How about an 












