---
title: "Third Book — Chapter 121 to 125"
description: "Pistis Sophia"
published: true
date: 2025-1-16T20:40:26Z
tags: Christianity, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-16T20:40:26Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_3_120">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Third Book — Chapter 111 to 120</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_4_135">
          <span class="pr-2">Fourth Book — Chapter 126 to 135</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## CHAPTER 121

When then the Saviour had said this unto his disciples, he said unto them: “Understand ye in what manner I speak with you?”

<small>Mary interpreteth from a former saying.</small>

Mary answered and said: “Yea, my Lord, with precision have I precisely followed all the words which thou hast said. Concerning this word then thou hast spoken unto us aforetime: ‘If the house-holder knew at what hour in the night the thief cometh to break into the house, he would keep awake and not suffer the man to break into his house.’”

When then Mary had said this, the Saviour said: “Well said, thou spiritual Mary. This is the word.”

The Saviour continued again and said unto his disciples: “Now, therefore, herald ye unto all men who shall receive mysteries in the Light, and speak **(311)** unto them, saying: Keep watch over yourselves and sin not, lest ye heap evil on evil and go out of the body without having repented and become strangers to the Light-kingdom for ever.”

When the Saviour had said this, Mary answered and said: “My Lord, great is the compassion of those mysteries which forgive sins at every time.”

<small>If even men on earth are compassionate, how much more then the highest mysteries?</small>

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary in the midst of the disciples: "If to-day a king who is a man of the world, giveth a gift to men of his like, and also forgiveth murderers and those who have intercourse with males, and the rest of the very grievous sins which are deserving of death,—if it becometh him who is a man of the <span id="p258"><sup><small>[ p. 258 ]</small></sup></span> world, to have done this, much more then have the Ineffable and the First Mystery, who are the lords of the universe, the authority to act in all things as it pleaseth them, that they forgive every one who shall receive mysteries.

“Or if on the other hand a king to-day investeth a soldier with a royal vesture and sendeth him into foreign regions, and he committeth murders and other grievous sins which are deserving of death, then they will not impute them to him, and are not able to do him any evil because he is invested with the royal vesture,—how much more then those who wear the mysteries of the vestures of the Ineffable and those of the First Mystery, who are lords over all those of the height and all those of the depth!”

## CHAPTER 122

<small>Jesus trieth Peter.</small>

Thereafter Jesus saw a woman who came to make repentance. **(312)** He had baptized her three times, and yet she had not done what was worthy of the baptisms. And the Saviour desired to try Peter, to see if he was compassionate and forgiving, as he had commanded them. He said unto Peter: “Lo, three times have I baptized this soul, and yet at this third time she hath not done what is worthy of the mysteries of the Light. Wherefor then cloth she make her body good for nothing? Now, therefore, Peter, perform the mystery which cutteth off the souls from the inheritances of the Light; perform that mystery in order that it may cut off the soul of this woman from the Inheritance of the Light.”

When then the Saviour had said this, he tried \[Peter\] to see whether he was compassionate and forgiving.

When then the Saviour had said this, Peter <span id="p259"><sup><small>[ p. 259 ]</small></sup></span> said: “My Lord, let her yet this time, that we may give her the higher mysteries; and if she is fit, then hast thou let her inherit the Light-kingdom, but if she is not fit, then hast thou \[to\] cut her off from the Light-kingdom.”

When then Peter had said this, the Saviour knew that Peter was compassionate as he and forgiving.

When then all this was said, the Saviour said unto his disciples: “Have ye understood all these words and the type **(313)** of this woman?”

<small>Mary interpreteth the incident from a former saying.</small>

Mary answered and said: “My Lord, I have understood the mysteries of the things which have fallen to this woman's lot. Concerning the things then which have fallen to her lot, thou hast spoken unto us aforetime in similitude, saying: ‘A man owned a fig-tree in his vineyard; and he came to look for its fruit, and he found not a single one on it. He said to the vine-dresser: Lo, three years do I come to look for fruit on this fig-tree, and I have not any produce at all from it. Cut it down then; why doth it make the ground also good for nothing? But he answered and said unto him: My lord, have patience with it still this year, until I dig round it and give it dung; and if it beareth in another year, thou hast let it, but if thou dost not find any \[fruit\] at all, then hast thou \[to\] cut it down.’ Lo, my Lord, this is the solution of the word.”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: “Well said, spiritual \[one\]. This is \[the solution of\] the word.”

## CHAPTER 123

Mary continued again and said unto the Saviour: “My Lord, a man who hath received mysteries and hath not done what is worthy of <span id="p260"><sup><small>[ p. 260 ]</small></sup></span> them, but he hath turned and hath sinned, thereafter he hath again repented and hath been in great repentance,—is it then lawful for my brethren to renew for him the mystery which he hath received, or **(314)** rather give him a mystery out of the lower mysteries,—is it lawful, or not?”

<small>In the case of repentance only higher mysteries than those previously received can remit sins.</small>

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: “Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: Neither the mystery which he hath received, nor the lower hearken unto him, to forgive his sins; but it is the mysteries which are higher than those which he hath received, which hearken unto him and forgive his sins. Now, therefore, Mary, let thy brethren give him the mystery which is higher than that which he hath received, and they are to accept his repentance from him and forgive his sins,—the latter indeed, because he hath received it once more, and the former, because he hath towered over them \[the lower mysteries\] upward,—the latter indeed hearkeneth not unto him to forgive his sin; but it is the mystery which is higher than that which he hath received, that forgiveth his sins. But if on the other hand he hath received the three mysteries in the two spaces or in the third from within, and he hath turned and transgressed, no mystery hearkeneth unto him to help him in his repentance, neither the higher nor the lower, save the mystery of the First Mystery and the mysteries of the Ineffable,—it is they which hearken unto him and accept his repentance from him.”

Mary answered and said: “My Lord, a man who hath received mysteries up to two or three **(315)** in the second or third space, and he hath not transgressed, but is still in his faith in uprightness <span id="p261"><sup><small>[ p. 261 ]</small></sup></span> and without play-acting, \[what will befall him\]?”

<small>There is no limit to the number of mysteries the faithful may receive.</small>

And the Saviour answered and said unto Mary: “Every man who hath received mysteries in the second and in the third space, and hath not transgressed, but is still in his faith without play-acting, it is lawful for such an one to receive mysteries in the space which pleaseth him, from the first to the last, because they have not transgressed.”

## CHAPTER 124

Mary continued again and said: “My Lord, a man who hath known the godhead and hath received of the mysteries of the Light, and hath turned and transgressed and done lawlessly and hath not turned to repent, and a man on the other hand who hath not found the godhead nor known it, and that man is a sinner and moreover impious, and they both have come out of the body,—which of them will get more suffering in the judgments?”

<small>The fate of the gnostic who sinneth is more terrible than that of the ignorant sinner.</small>

The Saviour answered again and said unto Mary: “Amēn, amēn, I say unto thee: The man who hath known the godhead and hath received the mysteries of the Light, and sinned and hath not turned to repent, he will get suffering in the chastisements of the judgments in great sufferings and **(316)** judgments exceedingly far more in comparison with the impious and law-breaking man who hath not known the godhead. Now, therefore, who hath ears to hear, let him hear.”

<small>Mary interpreteth the same from a former saying.</small>

When then the Saviour had said this, Mary started forward and said: “My Lord, my light-man hath ears, and I have understood the whole word which thou hast spoken. Concerning this word then thou hast spoken unto us in a similitude: <span id="p262"><sup><small>[ p. 262 ]</small></sup></span> ‘The slave who knew the will of his lord and made not ready nor did the will of his lord, will receive great blows; but he who knew not and did not, will be deserving of less. For from every one to whom more is entrusted, of him will more be demanded, and to whom much is handed over, of him much is required,’—that is, my Lord: He who knew the godhead and hath found the mysteries of the Light and hath transgressed, will be chastized in a far greater chastisement than he who hath not known the godhead. This, my Lord, is the solution of the word.”

## CHAPTER 125

Mary continued again and said unto the Saviour: “My Lord, if the faith and the mysteries shall have revealed themselves,—now, therefore, if souls come into the world in many circuits and are neglectful of receiving mysteries, hoping that, if they come into the world at any other circuit, they will receive them, will they not then be in danger **(317)** of not succeeding in receiving the mysteries?”

<small>Of those who procrastinate, saying they have many births before them.</small>

The Saviour answered and said unto his disciples: "Herald unto the whole world and say unto men: Strive thereafter that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light in this time of affliction and enter into the Light-kingdom. Join not one day to another, or one circuit to another, hoping that ye may succeed in receiving the mysteries if ye come into the world in another circuit.

“And these know not when the number of the perfect souls will be at hand; for if the number of the perfect souls shall be at hand, I will now shut the gates of the Light, and no one from this hour onwards will enter in, nor will <span id="p263"><sup><small>[ p. 263 ]</small></sup></span> any one hereafter go forth, for the number of the perfect souls is completed and the mystery of the First Mystery is completed, for the sake of which the universe hath arisen,—that is: I am that Mystery.

<small>Of the time of the completion.</small>

“And from this hour onwards no one will be able to enter into the Light and no one be able to go forth. For at the completion of the time of the number of the perfect souls, before I have set fire to the world, in order that it may purify the æons and the veils and the firmaments and the whole earth and also all the matters which are on it, mankind **(318)** will be still existing.

<small>Those who procrastinate are excluded from the Light.</small>

“At that time then the faith will reveal itself still more and the mysteries in those days. And many souls will come by means of the circuits of the changes of the body, and coming back into the world are some of those in this present time who have hearkened unto me, how I taught, who at the completion of the number of the perfect souls will find the mysteries of the Light and receive them and come to the gates of the Light and find that the number of the perfect souls is complete, which is the completion of the First Mystery and the gnosis of the universe. And they will find that I have shut the gates of the Light and that it is impossible that any one should enter in or that any one should go forth from this hour.

Their entreaties at the gates of Light."Those souls then will knock at the gates of the Light, saying: Lord, open unto us! And I will answer unto them: I know you not, whence ye are. And they will say unto me: We have received of thy mysteries and fulfilled thy whole teaching and thou hast taught us on the high <span id="p264"><sup><small>[ p. 264 ]</small></sup></span> ways. And I will answer and say unto them: I know you not, who ye are, ye who are doers of iniquity and of evil even unto now. Wherefor go into the outer darkness. And **(319)** from that hour they will go into the outer darkness, there where is howling and grinding of teeth.

“For this cause then, herald unto the whole world and say unto them: ‘Strive thereafter, to renounce the whole world and the whole matter therein, that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light before the number of the perfect souls is completed, in order that they may not make you stop before the gates of the Light and. lead you away into the outer darkness.’

“Now, therefore, who hath ears to hear, let him hear.”

<small>Mary interpreteth the same.</small>

When then the Saviour had said this, Mary started forward again and said: "My Lord, not only hath my light-man ears, but my soul hath heard and understood all the words which thou sayest. Now, therefore, my Lord, concerning the words which thou hast spoken: 'Herald unto the men of the world and say unto them: Strive thereafter, to receive the mysteries of the Light, in this time of affliction, that ye may inherit the Light-kingdom. . . .

.          .          .          .          .          .

**[A CONSIDERABLE LACUNA HERE OCCURS IN THE TEXT.]**

.          .          .          .          .          .

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_3_120">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Third Book — Chapter 111 to 120</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_4_135">
          <span class="pr-2">Fourth Book — Chapter 126 to 135</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
