---
title: "Third Book — Chapter 102 to 110"
description: "Pistis Sophia"
published: true
date: 2025-1-16T20:40:26Z
tags: Christianity, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-16T20:40:26Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_2_101">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Second Book — Chapter 91 to 101</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_3_120">
          <span class="pr-2">Third Book — Chapter 111 to 120</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p213">[<sup><small>p. 213</small></sup>]</span>

## A THIRD BOOK

## CHAPTER 102

<small>Of the proclamation of the disciples.</small>

JESUS continued again in the discourse and said unto his disciples: "When I shall have gone into the Light, then herald it unto the whole world and say unto them: Cease not to seek day and night and remit not yourselves until ye find the mysteries of the Light-kingdom, which will purify you and make you into refined light and lead you into the Light-kingdom.

<small>What men should renounce.</small>

"Say unto them: Renounce the whole world and the whole matter therein and all its care and all its sins, in a word all its associations which are in it, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from all the chastisements which are in the judgments.

“Say unto them: Renounce murmuring, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire of the dog-faced \[one\].

“Say unto them: Renounce eavesdropping \[?\], that ye may \[be worthy of the mysteries of the Light\] and be saved from the judgments of the dog-faced \[one\].

“Say unto them: Renounce litigiousness \[?\], that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the chastisements of Ariēl.

“Say unto them: Renounce false slander, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the <span id="p214">[<sup><small>p. 214</small></sup>]</span> Light and be saved from the fire-rivers of the dog-faced \[one\].

“Say unto them: Renounce false witness, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and that ye may escape and be saved from the fire-rivers of the dog-faced \[one\].

“Say unto them: Renounce pride and haughtiness, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire-pits of Ariēl.

“Say unto them: Renounce belly-love, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the judgments of Amente.

“Say unto them: Renounce babbling, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fires of Amente.

“Say unto them: **(256)** Renounce craftiness, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the chastisements which are in Amente.

“Say unto them: Renounce avarice, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire-rivers of the dog-faced \[one\].

“Say unto them: Renounce love of the world, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the pitch- and fire-coats of the dog-faced \[one\].

“Say unto them: Renounce pillage, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire-rivers of Ariēl.

“Say unto them: Renounce evil conversation, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the chastisements of the fire-rivers . . . .

<span id="p215">[<sup><small>p. 215</small></sup>]</span>

“Say unto them: Renounce wickedness, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire-seas of Ariēl.

“Say unto them: Renounce pitilessness, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the judgments of the dragon-faced \[ones\].

“Say unto them: Renounce wrath, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire-rivers of the dragon-faced \[ones.\]

“Say unto them: Renounce cursing, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire-seas of the dragon-faced \[ones\].

“Say unto them: Renounce thieving, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the bubbling seas of the dragon-faced \[ones\]. **(257)**

“Say unto them: Renounce robbery, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from Yaldabaōth.

“Say unto them: Renounce slandering, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the fire-rivers of the lion-faced \[one\].

“Say unto them: Renounce fighting and strife, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the seething rivers of Yaldabaōth.

“Say unto them: Renounce all unknowing, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the servitors of Yaldabaōth and the fire-seas.

“Say unto them: Renounce evil doing, that <span id="p216">[<sup><small>p. 216</small></sup>]</span> ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from all the demons of Yaldabaōth and all his judgments.

“Say unto them: Renounce sloth, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the seething pitch-seas of Yaldabaōth.

“Say unto them: Renounce adultery, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light-kingdom and be saved from the sulphur- and pitch-seas of the lion-faced \[one\].

“Say unto them: Renounce murder, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the crocodile-faced ruler,—this one who is in the cold, **(258)** is the first chamber of the outer darkness.

“Say unto them: Renounce pitilessness and impiety, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the rulers of the outer darkness.

“Say unto them: Renounce atheism, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the howling and grinding of teeth.

“Say unto them: Renounce \[magic\] potions, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the great cold and the hail of the outer darkness.

“Say unto them: Renounce blasphemy, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from the great dragon of the outer darkness.

“Say unto them: Renounce the doctrines of error, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and be saved from all the chastisements <span id="p217">[<sup><small>p. 217</small></sup>]</span> of the great dragon of the outer darkness.

“Say unto those who teach the doctrines of error and to every one who is instructed by them: Woe unto you, for, if ye do not repent and abandon your error, ye will go into the chastisements of the great dragon and of the outer darkness, which is exceedingly evil, and never will ye be cast \[up\] into the world, but will be non-existent until the end. **(259)**

“Say unto those who abandon the doctrines of truth of the First Mystery: Woe unto you, for your chastisement is sad compared with \[that of\] all men. For ye will abide in the great cold and ice and hail in the midst of the dragon and of the outer darkness, and ye will never from this hour on be cast \[up\] into the world, but ye shall be frozen up \[?\] in that region and at the dissolution of the universe ye will perish and become non-existent eternally.

<small>The boundaries of the ways of the worthy.</small>

"Say rather to the men of the world: Be calm, that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye loving-unto-men, that ye may be worthy of the mysteries of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye gentle, that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye peaceful, that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye merciful, that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

<span id="p218">[<sup><small>p. 218</small></sup>]</span>

“Say unto them: Give ye alms, that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Minister unto the poor and the sick and distressed, that ye may receive the mysteries **(260)** of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye loving-unto-God, that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be ye righteous, that ye may receive the mysteries \[of the Light\] and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Be good, that ye may receive the mysteries \[of the Light\] and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“Say unto them: Renounce all, that ye may receive the mysteries of the Light and go on high into the Light-kingdom.

“These are all the boundaries of the ways for those who are worthy of the mysteries of the Light.

<small>Unto whom are the mysteries of the Light to be given.</small>

<small>The mysteries are for the forgiveness of sins.</small>

“Unto, such, therefore, who have renounced in this renunciation, give the mysteries of the Light and hide them not from them at all, even though they are sinners and they have been in al! the sins and all the iniquities of the world, all of which I have recounted unto you, in order that they may turn and repent and be in the submission which I have just recounted unto you. Give unto them the mysteries of the Light-kingdom and hide them not from them at all; for it is because of sinfulness that I have brought the mysteries into the world, that I may forgive all their sins which they have committed from the beginning on. For this cause <span id="p219">[<sup><small>p. 219</small></sup>]</span> have I said unto you aforetime: ‘I am not come to call the righteous.’ Now, **(261)** therefore, I have brought the mysteries that \[their\] sins may be forgiven for every one and they be received into the Light-kingdom. For the mysteries are the gift of the First Mystery, that he may wipe out the sins and iniquities of all sinners.”

## CHAPTER 103

<small>Mary questioneth the Saviour.</small>

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished saying these words unto his disciples, that Mary came forward and said to the Saviour: “My Lord, will then a righteous man who is perfected in all righteousness, and that man who hath no sin at all, will such an one be tormented in the chastisements and judgments or not? Or will rather that man be brought into the kingdom of heaven or not?”

<small>Of the soul of the righteous man who hath not received the mysteries at death.</small>

And the Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "A righteous man who is perfected in all righteousness and who hath never committed any sin of any kind, and such an one who never hath received mysteries of the Light, if the time is at hand when he goeth forth out of the body, then straightway come the receivers of one of the great triple-powers,—those among whom there is a great \[one\],—snatch away the soul of that man from the hands of the retributive receivers and spend three days circling with it in all the creatures of the world. After three days they lead it down into the chaos, so as to lead it into all the chastisements of the judgments and to dispatch it to all the judgments. The fires of the chaos do not trouble it greatly; but they will trouble it partly for a short time.

“And with haste they take pity on it quickly, to lead it up out of the chaos and lead it on the <span id="p220">[<sup><small>p. 220</small></sup>]</span> way of the midst through all the rulers. And they \[_sc._ the rulers\] do not chastize it in their harsh judgments, but the fire of their regions troubleth it partly. And if it shall be brought into the region of Yachthanabas, the pitiless, then will he indeed not be able to chastize it in his evil judgments, but he holdeth it fast a short time, while the fire of his chastisements troubleth it partly.

And again they take pity on it quickly, and lead it up out of those regions of theirs and they do not bring it into the æons, so that the rulers of the æons do not carry it away ravishingly; they bring it on the way of the sun and bring it before the Virgin of Light. She proveth it and findeth that it is pure of sins, but letteth them not bring it to the Light, because the sign of the kingdom of the mystery is not with it. But she sealeth it with a higher seal and letteth it be cast down into the body **(263)** into the æons of righteousness,—that body which will be good to find the signs of the mysteries of the Light and inherit the Light-kingdom for ever.

“If on the contrary he hath sinned once or twice or thrice, then will he be cast back into the world again according to the type of the sins which he hath committed, the type of which I will tell you when I shall have told you the expansion of the universe.

“But amēn, amēn, I say unto you: Even if a righteous man hath committed no sins at all, he cannot possibly be brought into the Light-kingdom, because the sign of the kingdom of the mysteries is not with him. In a word, it is impossible to bring souls into the Light without the mysteries of the Light-kingdom.”

## CHAPTER 104

<span id="p221">[<sup><small>p. 221</small></sup>]</span>

<small>John questioneth Jesus.</small>

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished saying these words unto his disciples, that John came forward and said: “My Lord, suppose a sinning and a law-breaking man is replete in all iniquities, and he hath ceased from these for the sake of the kingdom of heaven and renounced the whole world and the whole matter therein, and we give him from the be-ginning onwards the mysteries of the Light which are in the first space from without, and if he receiveth the mysteries, and after a little while again if he returneth and transgresseth, and thereafter again if he turneth and ceaseth from all sins and turneth and **(264)** renounceth the whole world and the whole matter therein, so that he cometh again and is in great repentance, and if we know truly in truth that he longeth after God, so that we give him the second mystery of the first space which is from without;—in like manner if he turneth anew and transgresseth and is again in the sins of the world, and again if he thereafter turneth and ceaseth from the sins of the world and again renounceth the whole world and the whole matter therein and again is in great repentance, and we know it with certainty that he is not a play-actor, so that we turn and give him the mysteries of the beginning, which \[are\] in the first space from without;—in like manner, if he turneth again and sinneth and is in every type \[of sin\];—desirest thou that we forgive him unto seven times and give him the mysteries which are in the first space from without, unto seven times or not?”

<small>The disciples are to forgive many times seven times.</small>

The Saviour answered again and said unto John: "Not only forgive him unto seven times, <span id="p222">[<sup><small>p. 222</small></sup>]</span> but amēn, I say unto you: Forgive him unto many times seven times, and every time give him the mysteries from the beginning onwards which are in the first space from without. Perchance ye win the soul of that brother and he inheriteth the Light-kingdom.

“For this cause, therefore, when ye questioned me aforetime, **(265)** saying: ‘If our brother sin against us, desirest thou that we forgive him unto seven times?’—I answered and spake unto you in a similitude, saying: ‘Not only unto seven times, but unto seventy times seven.’

“Now, therefore, forgive him many times and every time give him the mysteries which are in the first space which is from without. Perchance ye win the soul of that brother and he inheriteth the Light-kingdom.

<small>Of the reward of the savers of souls.</small>

“Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: He who shall keep in Life and save only one soul, besides the dignity which he possesseth in the Light-kingdom, he will receive yet another dignity for the soul which he hath saved, so that he who shall save many souls, besides the dignity which he possesseth in the Light he will receive many other dignities for the souls which he hath saved.”

## CHAPTER 105

<small>John continueth his questioning.</small>

When then the Saviour had said this, John started forward and said: "My Lord, bear with me if I question thee, for from now on I will begin to, question thee on all things concerning the manner, how we are to herald it to mankind.

“If, therefore, I give that brother a mystery out of the mysteries of the beginning which are in the first space from without, and if I give him many mysteries and he doeth not what **(266)** is <span id="p223">[<sup><small>p. 223</small></sup>]</span> worthy of the kingdom of heaven,—desirest thou that we let him pass through to the mysteries of the second space? Perchance we win the soul of that brother, and he turneth, repenteth and inheriteth the Light-kingdom. Desirest thou that we let him pass through to the mysteries \[which are in the second space\] or not?”

<small>That the mysteries shall be given again unto a repentant brother even up to the three of the second space.</small>

And the Saviour answered and said unto John: "If it is a brother who is not play-acting, but in truth longeth after God, if ye have given him many times the mysteries of the beginning and because of the necessity of the elements of the Fate he hath not done what is worthy of the mysteries of the Light-kingdom, then forgive him, let him pass through and give him the first mystery which is in the second space. Perchance ye win the soul of that brother.

“And if he hath not done what is worthy of the mysteries of the Light and hath committed transgression and divers sins, and thereafter hath turned; again and been in great repentance and hath renounced the whole world and ceased from all the sins of the world, and ye know with certainty that he doth not play-act but in truth longeth after God, then turn ye anew, forgive him, let him pass on through and give him the second mystery in the second **(267)** space of the First Mystery. Perchance ye win the soul of that brother and he inheriteth the Light-kingdom.

“And again if he hath not done what is worthy of the mysteries, but hath been in transgression and divers sins, and thereafter again hath turned and been in great repentance and hath renounced the whole world and the whole matter therein and ceased from the sins of the world, so that <span id="p224">[<sup><small>p. 224</small></sup>]</span> ye know truly that he is not play-acting but longeth truly after God, then turn ye anew, forgive him and receive his repentance, because the First Mystery is compassionate and merciful-minded; let also that man pass through and give him the three mysteries together which are in the second space of the First Mystery.

<small>The limit of the power of the disciples to forgive sins.</small>

"If that man \[then\] transgresseth and is in divers sins, from that moment onwards ye are not to forgive him nor to receive his repentance; but let him be among you as a stumbling-block and as a transgressor.

“For, amēn, I say unto you: Those three mysteries will be witnesses for his last repentance, and he hath not repentance from this moment onwards. For, amēn, I say unto you: The soul of that man will not **(268)** be cast back into the world above from this moment onwards, but will be in the abodes of the dragon of the outer darkness.

<small>A former saying explained.</small>

"For regarding the souls of such men I have spoken unto you aforetime in a similitude, saying: ‘If thy brother sinneth against thee, bring him over between thee alone and him. If he hearkeneth unto thee, thou wilt win thy brother; if he hearkeneth not unto thee, take with thee yet another. If he hearkeneth not unto thee and the other, bring him to the assembly. If he hearken not unto the others, let him be for you as a transgressor and as a stumbling-block.’—That is: If he is not usable in the first mystery, give him the second; and if he is not usable in the second give him the three, assembled together, which is ‘the assembly’; and if he is not usable in the third mystery, let him be for you as a stumbling-block and as a transgressor.

<span id="p225">[<sup><small>p. 225</small></sup>]</span>

<small>Of the master-mystery of the forgiveness of sins.</small>

“And the word which I have spoken unto you aforetime: ‘So that through two to three witnesses every word may be established,’—it is this: Those three mysteries will witness for his last repentance. And amēn, **(269)** I say unto you: If that man repenteth, no mystery can forgive him his sins, nor can his repentance be received, nor can he at all be hearkened to through any mystery, save through the first mystery of the First Mystery and through the mysteries of the Ineffable. It is these alone which will receive the repentance of that man and forgive his sins; for those mysteries in sooth are compassionate and merciful-minded and forgiving at every time.”

## CHAPTER 106

<small>John continueth his questioning.</small>

When then the Saviour had said this, John continued again and said to the Saviour: “My Lord, suppose an exceedingly sinful brother who hath renounced the whole world and the whole matter therein and all its sins and all its cares, and we shall prove him and know that he is not in deceit and play-acting but that in uprightness and in truth he longeth \[after God\], and we know that he hath become worthy of the mysteries of the second space or of the third,—desirest thou that we give him of the mysteries of the second space and of the third, before he hath at all received mysteries of the Inheritance of the Light or not? Desirest thou that we give or not?”

<small>Further of the forgiveness of sins.</small>

And the Saviour answered and said unto John in the midst of the disciples: "If ye know with certainty that that man **(270)** hath renounced the whole world and all its cares and all its associations and all its sins, and if ye know in truth that he <span id="p226">[<sup><small>p. 226</small></sup>]</span> is not in deceit, neither that he was play-acting nor that he was curious to know the mysteries, how they are brought to pass, but that he longeth after God in truth, hide them not from such an one, but give him of the mysteries of the second and third space and try even of what mystery he is worthy; and that of which he is worthy, give him and hide it not from him, for if ye hide it from him, ye may be guilty of a great condemnation.

“If ye give him once \[of the mysteries\] of the second space or of the third and he turneth again and sinneth, ye are to continue again the second time up to the third time. If he still sinneth, ye shall not continue to give him, for those three mysteries will be witnesses unto him for his last repentance. And amēn, I say unto you: He who shall give that man anew mysteries of the second space or of the third, is guilty of a great condemnation. But let him be for you as a transgressor and as a stumbling-block.

“Amēn, I say unto you: The soul of that man cannot be cast back into the world **(271)** from this moment onwards; but his habitation is in the midst of the jaws of the dragon of the outer darkness, the region of howling and grinding of teeth. And at the dissolution of the world his soul will be frozen up \[?\] and perish in the violent cold and exceedingly violent fire and will be non-existent eternally.

“Even if he yet again turneth and renounceth the whole world and all its cares and all its sins, and he is in great citizenship and great repentance, no mystery can receive from him his repentance; nor can it hearken unto him, to have mercy <span id="p227">[<sup><small>p. 227</small></sup>]</span> upon him and receive his repentance and forgive his sins, save the mystery of the First Mystery and the mystery of the Ineffable. It is these alone which will receive the repentance of that man and forgive his sins; for in sooth those mysteries are compassionate and merciful-minded and forgiving of sins at every time.”

## CHAPTER 107

<small>John continueth his questioning.</small>

And when the Saviour had said this, John continued again and said: “My Lord, bear with me, if I question thee, and be not wroth with me, for I question concerning all things with surety and certainty for knowledge of the manner, how we are to herald it to the men of the world.”

And the Saviour answered and said unto John: “Question concerning all things on which thou questionest, and I will reveal them unto thee, face to face **(272)** in openness without similitude, or with surety.”

And John answered and said: “My Lord, if we go forth and herald it and come into a city or a village, and if the men of that city come forth to meet us without our knowing who they are, and if they receive us unto themselves in great deceit and great play-acting and bring us into their house, desiring to make trial of the mysteries of the Light-kingdom, and if they play-act with us in submission and we suppose that they long after God, and we give them the mysteries of the Light-kingdom, and if we thereafter know that they have not done what is worthy of the mystery, and we know that they have play-acted with us, and have been deceitful against us and that they have also made a show of the mysteries region by region, making trial of us <span id="p228">[<sup><small>p. 228</small></sup>]</span> and also of our mysteries,—what is then the thing which will befall such?”

<small>Of pretenders who receive the mysteries.</small>

And the Saviour answered and said unto John: "If ye come into a city or a village, where ye enter into the house and they receive you unto themselves, give them a mystery. If they are worthy, ye will win their souls and they will inherit the Light-kingdom; but if they are not worthy but are deceitful against you, and if they also make a show of the mysteries, making trial of you and also of the mysteries, then invoke **(273)** the first mystery of the First Mystery which hath mercy on every one, and say: Thou Mystery, which we have given unto these impious and iniquitous souls who have not done what is worthy of thy mystery but have made a show of us, turn back \[then\] the mystery unto us and make them for ever strangers to the mystery of thy kingdom. And shake ye off the dust of your feet as a witness against them, saying: May your souls be as the dust of your house. And amēn, I say unto you: In that hour all the mysteries which ye have given unto them, will return unto you, and all the words and all the mysteries of the region up to which they have received figures, will be taken from them.

<small>A former saying explained.</small>

"Concerning such men, therefore, have I aforetime spoken unto you in similitude, saying: ‘Where ye enter into a house and are received, say unto them: Peace be with you. And if they are worthy, let your peace come upon them; and if they are not worthy, let your peace return unto you,’—that is: If those men do what is worthy of the mysteries and in truth long after God, give them the mysteries of the Light-kingdom; <span id="p229">[<sup><small>p. 229</small></sup>]</span> but if they play-act with you and are deceitful against you, without your having known it, **(274)** and if ye give them the mysteries of the Light-kingdom, and again thereafter they make a show of the mysteries and they make also trial of you and also of the mysteries, then perform the first mystery of the First Mystery, and it will turn back unto you all the mysteries which ye have given unto them, and it will make them strangers to the mysteries of the Light for ever.

“And such men will not be led back to the world from this moment onwards; but amēn, I say unto you: Their dwelling is in the midst of the jaws of the dragon of the outer darkness. And if they still at a time of repentance renounce the whole world and the whole matter therein and all the sins of the world, and they are in entire submission to the mysteries of the Light, no mystery can hearken unto them nor forgive their sins, save this same mystery of the Ineffable, which hath mercy on every one and forgiveth every one his sins.”

## CHAPTER 108

<small>Mary again questioneth Jesus.</small>

It came to pass, when Jesus had finished saying these words unto his disciples, that Mary adored the feet of Jesus and kissed them. Mary said: “My Lord, bear with me, if I question thee, and be not wroth with me.”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: “Question concerning what thou desirest to question, and I will reveal it **(275)** unto thee in openness.”

And Mary answered and said: “My Lord, suppose a good and excellent brother whom we have filled with all the mysteries of the Light, and that brother hath a brother or kinsman, in a <span id="p230">[<sup><small>p. 230</small></sup>]</span> word he hath in general \[any\] man, and this \[man\] is a sinner and impious or better he is no sinner, and such an one hath gone out of the body, and the heart of the good brother is grieved and mourneth over him, that he is in judgments and chastisements,—now, therefore, my Lord, what are we to do to remove him out of the chastisements and harsh judgments?”

And the Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Concerning this word, therefore, I have already spoken unto you at another time, but hearken that I may say it again, so that ye may be perfected in all mysteries and be called ‘the perfected in every fulness.’

<small>How the souls of those who have come out of the body may be helped by those on earth.</small>

“Now, therefore, all men, sinners or better who are no sinners, not only if ye desire that they be taken out of the judgments and violent chastisements, but that they be removed into a righteous body which will find the mysteries of the godhead, so that it goeth on high and inheriteth the Light-kingdom,—then perform the third mystery of the Ineffable **(276)** and say: Carry ye the soul of this and this man of whom we think in our hearts, carry him out of all the chastisements of the rulers and haste ye quickly to lead him before the Virgin of Light; and in every month let the Virgin of Light seal him with a higher seal, and in every month let the Virgin of Light cast him into a body which will be righteous and good, so that it goeth on high and inheriteth the Light-kingdom. ”And if ye say this, amēn, I say unto you: All who serve in all the orders of the judgments of the rulers, hasten to hand over that soul from one to the other, until they lead it before the Virgin of Light. And the Virgin of Light sealeth <span id="p231">[<sup><small>p. 231</small></sup>]</span> it with the sign of the kingdom of the Ineffable and handeth it over unto her receivers, and the receivers will cast it into a body which will be righteous and find the mysteries of the Light, so that it will be good and goeth on high and inheriteth the Light-kingdom. Lo, this is it on which ye question me.”

## CHAPTER 109

<small>Mary continueth her questioning.</small>

And Mary answered and said: “Now, therefore, my Lord, hast thou then not brought mysteries into the world that man **(277)** may not die through the death which is appointed him by the rulers of the Fate,—be it that it is appointed one to die by the sword or die by the waters or through tortures and torturings and acts of violence which are in the law, or through any other evil death,—hast thou then not brought mysteries into the world that man may not die with them through the rulers of the Fate, but that he may die by a sudden death, so that he endure no sufferings through such kinds of death? For they are exceedingly numerous who persecute us because of thee, and numerous those who persecute us because of thy name, in order that, if they torture us, we may speak the mystery and straightway go out of the body without having endured any sufferings at all.”

<small>How he who possesseth the mysteries can come forth out of the body without suffering.</small>

The Saviour answered and said unto all his disciples: “Concerning this word on which ye question me, I have spoken unto you at another time; but hearken again that I may say it unto you anew: Not only ye, but every man who will accomplish that first mystery of the First Mystery of the Ineffable,—he who, therefore, shall perform that mystery and accomplish it in all its figures and all its types and all its stations, in <span id="p232">[<sup><small>p. 232</small></sup>]</span> performing it, he will not come out of the body; but after he hath accomplished that mystery in all its figures **(278)** and all its types, thereafter then at every time when he shall speak the name of that mystery, he will save himself from all that which is appointed him by the rulers of the Fate. And in that hour he will come forth out of the body of the matter of the rulers, and his soul will become a great light-stream, so that it soareth on high and penetrateth all the regions of the rulers and all the regions of the Light, until it reacheth the region of its kingdom. Neither giveth it answers nor apologies in any region at all, for it is without tokens.”

## CHAPTER 110

When then Jesus had said this, Mary continued, threw herself at Jesus' feet, kissed them and said: “My Lord, still will I question thee. Reveal \[it\] unto us and hide \[it\] not from us.”

Jesus answered and said unto Mary: “Question on what ye question, and I will reveal \[it\] unto you in openness without similitude.”

<small>Mary continueth her questioning.</small>

Mary answered and said: “My Lord, hast thou then not brought mysteries into the world because of poverty and riches, and because of weakness and strength, and because of . . . and healthy bodies, in a word because of all such, so that, if we go into the regions of the land, and they do not have faith in us and they hearken not unto our words, and we perform any such mysteries in those regions, they may know truly in truth that we **(279)** herald the words \[of the God\] of the universe?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary in the midst of the disciples: "Concerning this mystery on which ye question me, I have given <span id="p233">[<sup><small>p. 233</small></sup>]</span> it unto you at another time; but I will repeat it and speak the word unto you:

<small>The mystery of the raising of the dead.</small>

“Now, therefore, Mary, not only ye, but every man who shall accomplish the mystery of the raising of the dead,—that which healeth the demons and all pains and all sicknesses and the blind and the lame and the maimed and the dumb and the deaf, which I have given unto you aforetime,—he who shall receive \[that\] mystery and accomplish it, thereafter then, if he ask for all things, for poverty and riches, for weakness and strength, for . . . and healthy body, and for all healings of the body and for the raising of the dead and for healing the lame and the blind and the deaf and the dumb and all sicknesses and all pains,—in a word, he who shall accomplish that mystery and ask for all the things which I have just said, then will they quickly come to pass for him.”

<small>The disciples became frenzied at the sublimity of the prospect.</small>

When then the Saviour had said this, the disciples came forward, cried out all together and said: “O Saviour, thou hath made us very exceedingly frenzied because of the great deeds of which thou tellest us; and because thou hast borne up our souls, they have pressed to go forth out of us **(280)** unto thee, for we issue from thee. Now, therefore, because of these great deeds of which thou tellest us, our souls have become frenzied and they have pressed very exceedingly, yearning to go forth out of us on high to the region of thy kingdom.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_2_101">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Second Book — Chapter 91 to 101</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_3_120">
          <span class="pr-2">Third Book — Chapter 111 to 120</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
