---
title: "Third Book — Chapter 111 to 120"
description: "Pistis Sophia"
published: true
date: 2025-1-16T20:40:26Z
tags: Christianity, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-16T20:40:26Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_3_110">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Third Book — Chapter 102 to 110</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_3_125">
          <span class="pr-2">Third Book — Chapter 121 to 125</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## CHAPTER 111

<small>How the disciples shall make proclamation.</small>

When then the disciples had said this, the Saviour continued again and said unto his disciples: "If ye go into cities or kingdoms or countries, proclaim first unto them, saying:

<span id="p234"><sup><small>[ p. 234 ]</small></sup></span>

Search ever and cease not, until ye find the mysteries of the Light which will lead you into the Light-kingdom. Say unto them: Beware of the doctrines of error. For many will come in my name and say: It is I. And it is not I, and they will lead many astray.

<small>What mysteries they shall give.</small>

“Now, therefore, unto all men who come unto you and have faith in you and hearken unto your words and do what is worthy of the mysteries of the Light, give the mysteries of the Light and hide them not from them. And unto him who is worthy of the higher mysteries, give them, and to him who is worthy of the lower mysteries, give them, and hide not anything from any one.

<small>The mystery of the raising of the dead not to be given to any.</small>

“The mystery of the raising of the dead and of the healing of the sick, on the other hand, give unto no one nor give instruction in it, for that mystery belongeth to the rulers, it and all its namings. For this cause, therefore, give it **(281)** unto no one, nor give instruction in it until ye establish the faith in the whole world, in order that, if ye come into cities or into countries, and they do not receive you unto themselves, and do not have faith, and do not hearken unto your words, ye may raise the dead in those regions and heal the lame and the blind and manifold of sicknesses in those regions. And through all such they will have faith in you, that ye herald the God of the universe, and will have faith in all the words of you. For this cause, therefore, have I given unto you that mystery, until ye establish the faith in the whole world.”

When then the Saviour had said this, he continued again in the discourse and said unto Mary: "Now, therefore, hearken, Mary, concerning the <span id="p235"><sup><small>[ p. 235 ]</small></sup></span> word on which thou hast questioned me: Who constraineth the man until he sinneth? Now, therefore, hearken:

<small>Of the constitution of man.</small>

“Is the babe born, the power is feeble in it, and the soul is feeble in it, and also the counterfeiting spirit is feeble in it; in a word, the three together are feeble, without any one of them sensing anything, whether good or evil, because of the load of forgetfulness which is very heavy. Moreover the body also is feeble. And the babe eateth of the delights of the world of the rulers; and the power draweth into itself from the portion of the power which **(282)** is in the delights; and the soul draweth into itself from the portion of the soul which is in the delights; and the counterfeiting spirit draweth into itself from the portion of the evil which is in the delights and in its lusts. And on the other hand the body draweth into itself the matter which senseth not, which is in the delights. The destiny on the contrary taketh nothing from the delights, because it is not mingled with them, but it departeth again in the condition in which it cometh into the world.

“And little by little the power and the soul and the counterfeiting spirit grow, and every one of them senseth according to its nature: the power senseth to seek after the light of the height; the soul on the other hand senseth to seek after the region of righteousness which is mixed, which is the region of the commixture; the counterfeiting spirit on the other hand seeketh after all evils and lusts and all sins; the body on the contrary senseth nothing unless it taketh up force out of the matter.

<span id="p236"><sup><small>[ p. 236 ]</small></sup></span>

“And straightway the three develop sense, every one according to its nature. And the retributive receivers assign the servitors to follow them and be witnesses of all the sins which they commit, with a view to the manner and method how they will chastize them in the judgments.

<small>Of the counterfeiting spirit.</small>

“And after this the counterfeiting spirit **(283)** contriveth and senseth all sins and the evil which the rulers of the great Fate have commanded for the soul, and it maketh them for the soul.

“And the inner power stirreth the soul to seek after the region of the Light and the whole god-head; and the counterfeiting spirit leadeth away the soul and compelleth it continually to do all its lawless deeds, all its mischiefs and all its sin, and is persistently allotted to the soul and is hostile to it, and making it do all this evil and all these sins.

“And it goadeth on the retributive servitors, so that they are witnesses in all the sins which it will make it do. Moreover also if it will rest in the night \[or\] by day, it stirreth it in dreams or in lusts of the world, and maketh it to lust after all the things of the world. In a word, it driveth \[?\] it into all the things which the rulers have commanded for it and it is hostile to the soul, making it do what pleaseth it not.

“Now, therefore, Mary, this is in fact the foe of the soul, and this compelleth it until it doeth all sins.

<small>The state of the sinful soul after death.</small>

“Now, therefore, if **(284)** the time of that man is completed, first cometh forth the destiny and leadeth the man unto death through the rulers and their bonds with which they are bound through the Fate.

<span id="p237"><sup><small>[ p. 237 ]</small></sup></span>

“And thereafter the retributive receivers come and lead that soul out of the body. And thereafter the. retributive receivers spend three days circling round with that soul in all the regions and dispatch it to all the æons of the world. And the counterfeiting spirit and the destiny follow that soul; and the power returneth to the Virgin of Light.

“And after three days the retributive receivers lead down that soul to the Amente of the chaos; and when they bring it down to the chaos, they hand it over to those who chastize. And the retributive receivers return unto their own regions according to the economy of the works of the rulers concerning the coming-forth of the souls.

“And the counterfeiting spirit becometh the receiver of the soul, being assigned unto it and transferring it according to the chastisement because of the sins which it hath made it commit, and is in great enmity to the soul.

“And when the soul hath finished the chastisements in the chaos according to the sins **(285)** which it hath committed, the counterfeiting spirit leadeth it forth out of the chaos, being assigned unto it and transferring it to every region because of the sins which it hath committed; and it leadeth it forth on the way of the rulers of the midst. And when it reacheth them, \[the rulers\] question it on the mysteries of the destiny; and if it hath not found them, they question their destiny. And those rulers chastize that soul according to the sins of which it is guilty. I will tell you the type of their chastisements at the expansion of the universe.

<span id="p238"><sup><small>[ p. 238 ]</small></sup></span>

<small>How a sinful soul is brought back to birth.</small>

“When, therefore, the time of the chastisements of that soul in the judgments of the rulers of the midst shall be completed, the counterfeiting spirit leadeth the soul up out of all the regions of the rulers of the midst and bringeth it before the light of the sun according to the commandment of the First Man, Yew, and bringeth it before the judge, the Virgin of Light. And she proveth that soul and findeth that it is a sinning soul, and ceaseth her light-power into it for its standing-upright and because of the body and the community of sense,—the type of which I will tell you at the expansion of the universe. And the Virgin of Light sealeth that soul and handeth it over to one of her receivers **(286)** and will have it cast into a body which is suitable to the sins which it hath committed.

“And amēn, I say unto you: They will not discharge that soul from the changes of the body until it hath yielded its last circuit according to its merit. Of all these then will I tell you their type and the type of the bodies into which it will be cast according to the sins of each soul. All this will I tell you when I shall have told you the expansion of the universe.”

## CHAPTER 112

<small>Of the ascension after death of the good soul that hath received the mysteries.</small>

Jesus continued again in the discourse and said: "If on the contrary it is a soul which hath not hearkened unto the counterfeiting spirit in all its works, but hath become good and hath received the mysteries of the Light which are in the second space or even those which are in the third space which is within, when the time \[of the coming-forth\] of that soul out of the body is completed, then the counterfeiting spirit followeth that soul, it and the destiny; and <span id="p239"><sup><small>[ p. 239 ]</small></sup></span> it followeth it on the way on which it will go above.

“And before it removeth itself above, it uttereth the mystery of the undoing of the seals and all the bonds of the counterfeiting spirit with which the rulers have bound it to the soul; and when it is uttered, the bonds of the counterfeiting spirit undo themselves, and it ceaseth to come into that soul and releaseth the soul according to the commandments which **(287)** the rulers of the great Fate have commanded it, saying: ‘Release not this soul until it tell thee the mystery of the undoing of all the seals with which we have bound thee to the soul.’

“If then the soul shall have uttered the mystery of the undoing of the seals and of all the bonds of the counterfeiting spirit, and if it ceaseth to come into the soul and ceaseth to be bound to it, then it uttereth in that moment a mystery and releaseth the destiny to its region to the rulers who are on the way of the midst. And it uttereth the mystery and releaseth the counterfeiting spirit to the rulers of the Fate to the region in which it was bound to it.

“And in that moment it becometh a great light-stream, shining exceedingly, and the retributive receivers who have led it forth out of the body, are afraid of the light of that soul and fall on their faces. And in that moment that soul becometh a great light-stream, it becometh entirely wings of light, and penetrateth all the regions of the rulers and all the orders of the Light, until it reacheth the region of its kingdom up to which it hath received mysteries.

<small>Of the state after death of one who hath received the mysteries, and yet hath transgressed.</small>

“If on the other hand it is a soul which hath <span id="p240"><sup><small>[ p. 240 ]</small></sup></span> received mysteries in the first space which is without, and if after it **(288)** hath received the mysteries it hath accomplished them, it \[then\] turneth and committeth sin after the accomplishing of the mysteries, and if the time of the coming-forth of that soul is completed, then the retributive receivers come to lead that soul out of the body.

“And the destiny and the counterfeiting spirit follow that soul. Because the counterfeiting spirit is bound to it with the seals and the bonds of the rulers, it followeth thus that soul which travelleth on the ways with the counterfeiting spirit.

“It uttereth the mystery of the undoing of all the bonds and all the seals with which the rulers have bound the counterfeiting spirit to the soul. And when the soul uttereth the mystery of the undoing of the seals, straightway the bonds of the seals which are bound in the counterfeiting spirit to the soul undo themselves. And when the soul uttereth the mystery of the undoing of the seals, straightway the counterfeiting spirit undoeth itself and ceaseth to be assigned to the soul. And in that moment the soul uttereth a mystery and restraineth the counterfeiting spirit and the destiny and dischargeth them which follow it. But no one of them is in its power; **(289)** but it is in their power.

“And in that moment the receivers of that soul come with the mysteries which it hath received, come and snatch that soul out of the hands of the retributive receivers, and the \[latter\] receivers go back to the works of the rulers for the purpose of the economy of the leading-forth of the souls.

<span id="p241"><sup><small>[ p. 241 ]</small></sup></span>

“And the receivers of that soul on the other hand who belong to the Light, become wings of light for that soul and become vestures of light for it and they do not lead it into the chaos, because it is not lawful to lead into the chaos souls which have received mysteries, but they lead it on the way of the rulers of the midst. And when it reacheth the rulers of the midst, those rulers meet the soul, they being in great fear and violent fire and with different faces, in a word in great immeasurable fear.

<small>The apology of the rulers of the ways of the midst.</small>

“And in that moment the soul uttereth the mystery of their apology. And they are exceedingly afraid and fall on their faces, being in fear of the mystery which it hath uttered, and of their apology. **(290)** And that soul surrendereth their destiny, saying unto them: Take your destiny! I come not to your regions from this moment onwards. I have become a stranger unto you for ever, being about to go unto the region of my inheritance.

“And when the soul shall have said this, the receivers of the Light fly with it on high and lead it into the æons of the Fate, it giving every region its apology and its seals,—which I will tell you at the expansion of the universe. And it giveth the counterfeiting spirit to the rulers and telleth them the mystery of the bonds with which it is bound to it, and sayeth unto them: There haveThe apology of the rulers of the Fate. ye your counterfeiting spirit! I come not to your region from this moment onwards. I have become a stranger unto you for ever. And it giveth every one his seal and his apology.

<small>Of the ascension of that soul into the Inheritance.</small>

“And when the soul shall have said this, the receivers of the Light fly with it on high and lead <span id="p242"><sup><small>[ p. 242 ]</small></sup></span> it **(291)** out of the æons of the Fate and lead it up into all the æons \[above\], it giving to every region its apology and the apology of all the regions and the seals to the tyrants of the king, the Adamas. And it giveth the apology of all the rulers of all the regions of the Left,—whose collective apologies and seals I will one day tell you when I shall tell you the expansion of the universe.

“And moreover those receivers lead that soul to the Virgin of Light and that soul giveth the Virgin of Light the seals and the glory of the songs of praise. And the Virgin of Light and also the seven other virgins of the Light together prove that soul and find together their signs in it and their seals and their baptisms and their chrism. And the Virgin of Light **(292)** sealeth that soul and the receivers of the Light baptize that soul and give it the spiritual chrism; and every one of the virgins of the Light sealeth it with her seals.

“And moreover the receivers of the Light hand it over to the great Sabaōth, the Good, who is at the gate of the Life in the region of those of the Right, who is called ‘Father.’ And that soul giveth him the glory of his songs of praise and his seals and his apologies. And Sabaōth, the Great and Good, sealeth it with his seals. And the soul giveth its science and the glory of the songs of praise and the seals to the whole region of those of the Right. They all seal it with their seals; and Melchisedec, the great Receiver of the Light who is in the region of those of the Right, sealeth that soul and all the receivers of Melchisedec seal that soul and lead it into the Treasury of the Light.

“And it giveth the glory and the honour and <span id="p243"><sup><small>[ p. 243 ]</small></sup></span> the laud of the songs of praise and. all the seals of all the regions of the Light. And all those of the region of the Treasury of the Light seal it with their seals and it goeth unto the region of the Inheritance.”

## CHAPTER 113

When then the Saviour had said this unto his disciples **(293)** he said unto them: “Understand ye in what manner I discourse with you?”

<small>Mary interpreteth from former sayings.</small>

And Mary again started forward and said: "Yea, my Lord, I understand in what manner thou dost discourse with me, and I will comprehend them all \[_sc._ thy words\]. Now, therefore, concerning these words which thou sayest, my mind hath brought forward four thoughts in me and my light-man hath led me and exulted and seethed, desiring to come forth out of me and enter into thee. Now, therefore, my Lord, hearken that I may tell thee the four thoughts which have arisen in me.

<small>The piece of money which was brought unto Jesus.</small>

“The first thought hath arisen in me concerning the word which thou hast spoken: ‘Now, therefore, the soul giveth the apology and seal unto all the rulers who are in the region of the king, the Adamas, and giveth the apology and the honour and the glory of all their seals and the songs of praise to the region of the Light,’—concerning this word then thou hast spoken unto us aforetime, when they brought thee the piece of money and thou didst see that it was of silver and copper and didst ask: ‘Whose is this image?’ They said: ‘The king's.’ And when thou sawest that it was of silver and copper mixed, thou saidst: 'Give therefore the king's unto the king and God's unto God,'—that is: If the soul receiveth mysteries, it giveth the apology to <span id="p244"><sup><small>[ p. 244 ]</small></sup></span> all the rulers and to the region **(294)** of the king, the Adamas; and the soul giveth the honour and the glory to all those of the region of the Light. And the word: ‘It hath glistened, when thou didst see that it is made up of silver and copper,’—it is the type thereof, that in it \[_sc._ the soul\] is the power of the Light, which is the refined silver, and that in it is the counterfeiting spirit, which is the material copper. This, my Lord, is the first thought.

<small>A saying of Paul.</small>

“The second thought is on the other hand that which thou hast just said unto us concerning the soul which receiveth the mysteries: ‘If it cometh into the region of the rulers of the way of the midst, they come forth to meet it in exceedingly great fear and they are afraid of it. And the soul giveth the mystery of the fear unto them and they are afraid before it. And it giveth the destiny to its region, and it giveth the counterfeiting spirit to its own region, and it giveth the apology and the seals to every one of the rulers who are on the ways, and it giveth the honour and the glory and the laud of the seals and the songs of praise to all those of the region of the Light,’—concerning this word, my Lord, thou hast spoken aforetime through the mouth of our brother Paul: ‘Give tax to whom tax is due, give fear to whom fear is due, give tribute to whom tribute is due, give honour to whom honour is due, and give laud to whom laud is due, and owe not any other anything,’ **(295)**\—that is, my Lord: The soul which receiveth mysteries, giveth apology to all regions. This, my Lord, is the second thought.

<small>The foes of one's own house.</small>

“The third thought on the other hand concerning the word which thou hast aforetime spoken <span id="p245"><sup><small>[ p. 245 ]</small></sup></span> unto us: ‘The counterfeiting spirit is hostile to the soul, making it do all sins and all mischiefs, and it transferreth it in the chastisements because of all the . sins which it hath made it commit; in a word, it is hostile to the soul in every way,’—concerning this word, therefore, thou hast said unto us aforetime: ‘The foes of the man are the dwellers in his house,’—that is: The dwellers in the house of the soul are the counterfeiting spirit and the destiny, which are hostile to the soul the whole time, making it commit all sin and all iniquities. Lo this, my Lord, is the third thought.

<small>A former saying concerning rebirth.</small>

“The fourth thought on the other hand concerning the word which thou hast said: ‘If the soul goeth forth out of the body and travelleth on the way with the counterfeiting spirit, and if it hath not found the mystery of the undoing of all the bonds and the seals which are bound to the counterfeiting spirit, so that it may cease to haunt or be assigned to it,—if it then hath not found it, the counterfeiting spirit leadeth the soul to the Virgin of Light, the judge; and the judge, the Virgin of Light, proveth the soul and findeth **(296)** that it hath sinned and, as she also hath not found the mysteries of the Light with it, she handeth it over to one of her receivers, and her receiver leadeth it and casteth it into the body, and it cometh not out of the changes of the body before it hath yielded its last circuit,’—concerning this word, then, my Lord, thou hast said unto us aforetime: ‘Be reconciled with thy foe as long as thou art on the way with him, lest perchance thy foe hand thee over to the judge and the judge hand thee over to the servant and the servant <span id="p246"><sup><small>[ p. 246 ]</small></sup></span> cast thee into prison, and thou shalt not come forth out of that region till thou hast yielded the last farthing.’

“Because of this manifestly is thy word: Every soul which cometh forth out of the body and travelleth on the way with the counterfeiting spirit and findeth not the mystery of the undoing of all the seals and all the bonds, so that it may undo itself from the counterfeiting spirit which is bound to it,—that soul which hath not found mysteries of the Light and hath not found the mysteries of detachment from the counterfeiting spirit which is bound to it,—if then it hath not found it, the counterfeiting spirit leadeth that soul to the Virgin of Light, and the Virgin of Light, yea that judge, handeth over that soul **(297)** to one of her receivers, and her receiver casteth it into the sphere of the æons, and it cometh not out of the changes of the body before it hath yielded the last circuit which is appointed for it. This then, my Lord, is the fourth thought.”

## CHAPTER 114

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard Mary say these words, that he said: “Well said, all-blessed Mary, spiritual \[one\]. These are the solutions of the words which I have spoken.”

<small>Mary continueth to question Jesus.</small>

Mary answered and said: “Still, my Lord, do I question thee, because from now on I will begin to question thee on all things with sureness. For this cause, therefore, my Lord, be patient with us and reveal unto us all things on which we shall question thee for the sake of the manner, how my brethren are to herald it to the whole race of men.”

And when she had said this to the Saviour, <span id="p247"><sup><small>[ p. 247 ]</small></sup></span> the Saviour answered and said unto her in great compassion towards her: “Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: Not only will I reveal unto you all things on which ye shall question me, but from now on I will reveal unto you other things on which ye have not thought to question, which have not entered into the heart of man, and which also all the gods, who are below man, know not. Now, therefore, Mary, question on what thou mayest question, and I will reveal it unto thee face to face without similitude.”

## CHAPTER 115

And Mary answered and said: “My Lord, in what type then do **(298)** the baptisms forgive sins? I heard thee say: ‘The retributive servitors follow the soul, being witnesses to it for all the sins which it committeth, that they may convict it in the judgments.’ Now, therefore, my Lord, do the mysteries of the baptisms wipe out the sins which are in the hands of the retributive servitors, so that they forget them? Now, therefore, my Lord, tell unto us the type, how they forgive sins; nay, we desire to know it with sureness.”

<small>Of the retributive servitors.</small>

And the Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Finely hast thou spoken. The servitors indeed are they who bear witness to all sins; but they abide in the judgments, seizing the souls and convicting all the souls of sinners who have received no mysteries; and they keep them fast in the chaos, chastizing them. And those retributive receivers cannot overstep the chaos to reach to the orders which are above the chaos, and convict the souls which come forth out of those regions. Now then it is not lawful to use force on the souls which receive mysteries, and lead them into <span id="p248"><sup><small>[ p. 248 ]</small></sup></span> the chaos, so that the retributive servitors may convict them. But the retributive servitors convict the **(299)** souls of the sinners and they keep fast those who have received no mysteries which may lead them out of the chaos. The souls on the other hand which receive mysteries,—they have no power of convicting them, because they do not come forth out of their regions, and also, if they come forth into their regions, they are not able to obstruct them; nay, they cannot lead them into that chaos.

<small>How the soul of the sinner is stamped with his sins.</small>

“Hearken moreover that I may tell you the word in truth, in what type the mystery of baptism forgiveth sins. Now, therefore, if the souls sin when they are still in the world, the retributive servitors indeed come and are witnesses of all the sins which the soul committeth, lest in sooth they should come forth out of the regions of the chaos, in order that they may convict them in the judgments which are outside the chaos. And the counterfeiting spirit becometh witness of all the sins which the soul shall commit, in order that it may convict it in the judgments which are outside the chaos, not only that it may bear witness of them, but—all the sins of the souls—it sealeth the sins and maketh them fast on to the soul, in order that all the rulers of the chastisements of the sinners may recognize it, that it is a sinning soul, and that they may know of the number of sins which it hath committed, by the seals which the counterfeiting spirit hath made fast on to it, so that it shall be chastized according to **(300)** the number of sins which it hath committed. This do they with all sinning souls.

<small>How the baptisms purify sins.</small>

<small>The separation of the portions by the mystery of baptism.</small>

“Now, therefore, he who shall receive the <span id="p249"><sup><small>[ p. 249 ]</small></sup></span> mysteries of the baptisms, then the mystery of them becometh a great, exceedingly violent, wise fire and it burneth up the sins and entereth into the soul secretly and consumeth all the sins which the counterfeiting spirit hath made fast on to it. And when it hath finished purifying all the sins which the counterfeiting spirit hath made fast on to the soul, it entereth into the body secretly and pursueth all the pursuers secretly and separateth them off on the side of the portion of the body. For it pursueth the counterfeiting spirit and the destiny and separateth them off from the power and from the soul and putteth them on the side of the body, so that it separateth off the counterfeiting spirit and the destiny and the body into one portion; the soul and power on the other hand it separateth into another. The mystery of baptism on the contrary remaineth in the midst of the two, continually separating them from one another, so that it maketh them clean and purifieth them, in order that they may not be stained by matter.

“Now, therefore, Mary, this is the way in which the mysteries of the baptisms forgive sins and all iniquities.”

## CHAPTER 116

When then **(301)** the Saviour had said this, he said unto his disciples: “Understand ye in what manner I discourse with you?”

<small>Mary interpreteth the same from a former saying.</small>

Then Mary started forward and said: "Yea, my Lord, in truth I enquire closely into all the words which thou sayest. Concerning the word then of the forgiveness of sins thou hast spoken unto us in similitude aforetime, saying: ‘I am come to cast fire on the earth,’ and again: ‘What will I that it burn?’ And again thou hast distinguished <span id="p250"><sup><small>[ p. 250 ]</small></sup></span> it clearly, saying: ‘I have a baptism, to baptize in it; and how shall I endure until it is accomplished? Think ye I am come to cast peace on the earth? Nay, but I am come to cast division. For from now on five will be in one house; three will be divided against two, and two against three.’ This, my Lord, is the word which thou hast spoken clearly.

“The word indeed which thou hast spoken: ‘I am come to cast fire on the earth, and what will I that it burn?’—that is, my Lord: Thou hast brought the mysteries of the baptisms into the world, and thy pleasure is that they should consume all the sins of the soul and purify them. And thereafter again thou hast distinguished it clearly, saying: ‘I have a baptism, to baptize in it; and **(302)** how shall I endure until it is accomplished?’—that is: Thou wilt not remain in the world until the baptisms are accomplished and purify the perfect souls.

“And moreover the word which thou hast spoken unto us aforetime: ‘Think ye I am come to cast peace on the earth? Nay, but I am come to cast division. For from now on five will be in one house; three will be divided against two, and two against three,’—that is: Thou hast brought the mystery of the baptisms into the world, and it hath effected a division in the bodies of the world, because it hath separated the counterfeiting spirit and the body and the destiny into one portion; the soul and the power on the other hand it hath separated into another portion;—that is: Three will be against two, and two against three.”

And when Mary had said this, the Saviour <span id="p251"><sup><small>[ p. 251 ]</small></sup></span> said: “Well said, thou spiritual and light-pure Mary. This is the solution of the word.”

## CHAPTER 117

<small>Mary further questioneth Jesus.</small>

Mary answered again and said: “My Lord, I will still continue to question thee. Now, therefore, my Lord, bear with me questioning thee. Lo, in openness have we known the type in which the baptisms forgive sins. Now on the other hand the mystery of these three spaces and the mysteries of this First Mystery and the mysteries of the Ineffable, in what type do they forgive sins? Do they forgive in the type **(303)** of the baptisms, or not?”

<small>Of the forgiveness of sins according to the higher mysteries.</small>

The Saviour answered again and said: "Nay, but all the mysteries of the three spaces forgive the soul in all the regions of the rulers all the sine which the soul hath committed from the beginning onwards. They forgive it, and moreover they forgive the sins which it thereafter will commit, until the time up to which every one of the mysteries shall be effective,—the time up to which every one of the mysteries shall be effective I will tell you at the expansion of the universe.

“And moreover the mystery of the First Mystery and the mysteries of the Ineffable forgive the soul in all the regions of the rulers all the sins and all the iniquities which the soul hath committed; and \[not only\] do they forgive it all, but they impute unto it no sin from this hour unto all eternity, because of the gift of that great mystery and its prodigiously great glory.”

## CHAPTER 118

When then the Saviour had said this, he said unto his disciples: “Understand ye in what manner I speak with you?”

<small>Mary interpreteth the same from Psalm xxxi.</small>

And Mary answered again and said: "Yea, my Lord, already have I seized on all the words <span id="p252"><sup><small>[ p. 252 ]</small></sup></span> which thou sayest. Now, therefore, my Lord, concerning the word which thou sayest: **(304)** ‘All the mysteries of the three spaces forgive sins and cover their \[_sc._ the souls’\] iniquities,'—David, the prophet, then hath prophesied aforetime concerning this word, saying: ‘Blessed are they whose sins are forgiven and whose iniquities are covered.’

“And the word which thou hast spoken: ‘The mystery of the First Mystery and the mystery of the Ineffable forgive all men who shall receive those mysteries, not only the sins which they have committed from the beginning onwards, but also they impute them not to them from this hour unto all eternity,’—concerning this word David hath prophesied aforetime, saying: ‘Blessed are those to whom the Lord God will not impute sins,’—that is: Sins will not be imputed from this hour to those who have received the mysteries of the First Mystery and who have received the mystery of the Ineffable.”

He said: “Well said, Mary, thou spiritual and light-pure Mary. This is the solution of the word.”

And Mary continued again and said: “My Lord, if the man receiveth mysteries from the mysteries **(305)** of the First Mystery and again turneth and sinneth and transgresseth, and if he thereafter again turneth and repenteth and prayeth in any \[mystery\] of his mystery, will it be forgiven him, or not?”

<small>Of forgiveness even unto twelve times of those who have received the mysteries of the First Mystery.</small>

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: Every one who shall receive the mysteries of the First Mystery, <span id="p253"><sup><small>[ p. 253 ]</small></sup></span> if he again turneth and transgresseth twelve times and again twelve times repenteth, praying in the mystery of the First Mystery, it will be forgiven.

“But if after the twelve times he again transgresseth and turneth and transgresseth, it will not be forgiven him for ever, so that he should turn himself to any \[mystery\] of his mystery; and this \[man\] hath not repentance unless he receiveth the mysteries of the Ineffable, which have compassion at every time and forgive at every time.”

## CHAPTER 119

Mary continued again and said: “My Lord, but if on the other hand they who have received the mysteries of the First Mystery, turn and transgress, and if they come out of the body before they have repented, will they inherit the kingdom or not, because indeed they have received the gift of the First Mystery?”

<small>Of such initiated who sin and die without repentance.</small>

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: "Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: Every man who hath received mysteries in the First Mystery, | having transgressed for the first and the second and the third time, and if he cometh out of the body before he hath repented, his judgment is far sorer than all the judgments; for his dwelling is in the midst of the jaws of the dragon of the outer darkness, and at the end of all this he will be frozen up \[?\] in the chastisements and perish for ever, because he hath received the gift of the First Mystery and hath not abided in it \[_sc._ the gift\].

<small>Of the unending forgiveness of those who have received the mystery of the Ineffable.</small>

Mary answered and said: “My Lord, all men who shall receive the mysteries of the mystery of the Ineffable, and have turned again, have transgressed and have ceased in their faith, and again thereafter, when they are still in life, <span id="p254"><sup><small>[ p. 254 ]</small></sup></span> have turned and have repented, how many times will it be forgiven them?”

The Saviour answered and said unto Mary: “Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: To every man who shall receive the mysteries of the Ineffable, not only if he transgresseth once, turneth again and repenteth, will it be forgiven, but if at any time he transgresseth, and if, when still in life, he turneth again and repenteth, without play- acting, and again if he turneth and repenteth and prayeth in any of his mysteries, then will it be forgiven him, because he hath received of the gift of the mysteries of **(307)** the Ineffable, and moreover because those mysteries are compassionate and forgive at every time.”

And Mary answered again and said unto Jesus: “My Lord, those who shall receive the mysteries of the Ineffable, and have again turned, have transgressed and have ceased in their faith and are moreover come out of the body before they have repented, what will befall such?”

<small>Of such initiated who sin and die without repentance.</small>

And the Saviour answered and said unto Mary: “Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: All men who shall receive the mysteries of the Ineffable, blessed indeed are the souls which shall receive of those mysteries; but if they turn and transgress and come out of the body before they have repented, the judgment of those men is sorer than all the judgments, and it is exceedingly violent, even if those souls are new and it is their first time for coming into the world. They will not return to the changes of the bodies from that hour onwards and will not be able to do anything, but they will be cast out into the outer <span id="p255"><sup><small>[ p. 255 ]</small></sup></span> darkness and perish and be non-existent for ever.”

## CHAPTER 120

And when the Saviour had said this, he said unto his disciples: “Understand ye in what manner I speak with you?”

<small>Mary interpreteth the same from a former saying.</small>

Mary answered **(308)** and said: "I have seized on the words which thou hast said. Now, therefore, my Lord, this is the word which thou hast said: 'They who shall receive the mysteries of the Ineffable,—blessed indeed are those souls;

but if they turn, transgress, and cease in their faith, and if they go forth out of the body without having repented, they are no more fit from this hour onwards to return to the changes of the body, nor for anything at all, but they are cast out into the outer darkness, they will perish in that region and be non-existent for ever,'—concerning \[this\] word thou hast spoken unto us aforetime, saying: ‘Salt is good; but if the salt becometh sterile, with what are they to salt it? It is fit neither for the dunghill nor for the earth; but they throw it away,’—that is: Blessed are all the souls which shall receive of the mysteries of the Ineffable; but if they once transgress, they are not fit to return to the body henceforth from this hour onwards nor for anything at all, but they are cast into the outer darkness and perish in that region.”

And when she had said this, the Saviour said: “Well said, thou spiritual light-pure Mary. This is the solution of the word.”

And Mary continued again **(309)** and said: “My Lord, all men who have received the mysteries of the First Mystery and the mysteries of the Ineffable, those who have not transgressed, but <span id="p256"><sup><small>[ p. 256 ]</small></sup></span> whose faith in the mysteries was in sincerity, without play-acting,—they then have again sinned through the compulsion of the Fate and have again turned and repented and again prayed in any of the mysteries, how often will it be forgiven them?”

<small>Of the unending compassion of the great mysteries for the repentant.</small>

And the Saviour answered and said unto Mary in the midst of his disciples: "Amēn, amēn, I say unto you: All men who shall receive the mysteries of the Ineffable and moreover the mysteries of the First Mystery, sin every time through the compulsion of the Fate, and if they, when they are still in life, turn and repent and abide in any of their mysteries, it will be forgiven them at every time, because those mysteries are compassionate and forgiving for all time. For this cause then have I said unto you before: Those mysteries will not only forgive them their sins which they have committed from the beginning onwards, but they do not impute them to them from this hour onwards,—of which I have said unto you that they receive repentance at any time, and that they also will forgive the sins which they commit anew.

<small>Of the unrepentant.</small>

“If on the other hand those who shall receive mysteries of **(310)** the mystery of the Ineffable and of the mysteries of the First Mystery, turn and sin and come out of the body without having repented, then they will be even as those will be who have transgressed and not repented. Their dwelling also is in the midst of the jaws of the dragon of the outer darkness and they will perish and be non-existent for ever. For this cause have I said unto you: All men who shall receive the mysteries, if they knew the time when they come <span id="p257"><sup><small>[ p. 257 ]</small></sup></span> out of the body, would watch themselves and not sin, in order that they may inherit the Light-kingdom for ever.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_3_110">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Third Book — Chapter 102 to 110</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_3_125">
          <span class="pr-2">Third Book — Chapter 121 to 125</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
