---
title: "Sixth Book — Chapter 144 to 148"
description: "Pistis Sophia"
published: true
date: 2025-1-16T20:40:26Z
tags: Christianity, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-16T20:40:26Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_5_143">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Fifth Book — Chapter 136 to 143</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/A_Later_Postscript">
          <span class="pr-2">A Later Postscript</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p315">[<sup><small>p. 315</small></sup>]</span>

## A SIXTH BOOK

### Chapter 144

.          .          .          .          .          .

<small>Of the chastisement of the curser.</small>

. . . \[and lead them forth to the fire-rivers and fire-seas\] and take vengeance on it therein for another six months and eight days. Thereafter they lead it up on the way of the midst, and every one of the rulers of the way of the midst chastizeth it in his chastisements another six months and eight days. Thereafter they lead it to the Virgin of Light, who judgeth the good and the evil, that she may judge it. And when the sphere turneth itself, she handeth it over to her receivers, that they may cast it into the coons of the sphere. And the servitors of the sphere lead it forth to a water which is below the sphere; and it becometh **(380)** a seething fire and eateth into it, until it purifieth it utterly.

“And then cometh Yaluham, the receiver of Sabaōth, the Adamas, who handeth the souls the cup of forgetfulness, and he bringeth a cup filled with the water of forgetfulness and handeth it to the soul, and it drinketh it and forgetteth all regions and all the regions to which it hath gone. And they cast it down into a body which will spend its time continually troubled in its heart.

“This is the chastisement of the curser.”

Mary continued and said: “My Lord, the man <span id="p316">[<sup><small>p. 316</small></sup>]</span> who persistently slandereth, if he cometh out of the body, whither shall he get or what is, his chastisement?”

<small>Of the chastisement of the slanderer.</small>

Jesus said: "A man who persistently slandereth, if his time is completed through the sphere, that he cometh out of the body, then Abiout and Charmōn, the receivers of Ariēl, come, lead his soul out of the body and spend three days going round with it and instructing it concerning the creatures of the world.

“Thereafter they lead it below into Ameute before Ariēl, and he chastizeth it in his chastisements eleven months and twenty-and-one days.

“Thereafter they lead it into the chaos before. Yaldabaōth and his forty-and-nine demons, and every one of his demons fall upon it another eleven months and twenty-and-one days, scourging it with fiery whips.

“Thereafter **(381)** they lead it into fire-rivers and boiling fire-seas, to take vengeance on it therein another eleven months and twenty-and-one days.

“And thereafter they carry it on to the way of the midst, and every one of the rulers on the way of the midst chastizeth it in his chastisements another eleven months and twenty-and-one days.

“Thereafter they carry it to the Virgin of Light, who judgeth the righteous and the sinners, that she may judge it. And when the sphere turneth itself, she handeth it over to her receivers, that they may cast it into the æons of the sphere. And the servitors of the sphere will lead it to a water which is below the sphere; and it becometh <span id="p317">[<sup><small>p. 317</small></sup>]</span> a seething fire and eateth into it until it purifieth it utterly.

“And Yaluham, the receiver of Sabaōth, the Adamas, bringeth the cup of forgetfulness and handeth it to the soul, and it drinketh it and forgetteth all regions and all things and all the regions through which it hath gone. And they deliver it unto a body which will spend its time being afflicted.

“This is the chastisement of the slanderer.”

## CHAPTER 145

Mary said: “Woe, woe, unto sinners!”

Salome answered and said: "My Lord Jesus, a murderer who hath never committed any sin but murdering, if he cometh out of the body, what is his chastisement?

<small>Of the chastisement of the murderer.</small>

Jesus answered and said: "A murderer who **(382)** hath never committed any sin but murdering, if his time is completed through the sphere, that he cometh out of the body, the receivers of Yaldabaōth come and lead his soul out of the body and bind it by its feet to a great demon with a horse's face, and he spendeth three days circling round with it in the world.

“Thereafter they lead it into the regions of the cold and of the snow, and they take vengeance on it there three years and six months.

“Thereafter they lead it down into the chaos before Yaldabaōth and his forty-and-nine demons, and every one of his demons scourgeth it another three years and six months.

“Thereafter they lead it down into the chaos before Persephonē and take vengeance on it with her chastisements another three years and six months.

“Thereafter they carry it on to the way of <span id="p318">[<sup><small>p. 318</small></sup>]</span> the midst, and every one of the rulers of the way of the midst taketh vengeance on it with the chastisements of its regions another three years and six months.

“Thereafter they lead it unto the Virgin of Light, who judgeth the righteous and the sinners, that she may judge it. And when the sphere turneth itself, she commandeth that it shall be cast into the outer darkness until the time when the darkness of the midst shall be upraised; it \[the soul\] will be destroyed and dissolved.

“This is the chastisement of the murderer.”

## CHAPTER 146

<small>Peter protesteth against the women.</small>

Peter said: “My Lord, let the women **(383)** cease to question, in order that we also may question.”

Jesus said unto Mary and the women: “Give opportunity to your men brethren, that they also may question.”

Peter answered and said: “My Lord, a robber and thief, whose sin is this persistently, when he cometh out of the body, what is his chastisement?”

<small>Of the chastisement of the thief.</small>

Jesus said: "If the time of such an one is completed through the sphere, the receivers of Adōnis come after him, and lead his soul out of the body, and they spend three days circling round with it and instructing it concerning the creatures of the world.

“Thereafter they lead it down into the Amente before Ariēl, and he taketh vengeance on it in his chastisements three months, eight days and two hours.

“Thereafter they lead it into the chaos before Yaldabaōth and his forty-and-nine demons, and every one of his demons taketh vengeance on it another three months, eight days and two hours.

<span id="p319">[<sup><small>p. 319</small></sup>]</span>

“Thereafter they lead it on to the way of the midst, and every one of the rulers of the way of the midst taketh vengeance on it through his dark smoke and his wicked fire another three months, eight days and two hours.

“Thereafter they lead it up unto the Virgin of Light, who judgeth the righteous and the sinners, that she may judge it. And when the sphere turneth itself, she handeth it over to her receivers, that they may cast it into the æons of the sphere. And they lead it forth into a water which is below the sphere; **(384)** and it becometh a seething fire and eateth into it until it purifieth it utterly.

“Thereafter cometh Yaluham, the receiver of Sabaōth, the Adamas, bringeth the cup of forget-fulness and handeth it unto the soul; and it drinketh it and forgetteth all things and all the regions to which it had gone. And they cast it into a lame, halt and blind body.

“This is the chastisement of the thief.”

Andrew answered and said: “An arrogant, overweening man, when he cometh out of the body, what will happen to him?”

<small>Of the chastisement of the arrogant.</small>

Jesus said: "If the time of such an one is completed through the sphere, the receivers of Ariēl come after him and lead out his soul \[out of the body\] and spend three days travelling round in the world \[with it\] and instructing it concerning the creatures of the world.

“Thereafter they lead it down into the Amente before Ariēl; and he taketh vengeance on it with his chastisements twenty months.

“Thereafter they lead it into the chaos before Yaldabaōth and his forty-and-nine demons; and <span id="p320">[<sup><small>p. 320</small></sup>]</span> he and his demons, one by one, take vengeance on it another twenty months.

“Thereafter they carry it on to the way of the midst; and every one of the rulers of the way of the midst taketh vengeance on it another twenty months.

“And thereafter they lead it unto the Virgin of Light, that she may judge it. And when the sphere turneth itself, she handeth it over to her receivers, that they may cast it into the æons of the sphere. And the servitors of the sphere **(385)** lead it into a water which is below the sphere; and it becometh a seething fire and eateth into it until it purifieth it.

“And Yaluham, the receiver of Sabaōth, the Adamas, cometh and bringeth the cup with the water of forgetfulness and handeth it to the soul; and it drinketh and forgetteth all things and all the regions to which it had gone. And they cast it up into a lame and deformed body, so that all despise it persistently.

“This is the chastisement of the arrogant and overweening man.”

Thomas said: “A persistent blasphemer, what is his chastisement?”

<small>Of the chastisement of the blasphemer.</small>

Jesus said: "If the time of such an one is completed through the sphere, the receivers of Yaldabaōth come after him and bind him by his tongue to a great demon with a horse's face; they spend three days travelling round with him in the world, and take vengeance on him.

“Thereafter they lead him into the region of the cold and of the snow, and take vengeance on him there eleven years.

“Thereafter they lead him down into the <span id="p321">[<sup><small>p. 321</small></sup>]</span> chaos before Yaldabaōth and his forty-and-nine demons, and every one of his demons taketh vengeance on him another eleven years.

“Thereafter they lead him into the outer darkness until the day when the great ruler with the dragon's face **(386)** who encircleth the darkness, shall be judged. And that soul becometh frozen up \[?\] and destroyed and dissolved.

“This is the judgment of the blasphemer.”

## CHAPTER 147

Bartholomew said: “A man who hath intercourse with a male, what is his vengeance?”

<small>Of the chastisement of him who hath intercourse with males.</small>

Jesus said: "The measure of the man who hath intercourse with males and of the man with whom he lieth, is the same as that of the blasphemer.

“When then the time is completed through the sphere, the receivers of Yaldabaōth come after their soul, and he with his forty-and-nine demons taketh vengeance on it eleven years.

“Thereafter they carry it to the fire-rivers and seething pitch-seas, which are full of demons with pigs' faces. They eat into them and take vengeance on \[?\] them in the fire-rivers another eleven years.

“Thereafter they carry them into the outer darkness until the day of judgment when the great darkness is judged; and then they will be dissolved and destroyed.”

Thomas said: “We have heard that there are some on the earth who take the male seed and the female monthly blood, and make it into a lentil porridge and eat it, **(387)** saying: ‘We have faith in Esau and Jacob.’ Is this then seemly or not?”

<small>Of the chastisement of a foul act of sorcery.</small>

Jesus was wroth with the world in that hour <span id="p322">[<sup><small>p. 322</small></sup>]</span> and said unto Thomas: “Amēn, I say: This sin is more heinous than all sins and iniquities. Such men will straightway be taken into the outer darkness and not be cast back anew into the sphere, but they shall perish, be destroyed in the outer darkness in a region where there is neither pity nor light, but howling and grinding of teeth. And all the souls which shall be brought into the outer darkness, will not be cast back anew, but will be destroyed and dissolved.”

John answered \[and said\]: “A man who hath committed no sin, but done good persistently, but hath not found the mysteries to pass through the rulers, when he cometh out of the body, what will happen unto him?”

<small>Of the after-death state of the righteous man who path not been initiated.</small>

Jesus said: "If the time of such an one is completed through the sphere, the receivers of Bainchōōōch, who is one of the triple-powered gods, come after his soul and lead his soul with joy and exultation and spend three days circling round with it and instructing it concerning the creations of the world with joy and exultation.

“Thereafter they lead it down into the Amente and instruct it concerning the instruments of chastisement in the Amente; but they will not take vengeance on it therewith. But they will only instruct it concerning them, and the smoke of the flame of the chastisements catcheth it only a little.

“Thereafter they carry it up unto the way of the midst and instruct it concerning the chastisements of the ways of the midst, the smoke from the flame catching it a little.

“Thereafter they lead it unto the Virgin of Light, and she judgeth it and depositeth it with <span id="p323">[<sup><small>p. 323</small></sup>]</span> the little Sabaōth, the Good, him of the Midst, until the sphere turneth itself, and Zeus and Aphrodite come in face of the Virgin of Light, while Kronos and Arēs come behind her.

“At that hour she taketh that righteous soul and handeth it over to her receivers, that they may cast it into the peons of the sphere. And the servitors of the sphere lead it forth into a water which is below the sphere; and a seething fire ariseth and eateth into it until it purifieth it utterly.

“Thereafter cometh Yaluham, the receiver of Sabaōth, the Adamas, who giveth the cup of forgetfulness unto the souls, and he bringeth the water of forgetfulness and handeth it to the soul; \[and it drinketh it\] and forgetteth all things and all the regions to which it had gone.

<small>Of the cup of wisdom.</small>

“Thereafter there cometh a receiver of the little Sabaōth, the Good, him of the Midst. He himself bringeth a cup filled with thoughts and wisdom, and soberness is in it; \[and\] he handeth it to the soul. And they cast it into a body which can neither sleep nor forget because of the cup of soberness which hath been handed unto it; but **(389)** it will whip its heart persistently to question about the mysteries of the Light until it find them, through the decision of the Virgin of Light, and inherit the Light for ever.”

## CHAPTER 148

Mary said: “A man who hath committed all sins and all iniquities and hath not found the mysteries of the Light, will he receive the chastisements for them all at once?”

<small>A sinner suffereth for each separate sin.</small>

Jesus answered: “Yea, he will receive it; if he hath committed three sins, he will receive chastisement for three.”

<span id="p324">[<sup><small>p. 324</small></sup>]</span>

John said: “A man who hath committed all sins and all iniquities, but at last hath found the mysteries of the Light, is it possible for him to be saved?”

<small>Even the greatest of sinners, if he repent, shall inherit the kingdom.</small>

Jesus said: “Such a man who hath committed all sins and all iniquities, and he findeth the mysteries of the Light, and performeth and fulfilleth them and ceaseth not nor doeth sins, will inherit the Treasury of the Light.”

<small>Of the time favourable for the birth of those who shall find the mysteries.</small>

Jesus said unto his disciples: "When the sphere turneth itself, and Kronos and Arēs come behind the Virgin of Light and Zeus and Aphrodite come in face of the Virgin, they being in their own æons, then the veils of the Virgin draw themselves aside and she falleth into joy in that hour when she seeth these two light-stars before her. And all the souls which she shall cast at that hour into the circuit of the æons of the sphere, that **(390)** they may come into the world, will be righteous and good and find at this time the mysteries of the Light; she sendeth them anew that they may find the mysteries of the Light.

“If on the other hand Arēs and Kronos come in face of the Virgin and Zeus and Aphroditē behind her, so that she seeth them not, then all the souls which she shall cast in that hour into the creatures of the sphere, will be wicked and wrathful and do not find the mysteries of the Light.”

<small>The disciples beseech Jesus to have mercy upon them.</small>

When then Jesus said this unto his disciples in the midst of the Amente, the disciples cried and wept, \[saying\]: “Woe, woe unto sinners, on whom the negligence and the forgetfulness of the rulers lie until they come out of the body and are led to these chastisements! Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, son of the Holy <span id="p325">[<sup><small>p. 325</small></sup>]</span> \[One\], and have compassion with us, that we may be saved from these chastisements and these judgments which are prepared for the sinners; for we also have sinned, our Lord and our Light.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_5_143">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Fifth Book — Chapter 136 to 143</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/A_Later_Postscript">
          <span class="pr-2">A Later Postscript</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
