---
title: "Second Book — Chapter 91 to 101"
description: "Pistis Sophia"
published: true
date: 2025-1-16T20:40:26Z
tags: Christianity, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-16T20:40:26Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_2_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Second Book — Chapter 81 to 90</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_3_110">
          <span class="pr-2">Third Book — Chapter 102 to 110</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## CHAPTER 91

And Jesus answered and said unto John: "Finely indeed do ye question on all with precision and certainty. But now, therefore, John, hearken that I may discourse with thee. Every one who hath received mysteries of the Light, will abide in the region up to which every one hath received mysteries, and he hath not the power to go into the height into the orders which are above him.

<small>Of the first Commandment.</small>

“So that he who hath received mysteries in the first Commandment, hath the power to go into the orders which are below him, that is into all the orders of the third \[?\] space; but he hath not the power to go into the height to the orders which are above him.

<small>Of the first space.</small>

“And he who shall receive the mysteries of the First Mystery, which is the four-and-twentieth mystery from without and the head of the first space which is without,—he hath the power to go into all the orders which are without him; but he hath not the power to go into the regions which are above him or to pass through them.

<small>Of the second space.</small>

“And of those who have received the mysteries in the orders of the four-and-twenty mysteries, **(204)** every one will go into the region in which he hath received mysteries, and he will have the <span id="p172">[<sup><small>p. 172</small></sup>]</span> power to pass through all the orders and spaces which are without him; but he hath not the power to go into the higher orders which are above him or to pass through them.

<small>Of the third space.</small>

“And he who hath received mysteries in the orders of the First Mystery which is in the third space, hath the power to go into all the lower orders which are below him and to pass through all; but on the other hand he hath not the power to go into the regions which are above him or to pass through them.

<small>Of the Thrice-spirituals.</small>

“And he who hath received mysteries of the first Thrice-spiritual, which ruleth over the four-and-twenty mysteries all together which rule over the space of the First Mystery, of whose region at the expansion of the universe I will tell you—he, therefore, who shall receive the mystery of that Thrice-spiritual, hath the power to go down into all orders which are below him; but he hath not the power to go into the height into the orders which are above him, that is into all the orders of the space of the Ineffable.

“And he who hath received the mystery of the second Thrice-spiritual, hath the power to go into all the orders of the first Thrice-spiritual **(205)** and to pass through them all and all their orders which are in them; but he hath not the power to go into the higher orders of the third Thrice-spiritual.

“And he who hath received the mystery of the third Thrice-spiritual, which ruleth over the three Thrice-spirituals and the three spaces of the First Mystery all together, \[hath the power to go into all the orders which are below him\]; but he hath not the power to go into the height <span id="p173">[<sup><small>p. 173</small></sup>]</span> into the orders which are above. him, that is into the orders of the space of the Ineffable.

<small>Of the master-mystery.</small>

“And he who hath received the master-mystery of the First Mystery of the Ineffable, that is the twelve mysteries of the First Mystery all together, which rule over all the spaces of the First Mystery, he, therefore, who shall receive that mystery, hath the power to pass through all the orders of the spaces of the three Thrice-spirituals and the three spaces of the First Mystery and all their orders, and hath the power to pass through all the orders of the inheritances of the Light, to pass through them from without within and from within without and from above below and from below **(206)** above and from the height to the depth and from the depth to the height and from the length to the breadth and from the breadth to the length; in a word, he hath the power to pass through all the regions of the inheritances of the Light, and he hath the power to bide in the region where he pleaseth, in the Inheritance of the Light-kingdom.

“And amēn, I say unto you: That man will at the dissolution of the world be king over all the orders of the Inheritance of the Light. And he who shall receive that mystery of the Ineffable which I am,

<small>Of the gnosis of the master-mystery.</small>

“That mystery knoweth why the darkness hath arisen and why the light hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the darkness of the darknesses hath arisen and why the light of the lights hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the chaos hath arisen and why the treasury of the light hath arisen.

<span id="p174">[<sup><small>p. 174</small></sup>]</span>

“And that mystery knoweth why the judgments have arisen and why the light-land and the region of the inheritances of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the chastisements of the sinners have arisen and why the rest of the kingdom of the light hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth **(207)** why the sinners have arisen and why the inheritances of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the impious have arisen and why the good have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the chastisements and judgments have arisen and why all the emanations of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the sins have arisen and why the baptisms and the mysteries of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the fire of chastisement hath arisen and why the seals of the light, so that the fire should not harm them, have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why wrath hath arisen and why peace hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why slander hath arisen and why songs of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the prayers of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why cursing hath arisen and why blessing hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why knavery hath arisen and why deceit hath arisen.

“And that mystery **(208)** knoweth why the slaying hath arisen and why the quickening of the souls hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why adultery <span id="p175">[<sup><small>p. 175</small></sup>]</span> and fornication have arisen and why purity hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why intercourse hath arisen and why continence hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why insolence and boasting have arisen and why humbleness and meekness have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why tears have arisen and why laughter hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why slander hath arisen and why good report hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why appreciation hath arisen and why disdain of men hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why murmuring hath arisen and why innocence and humbleness have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why sin hath arisen and why purity hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why strength hath arisen and why weakness hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why **(209)** motion of body hath arisen and why its utility hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why poverty hath arisen and why wealth hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the freedom \[?\] of the world hath arisen and why slavery hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why death hath arisen and why life hath arisen.”

## CHAPTER 92

It came to pass then, when Jesus had finished saying these words unto his disciples, that they rejoiced in great joy and exulted when they heard Jesus say these words.

And Jesus continued again in the discourse and said unto them: "Hearken, therefore, now still <span id="p176">[<sup><small>p. 176</small></sup>]</span> further, O my disciples, so that I discourse with you concerning the whole gnosis of the mystery of the Ineffable.

<small>Of the gnosis of the mystery of the Ineffable.</small>

“That mystery of the Ineffable knoweth why unmercifulness hath arisen and why mercifulness hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why ruin hath arisen and why everlasting eternity hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the reptiles have arisen and why they will be destroyed.

“And that mystery knoweth why the wild beasts have arisen **(210)** and why they will be destroyed.

“And that mystery knoweth why the cattle have arisen and why the birds have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the mountains have arisen and why the precious stones therein have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the matter of gold hath arisen and why the matter of silver hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the matter of copper hath arisen and why the matter of iron and of stone hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the matter of lead hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the matter of glass hath arisen and why the matter of wax hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why herbs, that is the vegetables, have arisen and why all matters have arisen.

“And the mystery knoweth why the waters of the earth and all things in them have arisen and why also the earth hath arisen.

<span id="p177">[<sup><small>p. 177</small></sup>]</span>

“And that mystery knoweth why the seas **(211)** and the waters have arisen and why the wild beasts in the seas have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the matter of the world hath arisen and why it \[the world\] will be utterly destroyed.”

## CHAPTER 93

Jesus continued again and said unto his disciples: "Yet further, O my disciples and companions and brethren, let every one be sober in the spirit which is in him, let him understand and comprehend all the words which I shall say unto you; for from now on will I begin to discourse with you concerning all the gnoses of that Ineffable.

“That mystery knoweth why the west hath arisen and why the east hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the south hath arisen and why the north hath arisen.

Yet further, O my disciples, hearken and continue to be sober and hearken to the total gnosis of the mystery of the Ineffable.

“That mystery knoweth why the demons have arisen and why mankind hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the heat hath arisen and why the pleasant air hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the stars have arisen and why the clouds have arisen. **(212)**

“And that mystery knoweth why the earth became deep and why the water came thereon.

“And that mystery knoweth why the earth became dry and why the water came thereon.

“And that mystery knoweth why famine hath arisen and why superfluity hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the hoar-frost <span id="p178">[<sup><small>p. 178</small></sup>]</span> hath arisen and why the healthful dew hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the dust hath arisen and why the delightsome freshness hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the hail hath arisen and why the pleasant snow hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the west wind hath arisen and why the east wind hath arisen.

("And that mystery knoweth why the fire of the height hath arisen and why the waters have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the east wind hath arisen. \[? miscopied.\])

“And that mystery knoweth why the south wind hath arisen and why the north wind hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the stars of the heaven and the **(213)** disks of the light-givers have arisen and why the firmament with all its veils hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the rulers of the spheres have arisen and why the sphere with all its regions hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the rulers of the æons have arisen and why the æons with their veils have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the tyrant rulers of the æons have arisen and why the rulers who have repented have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the servitors have arisen and why the decans have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the angels

have arisen and why the archangels have arisen.

<span id="p179">[<sup><small>p. 179</small></sup>]</span>

“And that mystery knoweth why the lords have arisen and why the gods have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the jealousy in the height hath arisen and why concord hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why hate hath arisen and why love hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why discord hath arisen and why concord hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why avarice **(214)** hath arisen and why renunciation of all hath arisen and love of possessions hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why love of the belly hath arisen and why satiety hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the paired have arisen and why the unpaired have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why impiety hath arisen and why fear of God hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the light-givers have arisen and why the sparks have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the thrice-powerful have arisen and why the invisibles have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the fore-fathers have arisen and why the purities have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the great self-willed hath arisen and why his faithful have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the great triple-powerful hath arisen and why the great invisible forefather hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the thirteenth æon hath arisen and why the region **(215)** of those of the Midst hath arisen.

<span id="p180">[<sup><small>p. 180</small></sup>]</span>

“And that mystery knoweth why receivers of the Midst have arisen and why the virgins of the light have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the ministers of the Midst have arisen and why the angels of the Midst have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the light-land hath arisen and why the great receiver of the light hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the guards of the region of the Right have arisen and why the leaders of them have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the gate of life hath arisen and why Sabaōth, the Good, hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the region of the Right hath arisen and why the light-land, which is the treasury of the light, hath arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the emanations of the light have arisen and why the twelve saviours have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the three gates of the treasury of the light have arisen and why the nine guards have arisen.

“And **(216)** that mystery knoweth why the twin-saviours have arisen and why the three Amēns have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the five Trees have arisen and why the seven Amēns have arisen.

“And that mystery knoweth why the Mixture which existeth not, hath arisen and why it is purified.”

## CHAPTER 94

And Jesus continued again and said unto his disciples: “Still further, O my disciples, be <span id="p181">[<sup><small>p. 181</small></sup>]</span> sober and let every one of you bring hither the power of sensing the Light before him, that ye may sense with sureness. For from now on I will discourse with you concerning the whole region in truth of the Ineffable and concerning the manner, how it is.”

<small>The disciples lose courage.</small>

It came to pass then, when the disciples had heard Jesus utter these words, that they gave way and let go entirely.

Then Mary Magdalene came forward, threw herself at the feet of Jesus, kissed them and wept aloud and said: “Have mercy upon me, my Lord, for my brethren have heard and let go of the words which thou saidest unto them. Now, therefore, my Lord, concerning the gnosis of all the things which thou hast said, that they are in the mystery **(217)** of the Ineffable; but I have heard thee say unto me: ‘From now on I will begin to discourse with you concerning the total gnosis of the mystery of the Ineffable,’—this word, therefore, which thou saidest, thou hast not gone forward to complete the word. For this cause, therefore, my brethren have heard and have let go and ceased to sense in what manner thou discoursest with them. Concerning the word which thou saidest unto them, now, therefore, my Lord, if the gnosis of all this is in that mystery, where is the man who is in the world, who hath the ability to understand that mystery with all its gnoses and the type of all these words which thou hast spoken concerning it?”

## CHAPTER 95

It came to pass then, when Jesus had heard Mary say these words and knew that the disciples had heard and had begun to let go, that he encouraged them and said unto them: "Grieve <span id="p182">[<sup><small>p. 182</small></sup>]</span> no more, my disciples, concerning the mystery of, the Ineffable, thinking that ye will not understand it. Amēn, I say unto you: That mystery is yours, and every one's who will give ear unto you, so that they renounce this whole world and the whole matter therein and renounce all the evil thoughts therein and renounce all the cares of this æon.

<small>Jesus explaineth that that mystery is really simpler than all mysteries.</small>

“Now, therefore, I say unto you: **(218)** For every one who will renounce the whole world and all therein and will submit himself to the godhead, that mystery is far easier than all the mysteries of the Light-kingdom and it is sooner to understand than them all and it is easier \[?\] than them all. He who reacheth unto the gnosis of that mystery, renounceth this whole world and all the cares therein.

“For this cause have I said to you aforetime: ‘All ye who are heavy under your burden, come hither unto me, and I will quicken you. For my burden is easy and my yoke is soft.’ Now, therefore, he who will receive that mystery, renounceth the whole world and the cares of all the matter therein. For this cause, therefore, my disciples, grieve not, thinking that ye will not understand that mystery. Amēn, I say unto you: That mystery is far sooner to understand than all mysteries. And amēn, I say unto you: That mystery is yours and every one's who will renounce the whole world and the whole matter therein.

“Now, therefore, hearken, my disciples and my companions and my brethren, that I may urge you on to the gnosis of the mystery of the Ineffable **(219)** concerning which I discourse with you, <span id="p183">[<sup><small>p. 183</small></sup>]</span> because I have in Booth gotten as far as to tell you the whole gnosis at the expansion of the universe; for the expansion of the universe is its gnosis.

“But now then hearken that I may discourse with you progressively concerning the gnosis of that mystery.

<small>Of the rending asunder and emanation of the powers of the universe.</small>

“That mystery knoweth wherefor the five Helpers have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless \[_pl_.\].

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the great Light of lights hath rent itself asunder and wherefor it hath come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the first Commandment hath rent itself asunder and wherefor it hath divided itself into the seven mysteries and wherefor it is named the first Commandment and wherefor it hath come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Great Light of the Impressions of the Light hath rent itself asunder and wherefor it hath set itself up without emanations and wherefor it hath come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the First Mystery, that is the four-and-twentieth mystery from without, hath rent itself asunder and wherefor it imitated in itself the twelve mysteries according to the number of the numbering of the Uncontainables **(220)** and Boundless and wherefor it hath come forth from the Fatherless.

<small>Of those of the second space of the Ineffable.</small>

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the twelve Immoveables have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have set themselves with all <span id="p184">[<sup><small>p. 184</small></sup>]</span> their orders and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Unwaverables have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have set themselves up, divided into twelve orders, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless, which belong to the orders of the space of the Ineffable.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Incomprehensibles, which pertain to the second space of the Ineffable, have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the twelve Undesignatables have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have set themselves up after all the orders of the Unindicatables, themselves being uncontainable and boundless, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor these Unindicatables have rent themselves asunder,—\[they\] who have not indicated themselves nor brought themselves into publicity according to the economy of the One and Only, the Ineffable, and wherefor they have come forth **(221)** from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Super-deeps have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have distributed themselves, being a single order, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the twelve orders of the Unspeakables have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have <span id="p185">[<sup><small>p. 185</small></sup>]</span> divided themselves, being three portions, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor all the Imperishables, being their twelve orders, have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have settled themselves, being expanded in a single order, and wherefor they have divided themselves and formed different orders, being uncontainable and boundless, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Impassables have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have set themselves up, being twelve boundless spaces, and have settled themselves, being three orders of spaces, according to the economy of the One and Only, the Ineffable, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the twelve Uncontainables, which belong to the orders **(222)** of the One and Only, the Ineffable, have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless, until they were brought to the space of the First Mystery, which is the second space.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the four-and-twenty myriads of Praise-singers have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have extended themselves outside the veil of the First Mystery, which is the twin-mystery, that which looketh within and without, of the One and Only, the Ineffable, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor all the <span id="p186">[<sup><small>p. 186</small></sup>]</span> Uncontainables have rent themselves asunder—\[those\], which I have just named, which are in the regions of the second space of the Ineffable, which is the space of the First Mystery, and wherefor those Uncontainables and Boundless have come forth from the Fatherless.

<small>Of those of the first space of the Ineffable.</small>

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the four-and-twenty mysteries of the first Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they are called the four-and-twenty spaces of the first Thrice-spiritual and wherefor they have come forth from the second Thrice-spiritual.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the four-and-twenty mysteries of the **(223)** second Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth from the third Thrice-spiritual.

“And that mystery knoweth why the four-and-twenty mysteries of the third Thrice-spiritual—that is the four-and-twenty spaces of the third Thrice-spiritual—have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the five Trees of the first Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have extended themselves, standing one behind the other and moreover bound one to the other with all their orders, and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the five Trees of the second Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

<span id="p187">[<sup><small>p. 187</small></sup>]</span>

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the five Trees of the third Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth why the Fore-uncontainables of the first Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the Fore-uncontainables of the second Trispiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor **(224)** they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor all the Fore-uncontainables of the third Thrice-spiritual have rent themselves asunder and wherefor they have come forth from the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the first Thrice-spiritual from below—those who belong to the orders of the One and Only, the Ineffable hath rent itself asunder and wherefor it hath come forth from the second Thrice-spiritual.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor the third Thrice-spiritual—that is the first Thrice-spiritual from above—hath rent itself asunder and wherefor it hath come forth from the twelfth Pro-thrice-spiritual, which is in the last region of the Fatherless.

“And that mystery knoweth wherefor all the regions which are in the space of the Ineffable, and all those in them, have expanded themselves, and wherefor they have come forth from the last Limb of the Ineffable.

“And that mystery knoweth itself, wherefor it hath rent itself asunder to come forth from the Ineffable,—that is from That which ruleth them <span id="p188">[<sup><small>p. 188</small></sup>]</span> all and which expanded them all according to **(225)** their orders.

## CHAPTER 96

<small>Jesus promiseth to explain further all in detail.</small>

“Of all these then will I speak unto you at the expansion of the universe—in a word, all those whom I have spoken of unto you: those who will arise and those who will come, those who emanate, and those who come forth, and those who are without over them, and those who are implanted in them, those who will contain the region of the First Mystery and those who are in the space of the Ineffable—of these will I speak unto you, because I will reveal them unto you, and I will speak of them unto you according to every region and according to every order, at the expansion of the universe. And I will reveal unto you all their mysteries which rule over them all, and their Pro-thrice-spirituals and their Super-thrice-spirituals which rule over their mysteries and their orders.

<small>Of the mystery succinctly.</small>

“Now, therefore, the mystery of the Ineffable knoweth wherefor all these have arisen of whom I have spoken unto you in openness, and through which all these have arisen. It is the mystery which is in them all; and it is the out-going of them all, and it is the up-going of them all, and it is the setting-up of them all.

“And the mystery of the Ineffable is the mystery which is in all these of whom I have spoken unto you, and of whom I will speak unto you at the expansion of the universe. And it is the mystery which is in them all, and it is the one only mystery of the Ineffable and the gnosis of all these **(226)** of whom I have spoken unto you, and of whom I will speak unto you, and of whom I have not spoken. Of these will I speak unto <span id="p189">[<sup><small>p. 189</small></sup>]</span> you at the expansion of the universe and of their total gnosis one with another, wherefor they have arisen. It is the one and only word of the Ineffable.

“And I will tell you the expansion of all mysteries and the types of every one of them and the manner of their completion in all their figures. And I will tell you the mystery of the One and Only, the Ineffable, and all its types, all its figures and its whole economy, wherefor it hath come forth from the last Limb of the Ineffable. For that mystery is the setting-up of them all.

<small>Of the one and only word of the Ineffable.</small>

“And that mystery of the Ineffable is moreover also a one and only word, which existeth in the speech of the Ineffable, and it is the economy of the solution of all the words which I have spoken unto you.

“And he who will receive the one and only word of that mystery which I shall now say unto you, and all its types and all its figures, and the manner of accomplishing its mystery,—for ye are perfect and all-perfect and ye will accomplish the whole gnosis of that mystery with its whole economy, for unto you all mysteries are entrusted,—hearken, therefore, now, that I may tell you that mystery, which is \[ . . .?\].

<small>Of the ascension of the soul of him who shall receive the one and only mystery.</small>

“He **(227)** then, who shall receive the one and only word of that mystery, which I have told you, if he cometh forth out of the body of the matters of the rulers, and if the retributive receivers come and free him from the body of matter of the rulers,—that is those \[receivers\] who free from the body all out-going souls,—when, therefore, the retributive receivers free the soul which <span id="p190">[<sup><small>p. 190</small></sup>]</span> hath received this one and only mystery of the Ineffable, which I have just told you, then will it straightway, if it be set free from the body of matter, become a great light-stream in the midst of those receivers, and the receivers will be exceedingly afraid of the light of that soul, and the receivers will be made powerless and fall down and desist altogether for fear of the great light which they have seen.

“And the soul which receiveth the mystery of the Ineffable, will soar into the height, being a great light-stream, and the receivers will not be able to seize it and will not know how the way is fashioned upon which it will go. For it becometh a great light-stream and soareth into the height, and no power is able to hold it down at all, nor **(228)** will they be able to come nigh it at all.

“But it will pass through all the regions of the rulers and all the regions of the emanations of the Light, and it will not give answers in any region, nor giveth it any apologies, nor giveth it any tokens; neither will any power of the rulers nor any power of the emanations of the Light be able to come nigh that soul. But all the regions of the rulers and all the regions of the emanations of the Light,—every one singeth unto it praises in their regions, in fear of the light of the stream which envelopeth that soul, until it passeth through them all, and goeth to the region of the inheritance of the mystery which it hath received,—that is to the mystery of the One and Only, the Ineffable,—and until it becometh one with its Limbs. Amēn, I say unto you: It will be in all the regions in the time a man shooteth an arrow.

<span id="p191">[<sup><small>p. 191</small></sup>]</span>

<small>Of the rank of such a soul.</small>

“Now, therefore, amēn, I say unto you: Every man who will receive that mystery of the Ineffable and accomplish it in all its types and all its figures,—he is a man in the world, but he towereth above all angels and will tower still more above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above all archangels and will tower still more above **(229)**them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above all tyrants and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above all lords and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above all gods and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above all light-givers and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above all pure \[ones\] and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above all triple-powers and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above all forefathers and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above all invisibles and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above the great invisible forefather and will raise himself above him.

<span id="p192">[<sup><small>p. 192</small></sup>]</span>

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above all those of the Midst and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above the emanations of the Treasury of the Light and will raise himself above them all.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above the Mixture **(230)** and will raise himself entirely above it.

“He is a man in the world, but he towereth above the whole region of the Treasury and will raise himself entirely above it.

“He is a man in the world, but he will rule with me in my kingdom.

“He is a man in the world, but he is king in the Light.

“He is a man in the world, but he is not one of the world.

“And amēn, I say unto you: That man is I and I am that man.

<small>Such souls are one with the First Mystery.</small>

“And at the dissolution of the world, that is when the universe will be raised up and when the numbering of the perfect souls will be raised up all together, and when I am king in the midst of the last Helper, being king over all the emanations of the Light and king over the seven Amēns and the five Trees and the three Amēns and the nine guards, and being king over the Child of the Child, that is the Twin-saviours, and being king over the twelve saviours and over the whole numbering of the perfect souls who shall receive the mysteries in the Light,—then will all men who shall receive the mysteries in the Ineffable, be fellow-kings with me and will sit on my right and on my left in my kingdom.

<span id="p193">[<sup><small>p. 193</small></sup>]</span>

“And amēn, I say unto you: Those men are I, and I am they.

“On this account have I said unto you aforetime: ‘Ye will sit on your **(231)** thrones on my right and on my left in my kingdom and will rule with me.’

“On this account, therefore, I have not hesitated nor have I been ashamed to call you my brethren and my companions, because ye will be fellow-kings with me in my kingdom. This, therefore, I say unto you, knowing that I will give you the mystery of the Ineffable; that is: That mystery is I, and I am that mystery.

<small>Of the dignity of the thrones in the kingdom.</small>

“Now, therefore, not only will ye reign with me, but all men who shall receive the mystery of the Ineffable, will be fellow-kings with me in my kingdom. And I am they, and they are I. But my throne will tower over them. \[And\] because ye will suffer sorrows in the world beyond all men, until ye herald forth all the words which I shall speak unto you, your thrones shall be joined to mine in my kingdom.

“On this account I have said unto you aforetime: ‘Where I shall be, there will be also my twelve ministers.’ But Mary Magdalene and John, the virgin, will tower over all my disciples and over all men who shall receive the mysteries in the Ineffable. And they will be on my right and on my left. And I am they, and they are I.

“And they will be like unto you in all things save that your thrones will tower over theirs, and my throne **(232)** will tower over yours.

<small>Of the gnosis of the word of the Ineffable.</small>

“And all men who will find the word of the Ineffable,—amēn, I say unto you: The men <span id="p194">[<sup><small>p. 194</small></sup>]</span> who shall know that word, will know the gnosis of all these words which I have spoken unto you, both those of the depth and those of the height, those of the length and those of the breadth; in a word, they will know the gnosis of all these words which I have spoken unto you and which I have not yet spoken unto you, which I will speak unto you, region by region and order by order, at the expansion of the universe.

“And amēn, I say unto you: They will know in what manner the world is established, and they will know in what type all those of the height are established, and they will know out of what ground the universe hath arisen.”

## CHAPTER 97

When then the Saviour had said this, Mary Magdalene started forward and said: “My Lord, bear with me and be not wroth with me, if I question on all things with precision and certainty. Now, therefore, my Lord, is then another the word of the mystery of the Ineffable and another the word of the whole gnosis?”

The Saviour answered and said: “Yea, another is the mystery of the Ineffable and another the word of the whole gnosis.”

And Mary answered again and said unto the Saviour: “My Lord, bear with me, if I question thee, and be not wroth with me. Now, therefore, my Lord, unless we live and know the gnosis of the whole word of the Ineffable, shall we not be able to inherit the Light-kingdom?”

<small>Of the distinction between the gnosis of the universe and the mysteries of the Light.</small>

And the Saviour answered **(233)** and said unto Mary: "Surely; for every one who shall receive a mystery of the Light-kingdom, will go and inherit up to the region up to which he hath received mysteries. But he will not know the <span id="p195">[<sup><small>p. 195</small></sup>]</span> gnosis of the universe, wherefor all this hath arisen, unless he knoweth the one and only word of the Ineffable, which is the gnosis of the universe. And again in openness: I am the gnosis of the universe. And moreover it is impossible to know the one and only word of the gnosis, unless a man first receive the mystery of the Ineffable. But all the men who shall receive mysteries in the Light,—every one will go and inherit up to the region up to which he hath received mysteries.

“On this account I have said unto you aforetime: 'He who hath faith in a prophet, will receive a prophet's reward, and he who hath faith in a righteous \[man\] will receive a righteous \[man's\] reward,'—that is: Every one will go to the region up to which he hath received mysteries. He who receiveth a lesser mystery, will inherit the lesser mystery, and he who receiveth a higher mystery, will inherit the higher regions. And every one will abide in his region in the light of my kingdom, and every one will have power over the orders which are below him, but he will not have the power to go to the orders which are above him; but he will abide in the region of the Inheritance of the Light **(234)** of my kingdom, being in a great light immeasurable for the gods and all the invisibles, and he will be in great joy and great jubilation.

“But now, therefore, hearken, that I may discourse with you concerning the grandeur of those who shall receive the mysteries of the First Mystery.

<small>Of the ascension of the souls of those who receive the twelve mysteries of the First Mystery.</small>

“He, therefore, who shall receive the \[first\] mystery of that First Mystery, and it shall be <span id="p196">[<sup><small>p. 196</small></sup>]</span> at the time that he cometh out of the body of the matter of the rulers,—then the retributive receivers come and lead the soul of that man out of the body. And that soul will become a great light-stream in the hands of the retributive receivers; and those receivers will be afraid of the light of that soul. And that soul will go upwards and pass through all the regions of the rulers and all the regions of the emanations of the Light. And it will not give answers nor apologies nor tokens in any single region of the Light nor in any single region of the rulers; but it will pass through all the regions and cross over them all, so that it goeth and ruleth over all the regions of the first saviour.

“In like manner also he who shall receive the second mystery of the First Mystery and the third and fourth, until he shall receive the twelfth mystery of the First Mystery, if it shall be at the time **(235)** that he cometh out of the body of the matter of the rulers,—then the retributive receivers come and lead the soul of that man out of the body of matter. And those souls will become a great light-stream in the hands of the retributive receivers; and those receivers will be afraid of the light of those souls and will become powerless and fall on their faces. And those souls will straightway soar upwards and cross over all the regions of the rulers and all the regions of the emanations of the Light. They will not give answers nor apologies nor tokens in any single region; but they will pass through all the regions and will cross over them all and rule over all the regions of the twelve saviours, so that they who receive the second mystery of the First

<span id="p197">[<sup><small>p. 197</small></sup>]</span>

Mystery, will rule over all the regions of the second saviour in the inheritances of the Light.

“In like manner also those who receive the third mystery of the First Mystery and the fourth and fifth and sixth up to the twelfth,—every one will rule over all the regions of the saviour up to whom he hath received the mystery.

“And he who shall receive in sequence the twelfth mystery of the First Mystery, that is the master-mystery concerning which I discourse with you,—**(236)** and he who, therefore, shall receive those twelve mysteries which belong to the First Mystery, if he goeth forth out of the world, will pass through all the regions of the rulers and all the regions of the Light, being a great light-stream, and he will moreover rule over all the regions of the twelve saviours; but they will not be able to be like unto those who receive the one and only mystery of the Ineffable. But he who shall receive those mysteries will abide in those orders, because they are exalted, and he will abide in the orders of the twelve saviours.”

## CHAPTER 98

<small>Mary again questioneth Jesus.</small>

It came to pass, when Jesus had finished speaking these words unto his disciples, that Mary Magdalene came forward, kissed the feet of Jesus and said unto him: “My Lord, bear with me and be not wroth with me, if I question thee; but have mercy upon us, my Lord, and reveal unto us all things on which we shall question thee. Now, therefore, my Lord, how doth the First Mystery possess twelve mysteries, \[and\] the Ineffable possess a one and only mystery?”

<small>Of the three mysteries and five mysteries.</small>

Jesus answered and said unto her: "Indeed it possesseth a one and only mystery, yet that mystery constituteth three mysteries, although <span id="p198">[<sup><small>p. 198</small></sup>]</span> it is the one and only mystery; but the type of every one of them is different. And moreover it constituteth five mysteries, although it is a one and only \[one\]; but the type of every one is different. So that these five mysteries are alike with one another in the mystery **(237)** of the kingdom in the inheritances of the Light; but the type of each of them is different. And their kingdom is higher and more exalted than the whole kingdom of the twelve mysteries together of the First Mystery; but they are not alike in the kingdom \[with the one and only mystery\] of the First Mystery in the Light-kingdom.

“In like manner also the three mysteries are not \[?\] alike in the Light-kingdom; but the type of every one of them is different. And they themselves also are not alike in the kingdom with the one and only mystery of the First Mystery in the Light-kingdom; and the type of every one of the three of them, and the type of the configuration of each of them, is different from one another.

<small>Of the first mystery.</small>

“The first \[mystery of the First Mystery\],—if thou accomplishest its mystery altogether and standest and accomplishest it finely in all its figures, then dost thou come straightway out of thy body, become a great light-stream and pass through all the regions of the rulers and all the regions of the Light, while all are in fear of that soul, until it cometh to the region of its kingdom.

<small>Of the second mystery.</small>

“The second mystery of the First Mystery, on the other hand,—**(238)** if thou accomplishest it finely in all its figures,—the man, therefore, who shall accomplish its mystery, if he speaketh that <span id="p199">[<sup><small>p. 199</small></sup>]</span> mystery over the head of any man who goeth forth out of the body, and he speaketh it into his two ears, if indeed the man who goeth forth out of the body hath received mysteries for the second time and is sharing in the word of truth,—amēn, I say unto you: That man, if he goeth forth out of the body of matter, then will his soul become a great light-stream and pass through all the regions, until it cometh to the kingdom of that mystery.

<small>Of its efficacy for the uninitiated.</small>

“But if that man hath received no mysteries and is not sharing in the words of truth,—if he who accomplisheth that mystery, speaketh that mystery over the head of a man who cometh forth out of the body and who hath received no mysteries of the Light, and shareth not in the words of truth,—amēn, I say unto you: That man, if he cometh forth out of the body, will be judged in no region of the rulers, nor can he be chastized in any region at all, nor will the fire touch him, because of the great mystery of the Ineffable which is with him.

“And they will hasten quickly and hand him over one to another in turn and lead him from region to region and **(239)** from order to order, until they bring him before the Virgin of Light, while all the regions are in fear of the mystery and the sign of the kingdom of the Ineffable which is with him.

“And if they bring him before the Virgin of Light, then the Virgin of Light will see the sign of the mystery of the kingdom of the Ineffable which is with him; the Virgin of Light marvelleth and proveth him, but suffereth them not to bring him to the Light, until he accomplisheth the total <span id="p200">[<sup><small>p. 200</small></sup>]</span> citizenship of the light of that mystery, that is the purities of the renunciation of the world and also of the total matter therein.

“The Virgin of Light sealeth him with a higher seal, which is this \[ . . .? \], and letteth him in that month in which he hath come out of the body of matter, light down into a body which will be righteous and find the godhead in truth and the higher mysteries, so that he may inherit them and inherit the Light eternal, which is the gift of the second mystery of the First Mystery of the Ineffable.

<small>Of the third mystery.</small>

“The third mystery of that Ineffable on the other hand,—the man indeed who shall accomplish that mystery, not only if he \[himself\] cometh forth out of the body, will he inherit the kingdom of the mystery, but if he complete that mystery and accomplish it with **(240)** all its figures, that is if he go through with that mystery and accomplish it finely and pronounce the name of that mysteryOf its efficacy. over a man who cometh forth out of the body and hath known that mystery,—let the former have delayed or rather not have delayed,—one who is in the dire chastisements of the rulers and in their dire judgments and their manifold fires,—amēn, I say unto you: The man who hath come forth out of the body,—if the name of this mystery is pronounced on his behalf, they will hasten quickly to bring him over and hand him over one to another, until they bring him before the Virgin of Light. And the Virgin of Light will seal him with a higher. seal, which is this \[ . . .?\], and in that month will she let him light down into the righteous body which will find the godhead in truth and the higher mystery, so that <span id="p201">[<sup><small>p. 201</small></sup>]</span> he inherit the Light-kingdom. This, therefore, is the gift of the third mystery of the Ineffable.

<small>Of the three and five mysteries.</small>

“Now, therefore, every one who shall receive one of the five mysteries of the Ineffable,—if he cometh forth out of the body and inheriteth up to the region of that mystery, then is the kingdom of those five mysteries higher than the kingdom of the twelve mysteries of the First Mystery, and it is higher than all the mysteries **(241)** which are below them. But those five mysteries of the Ineffable are alike with one another in their kingdom, yet are they not alike with the three mysteries of the Ineffable.

“He on the other hand who receiveth of the three mysteries of the Ineffable, if he cometh forth out of the body, will inherit up to the kingdom of that mystery. And those three mysteries are alike with one another in the kingdom and they are higher and more exalted than the five mysteries of the Ineffable in the kingdom, but they are not alike with the one and only mystery of the Ineffable.

<small>Of the mysteries of the three spaces</small>

“He on the other hand who receiveth the one and only mystery of the Ineffable, will inherit the region of the whole kingdom according to its whole glory, as I have already told you at another time. And every one who shall receive the mystery which is in the space of the universe of the Ineffable, and all the other mysteries which are united in the Limbs of the Ineffable, concerning which I have not yet spoken unto you, and concerning their expansion and the manner of their setting-up and the type of every one, how it is and wherefor it is named the Ineffable or wherefor it standeth expanded with all its <span id="p202">[<sup><small>p. 202</small></sup>]</span> Limbs and how many Limbs are in it and all its economies, **(242)** of which I will not tell you now, but when I come to the expansion of the universe I will tell you all severally,—to wit, its expansions and its description, how it is, and the aggregation \[?\] of all its Limbs, which belong to the economy of the One and Only, the unapproachable God in truth,—up to what region, therefore, every one shall receive the mysteries in the space of the Ineffable, up to that region will he inherit up to which he hath received. And those of the whole region of the space of that Ineffable give no answers in that region, nor give they apologies, nor give they tokens, for they are without tokens and they have no receivers, but they pass through all the regions, until they come to the region of the kingdom of the mystery which they have received.

“In like manner also those who shall receive mysteries in the second space, they have no answers nor apologies, for they are without tokens in that world, which is the space of the first mystery of the First Mystery.

“And those of the third space, which is without, which is the third space from without \[? within\],—every region in that space hath **(243)** its receivers and its explanations and its apologies and its tokens, which I will one day tell you when I come to speak of that mystery, that is when I shall have told you of the expansion of the universe.

<small>Of the reign of a thousand years of the Light.</small>

“Albeit at the dissolution of the universe, that is when the number of the perfect souls is completed and the mystery \[through\] which the universe altogether hath risen, is completed, I <span id="p203">[<sup><small>p. 203</small></sup>]</span> will pass a thousand years according to the years of the Light, being king over all the emanations of the Light and over the whole number of the perfect souls who have received all mysteries.”

## CHAPTER 99

It came to pass, when Jesus had finished speaking these words unto his disciples, that Mary Magdalene came forward and said: “My Lord, how many years of the years of the world is a year of the Light?”

<small>What is a year of the Light.</small>

Jesus answered and said unto Mary: "A day of the Light is a thousand years in the world, so that thirty-six-myriads of years and a half-myriad of years of the world are a single year of the Light.

“I shall, therefore, pass a thousand years of the Light being king in the midst of the last Helper, and being king over all the emanations of the Light and over the whole number of the perfect souls who have received the mysteries of the Light.

<small>Of those of the first space in the kingdom of the thousand years.</small>

“And ye, my disciples, and every one who shall receive the mystery of the Ineffable, will **(244)** abide with me on my right and on my left, being kings with me in my kingdom.

“And they who shall receive the three mysteries of that Ineffable, will be fellow-kings with you in the Light-kingdom; but they will not be alike with you and with those who receive the mystery of the Ineffable, but they will rather abide behind you, being kings.

“And they who receive the five mysteries of the Ineffable, will also abide behind the three mysteries, being also kings.

“And moreover they who receive the twelfth mystery of the First Mystery, will also again <span id="p204">[<sup><small>p. 204</small></sup>]</span> abide behind the five mysteries of the Ineffable, being also kings according to the order of every one of them.

“And all who receive of the mysteries in all the regions of the space of the Ineffable, will also be kings and abide before those who receive the mystery of the First Mystery, expanded according to the glory of every one of them, so that those who receive the higher mysteries, will abide in the higher regions, and those who receive the lower mysteries, will abide in the lower regions, being kings in the light of my kingdom.

“These alone are the allotment of the kingdom of the first space of the Ineffable. **(245)**

<small>Of those of the second space.</small>

“They on the other hand who receive all the mysteries of the second space, that is of the space of the First Mystery, will again abide in the light of my kingdom, expanded according to the glory of every one of them, and every one of them being in the mystery up to which he hath received. And those who receive the higher mysteries, will also abide in the higher regions, and those who receive the lower mysteries, will abide in the lower regions in the light of my kingdom.

“This is the allotment of the second king for those who receive the mystery of the second space of the First Mystery.

<small>Of those of the third space, the first from without.</small>

“Those on the other hand who receive the mysteries of the third space, that is of the first space from without, those again will abide behind the second king, expanded in the light of my kingdom, according to the glory of every one of them, every one abiding in the region up to which he hath received mysteries, so that those who receive the higher mysteries, will abide in the <span id="p205">[<sup><small>p. 205</small></sup>]</span> higher regions, and those who receive the lower mysteries, will abide in the lower regions.

“These are the three allotments of the Light-kingdom.

“The mysteries of these three allotments of the Light are exceedingly numerous. Ye shall find them in the two great Books of Yew. But I will give you and tell you the great mysteries **(246)** of every allotment, those which are higher than every region, that is the heads according to every region and according to every order which will lead the whole race of men into the higher regions, according to the space of the Inheritance.

<small>Of the Books of Yew.</small>

“Of the rest of the lower mysteries, therefore, ye have no need; but ye will find them in the two Books of Yew, which Enoch hath written whilst I spake with him out of the tree of gnosis and out of the tree of life in the paradise of Adam.

“Now, therefore, when I shall have explained unto you the whole expansion, I will give you and tell you the great mysteries of the three allotments of my kingdom, that is the heads of the mysteries which I will give you and tell you in all their figures and all their types and in their ciphers and the seals of the last space, that is the first space from without. And I will tell you the answers and the apologies and the tokens of that space.

“The second space which is within, possesseth no answers nor apologies nor tokens nor ciphers nor seals; but it possesseth only types and figures.”

## CHAPTER 100

When the Saviour had finished saying all this unto his disciples, **(247)** Andrew came forward and said: “My Lord, be not wroth with me, but have <span id="p206">[<sup><small>p. 206</small></sup>]</span> mercy upon me and reveal unto me the mystery of the word concerning which I shall question thee, for it hath been hard for me and I have not understood it.”

The Saviour answered and said unto him: “Question concerning that on which thou desirest to question, and I will reveal it unto thee face to face without similitude.”

<small>Andrew questioneth Jesus.</small>

And Andrew answered and said: “My Lord, I am astonished and marvel exceedingly, how the men who are in the world and in the body of this matter, if they come forth out of this world, will pass through these firmaments and all these rulers and all lords and all gods and all these great invisibles and all those of the region of the Midst and those of the whole region of the Right and all the great \[ones\] of the emanations of the Light, and enter into them all and inherit the Light-kingdom. This matter, therefore, is hard for me.”

<small>That the disciples and the powers are all from the same Mixture.</small>

When then Andrew had said this, the spirit of the Saviour was roused in him; he cried out and said: "How long am I to endure you? How long am I to bear with you? Have ye then not even yet understood and are ye ignorant? Know ye then not and do ye not understand that ye and all angels and all archangels and the gods and the lords and all the rulers and all the great invisibles **(248)** and all those of the Midst and those of the whole region of the Right and all the great \[ones\] of the emanations of the Light and their whole glory,—that ye all one with another are out of one and the same paste and the same matter and the same substance, and that ye all are out of the same Mixture.

<span id="p207">[<sup><small>p. 207</small></sup>]</span>

“And at the commandment of the First Mystery the Mixture was constrained, until all the great \[ones\] of the emanations of the Light and all their glory purified themselves, and until they purified themselves from the Mixture. And they have not purified themselves of themselves, but they have purified themselves by necessity according to the economy of the One and Only, the Ineffable.

“They indeed have not at all suffered and have not at all changed themselves in the regions, nor at all torn themselves asunder nor poured themselves into bodies of different kinds and from one into another, nor have they been in any affliction at all.

<small>Of transcorporation and purification.</small>

“Ye then in particular are the refuse of the Treasury and ye are the refuse of the region of the Right and ye are the refuse of the region of those of the Midst and ye are the refuse of all the invisibles and of all the rulers; in a word, ye are the refuse of all these. And ye are in great sufferings and great afflictions in your being poured from one into another of different kinds of bodies **(249)** of the world. And after all these sufferings ye have struggled of your-selves and fought, having renounced the whole world and all the matter therein; and ye have not left off seeking, until ye found all the mysteries of the kingdom of the Light, which have purified you and made you into refined light, exceedingly purified, and ye have become purified light.

“For this cause have I said unto you aforetime: ‘Seek, that ye may find.’ I have, therefore, said unto you: Ye are to seek after the mysteries of the Light, which purify the body <span id="p208">[<sup><small>p. 208</small></sup>]</span> of matter and make it. into refined light exceedingly purified.

<small>Of the purifying mysteries.</small>

“Amēn, I say unto you: For the sake of the race of men, because it is material, I have torn myself asunder and brought unto them all the mysteries of the Light, that I may purify them, for they are the refuse of the whole matter of their matter; else would no soul of the total race of men have been saved, and they would not be able to inherit the kingdom of the Light, if I had not brought unto them the purifying mysteries.

“For the emanations of the Light have no need of the mysteries, for they are purified; but it is the race of men which hath need of them, because they all are material refuse For this cause, therefore, have I said unto you aforetime: ‘The healthy have no need **(250)** of the physician, but the sick,’—that is: Those of the Light have no need of the mysteries, for they are purified lights; but it is the race of men which hath need of them, for \[they\] are material refuse \[_pl._\].

“For this cause, therefore, herald to the whole race of men, saying: Cease not to seek day and night, until ye find the purifying mysteries; and say unto the race of men: Renounce the whole world and the whole matter therein. For he who buyeth and selleth in the world and he who eateth and drinketh of its matter and who liveth in all its cares and in all its associations, amasseth other additional matters to the rest of his matter, because this whole world and all therein and all its associations are material refuse \[_pl._\], and they will make enquiry of every one concerning his purity.

<span id="p209">[<sup><small>p. 209</small></sup>]</span>

“For this cause, therefore, I have said unto you aforetime: Renounce the whole world and the whole matter therein, that ye may not amass other additional matter to the rest of your matter in you. For this cause, therefore, herald it to the whole race of men, saying: Renounce the whole world and all its associations, **(251)** that ye may not amass additional matter to the rest of your matter in you; and say unto them: Cease not to seek day and night and remit not yourselves until ye find the purifying mysteries which will purify you and make you into a refined light, so that ye will go on high and inherit the light of my kingdom.

<small>That all who are purified will be saved.</small>

“Now, therefore, Andrew and all thy brethren thy co-disciples, because of your renunciations and all your sufferings which ye have endured in every region, and because of your changes in every region and of your being poured from one into another of different kinds of bodies and because of all your afflictions, and after all this ye have received the purifying mysteries and are become refined light exceedingly purified,—for this cause, therefore, ye will go on high and penetrate into all the regions of all the great emanations of the Light and be kings in the Light-kingdom for ever.

That finally they will be higher than all powers."But if ye come forth out of the body and come on high and reach unto the region of the rulers, then will all the rulers be seized with shame before you, because ye are the refuse of their matter and have become light more purified than them all. And **(252)** if ye reach unto the region of the Great Invisible and unto the region of those of the Midst and of those of the Right and unto <span id="p210">[<sup><small>p. 210</small></sup>]</span> the regions of all the great emanations of the Light, then will ye be revered among them all, because ye are the refuse of their matter and are became light more purified than them all. And all the regions will sing praises before you, until ye come to the region of the kingdom.

“This is the answer to the words on which ye question. Now, therefore, Andrew, art thou still in unfaith and unknowing?” [^1]

<small>Jesus pardoneth the ignorance of Andrew.</small>

When then the Saviour said this, Andrew knew clearly, not only he but also all the disciples knew with precision that they should inherit the Light-kingdom. They all threw themselves down together at Jesus' feet, cried aloud, wept and besought the Saviour, saying: “Lord, forgive our brother the sin of unknowing.”

The Saviour answered and said: “I forgive and will forgive; for this cause, therefore, hath the First Mystery sent me, that I may forgive every one his sins.”

**[SUB-SCRIPTION:] A PORTION OF THE BOOKS OF THE SAVIOUR**

## CHAPTER 101

**[THE CONCLUSION OF ANOTHER BOOK]**

<small>Of the Limbs of the Ineffable.</small>

“AND those who are worthy of the mysteries which abide in the Ineffable, which are those which have not gone forth,—these exist before the First Mystery, and to use a likeness and similitude, that ye may understand it, they are as the Limbs of the Ineffable. And every one existeth according to the dignity of its glory: the head according <span id="p211">[<sup><small>p. 211</small></sup>]</span> to the dignity of the head and the eye according to the dignity **(253)** of the eyes and the ear according to the dignity of the ears and the rest of the Limbs \[in like fashion\]; so that the matter is manifest: There is a multitude of limbs but one only body. Of this indeed have I spoken in a pattern and similitude and likeness, but not in a form in truth; nor have I revealed the word in truth, but the mystery \[only\] of the Ineffable.

<small>The Saviour is their treasury.</small>

“And all the Limbs which are in it,—according to the word with which I have made comparison,—that is, those which abide on the mystery of the Ineffable, and those which abide in it, and also the three spaces which are after them according to the mysteries,—of all these in truth and verity I am their treasury beside whom there is no other treasury, who hath not his like in the world; but there are still words and mysteries and other regions.

<small>Of the dignity of those who have received the mysteries.</small>

“Now, therefore, blessed is he who hath found the \[words of the\] mysteries \[of the first space\] which is from without; and he is a god who hath found these words of the mysteries of the second space, which is in the midst; and he is a saviour and an uncontainable who hath found the words of the mysteries of the third space, which is within, and he is more excellent than the universe and like unto those who are in that third space. Because he hath found the mystery in which they are and in which they stand,—**(254)** for this cause, therefore, is he like unto them. He on the other hand who hath found the words of the mysteries which I have described unto you according to a likeness, that they are the Limbs of the Ineffable,—amēn, I say unto you: That man who hath <span id="p212">[<sup><small>p. 212</small></sup>]</span> found the words of these mysteries in divine truth, is the first in truth and like unto him \[_sc._ the First, i.</small> e. the Ineffable\], for through those words and mysteries . . . and the universe itself standeth through that First. For this cause he who hath found the words of those mysteries, is like unto the First. For it is the gnosis of the gnosis of the Ineffable concerning which I have discoursed with you this day.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_2_90">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Second Book — Chapter 81 to 90</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Christianity/Pistis_Sophia/Book_3_110">
          <span class="pr-2">Third Book — Chapter 102 to 110</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^1]: 210:1 These two sentences are placed at the end of the preceding paragraph, but clearly belong here.