---
title: "Contemplative Prayer"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-11-12T14:02:03.086Z
tags: 6-0-6, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-11-12T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2 py-1">© 1992 Ann Bendall<br>© 1992 ANZURA, Australia & New Zealand Urantia Association</p>

_Ann Bendall, Nambour, Queensland_

We are given a great deal of information in _The URANTIA Book_ — suggestions, techniques, benefits etc., on the topic of prayer. It appears that there is a fine dividing line between prayer and worship and hence, in referring to Jesus — “The Master prayed very little for himself, although he engaged in much worship of the nature of understanding communion with his Paradise Father” ([UB 144:3.23](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p3_23)).

In giving his apostles instructions in response to their queries on prayer -“this all-important and worshipful practice” — he described prayer as “the sincere and longing look of the child to its spirit Father; it is a psychologic process of exchanging the human will for the divine will. Prayer is a part of the divine plan for making over that which is into that which ought to be” ([UB 144:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p4_9)). Now what does this mean? I read on and discover that “Practically all of Jesus' praying was done in the spirit and in the heart — silently” and that the “Master so rarely uttered his prayers as spoken words”. I get the impression that not only did he not utter the words, he did not pray mentally in words. I suspect that Jesus' praying was in the form encouraged by the Catholic religion called ‘contemplative prayer’. If my suspicion is correct, another cheer for Jesus Michael's Spirit of Truth as it has again broken through the traditional barriers of formalized religion by building on what was, so as to make it what it ought to be.

Oh how I would love to pray as Jesus prays. All I know is that, with every shred of what limited intellect I possess, I wish my will to be attuned to God's will. I want to learn all interesting new prayers as mine are so repetitive. I start to pray and then burst into laughter. God knows what I need, before I ask Him and I want what He wants for me — simple as that.

I chat away to Him, normally praying for strength and humour, and then I get truly serious about this praying business and think I will try some contemplative praying. I sit for thirty seconds, having given strict instructions to my mind that this is genuine praying time — I want it! All is quiet, and I smile so happily. I am sure that my heart and my Thought Adjuster and soul are praying away with truly professional style and zeal. But I want to check up. My conscious mind wants to make sure that this is what is transpiring, and it also desires to add a few little requests, just in case the others have overlooked them.

I am convinced that I have a most patient, loving Thought Adjuster! In an attempt to help, I decide to pray for patience and then think perhaps it would be more appropriate if all effort went into a spot more wisdom, or maybe understanding, or even perhaps mercy! But then maybe there are another 200 characteristics which should rank of higher priority. I toss up my hands in confusion and settle for an affirmation — “For eternity, it is my will that your will be mine. I pray, Dear Father that you teach me to be, and love, as Jesus was, and loves”.

Prior to _The URANTIA Book_, praying was all so easy. I would burden God with my needs and then happily trip through life sublimely confident that I had let Him know where I stood and what I required (after all He had a big universe to run, and would be in doubt unless I let Him know). These days I am marginally wiser, and smile as I hear His response to my prayer. The attunement of my will to His, is beyond my ability to comprehend. It is the progression to a level where our wills are identifiable. I know not the path to my perfection; He does and will guide me. His guidance is clear and unambiguous.

I am to get off my pedestal of illusion, roll up my mental sleeves, pick up the blue book and read and understand and integrate its teachings into my being. _The URANTIA Book_ gives in excess of 100 character portrayals (I have not counted, but for the mathematically inclined, it would be of interest to see just how many). These descriptions of the various personalities — ranging from Lucifer, to the apostles, Jesus' family and the many people Jesus met — give a detailed explanation of their weaknesses and their attempts to rectify either themselves or the world around them. I verily believe that practically every imperfect and undesirable human characteristic is exemplified in this book, as well as the way to overcome them. I may not have them all, but as sure as I am that I am imperfect, I recognize some glaring examples of myself in descriptions of others. Before the blue book my desire to ‘be perfect’ was all in God's hands. These days I am expected to pull my weight. If I want to be ‘perfect’ then I am given all the information in regard to my imperfection, plus a foolproof technique to overcome them.

I believe I can understand the philosophy of those who say that _The URANTIA Book_ is the work of the devil. Did not Jesus say to ask whatever you wish of the Father, and he would go up and twist His arm and guarantee that you got it? Jesus was like a religious Aladdin's lamp. All we had to do was pray and we would be perfect. When taken literally, disappointment met many good folks' endeavours, when the Mercedes was not in the family garage with a ‘Love from God’ card. A goodly number of charismatics finally became more mature and started to realize that perhaps the more appropriate request was for ‘perfection’, and the spiritual tools to do “greater works than these”. Imagine their shock if they read _The URANTIA Book_ after which the pathway to perfection requires an inordinate amount of effort, and a precise map is provided which states exactly the direction. The road is not formed, we are required to build it as we go.