---
title: "The Twelfth Book — Chapter 11 to 14"
description: "The S'rimad Devî Bhâgawatam"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T22:24:17Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T22:24:17Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Srimad_Devi_Bhagawatam/Book_12_10">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">The Twelfth Book — Chapter 1 to 10</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Srimad_Devi_Bhagawatam">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="c11"></span>

## Chapter XI

**On the description of the enclosure walls built of Padmarâga mani, etc., of the Mani Dvîpa** <span id="p1179"><sup><small>[ p. 1179 ]</small></sup></span> 1-30. Vyâsa said :— O King Janamejaya! Next to this Pusparâga mani enclosure wall comes the tenth enclosure wall, made of Padmarâga mani, red like the red Kunkuma and the Rising Sun. It is ten yojanas high. All its ground, entrance gates and temples and arbours are all made of Padmarâga mani. Within this reside the sixty four Kalâs or Sub-S’aktis adorned with various ornaments and holding weapons in their hands. Each of them has a separate Loka (region) allotted and within this Loka he has get his own formidable weapons, Vâhanas, families and their <span id="p1180"><sup><small>[ p. 1180 ]</small></sup></span> leaders or Governors. O King! Now hear the names of the sixty four Kalâs. They are :— Pingalâksî, Vis’âlâksî, Samriddhi, Vriddhi, S’raddhâ, Svâhâ, Svadhâ, Mâyâ, Sañgñâ, Vasundharâ, Trîlokadhâtrî, Sâvitrî, Gâyatrî, Tridas’es’vsrî, Surûpâ, Bahurûpâ, Skandamâtâ, Achyutapriyâ, Vimalâ, Amalâ, Arunî, Ârunî, Prakriti, Vikriti, S’rîsti, Sthiti, Samrhiti, Sandhyâ, Mâtâ, Satî, Hamsî, Mardikâ, Vajrikâ, Parâ, Devamâtâ, Bhagavatî, Devakî, Kamalâsanâ, Trimukhî, Saptamukhî, Surâsura vimardinî, Lambosthî, Ûrdhakes’î, Bahusîrsâ, Vrikodarî Ratharekhâhvayâ, S’as’irekâ, Gaganavegâ, Pavanavegâ, Bhuvanapâlâ, Madanâturâ, Anangâ, Anangamathanâ, Anangamekhalâ, Anangakusumâ, Visvarûpâ, Surâdikâ, Ksayamkarî, Aksyobhyâ, Satyavâdinî, Bahurûpâ, S’uchivratâ, Udârâ and Vâgis’î. These are the sixty four Kalâs. All of them have got luminous faces and long lolling tongues. Fire is always coming out from the faces of all of them. The eyes of all of them are red with anger. They are uttering :— We will drink all the water and thus dry up the oceans; we will annihilate fire, we will stop the flow of air and control it. Today we will devour the whole universe and so forth. All of them have got bows and arrows in their hands; all are eager to fight. The four quarters are being reverberated with the clashing of their teeth. The hairs on their heads are all tawny and they stand upwards. Each of them has one hundred Aksauhinî forces under them. O King! What more to say than this that each of them has got power to destroy one lakh Brahmândas; and their one hundred Aksauhinî forces also can do the same. There is nothing that is not impracticable with them. What they cannot do cannot be conceived by mind nor can be uttered in speech. All the war materials exist within their enclosures. Chariots, horses, elephants, weapons, and forces all are unlimited. All the war materials are ready at all times and in abundance. Next comes the eleventh enclosure wall built of Gomedamani. It is ten Yojanas high. Its colour is like the newly blown Javâ flower. All the ground, trees, tanks, houses, pillars, birds and all other things are all red and built of Gomedamani. Here dwell the thirty-two Mahâ S’aktis adorned with various ornament made of Gomedamani and furnished with various weapons. They are always eager to fight. Their eyes are always red with anger; their bees are like Pis’âchas and their hands are like chakras (discs). “Pierce him,” “Beat him,” “Cut him,” “Tear him asunder,” “Burn him down,” are the words constantly uttered by them. The inhabitants of the place always worship them. Each of them has ten Aksauhinî forces. These are inordinately powerful. It is impossible to describe that. It seems that each S’akti can easily destroy one lakh Brahmândas.

<span id="p1181"><sup><small>[ p. 1181 ]</small></sup></span>

Innumerable chariots, elephants, hordes, etc., and other vâhanas are here. Verily all the war materials of the Devî Bhagavatî are seen in this Gomedamani enclosure.

31-51. Now I am mentioning the auspicious, sin destroying names of these S’aktis :— Vidyâ, Hrî, Pusti, Prajñâ, Sinî vâlî, Kuhû, Rudrâ, Viryâ, Prabhâ, Nandâ, Posanî, Riddhidâ, S’ubhâ, Kâlarâtri, Mahârâtri, Bhadra KâIî, Kaparddinî, Vikriti, Dandi, Mundinî, Sendukhandâ, S’ikhandinî, Nis’umbha s’umbha mathanî, Mahisâsura marddinî, Indrânî, Rudrânî, S’ankarârdha sarîrinî, Nârî, Nirâyanî Tris’ûlinî, Pâlinî, Ambikâ, and Hlâdinî. (See the Daksinâ Mûrti Samhitâ and other Tantras.)

Never there is any chance that they will be defeated anywhere. Hence if all those S’aktis get angry at any time, this Brahmânda ceases to exist. Next to this Gomeda enclosure comes the enclosure made of diamonds. It is ten yojanas high; on all sides there are the entrance gates; the doors are hinged there with nice mechanisms. Nice new diamond trees exist here. All the roads, royal roads, trees, and the spaces for watering their roots, tanks, wells, reservoirs, Sâranga and other musical instruments are all made of diamonds. Here dwells S’rî Bhuvanes’varî Devî with Her attendants. O King! Each of them has a lakh attendants. All of them are proud of their beauty. Some of them are holding fans in their hands; some are holding cups for drinking water; some, betelnuts; some are holding umbrellas; some chowries; some are holding various clothings; some flowers; some, looking glasses; some, saffrons; some collyrium, whereas some others are holding Sindûra (red lead). Some are ready to do the painting works; some are anxious to champoo the feet; some are eager to make Her wear ornaments; some are anxious to put garlands of flowers on Her neck. All of them are skilled in various arts of enjoyments and they are all young. To gain the Grace of the Devî, they consider the whole universe as trifling. Now I shall mention to you the names of the attendants of the Devî, proud of their possessing lots of amorous gestures and postures. Listen. They are :— Anangarûpâ, Anangamadanâ, Madanâturâ, Bhuvanavegâ, Bhuvanapâlikâ, Sarvas’is’ira, Anangavedanâ, Anangamekhalâ, these are the Eight Sakhîs. Each of them is as fair as Vidyullatâ. Each is adorned with various ornaments and skilled in all actions. When they walk to and fro with canes and rods in their hands in the service of the Devî, they look as if the lightning flashes glimmer on all sides.

52-71 On the outer portion of the enclosure wall, on the eight sides are situated the dwelling houses of these eight Sakhîs and they are always full of various vâhanas and weapons. Next to this enclosure of diamond <span id="p1182"><sup><small>[ p. 1182 ]</small></sup></span> comes the thirteenth enclosure wall made of Vaidûrya mani. Its height is ten yojanas. There are entrance gates and doorways on the four sides. The court inside, the houses, the big roads, wells, tanks, ponds, rivers and even the sands are all made of Vaidûrya mani. On the eight sides reside the eight Mâtrikâs Brâhmî, etc., with their hosts. These Mâtrikâs represent the sum-total of the individual Mâtrikâs in every Brahmânda. Now hear their names :— (1) Brâhmî, (2) Mâhes’varî, (3) Kaumârî, (4) Vaisnavî, (5) Vârâhî, (6) Indrânî, (7) Châmundâ, and (8) Mahâ Laksmî. Their forms are like those of Brahmâ and Rudra and others. They are always engaged in doing good to the Universe and reside here with their own Vâhanas and weapons.

At the four gates, the various Vâhanas of Bhagavatî remain always fully equipped. Somewhere there are Kotis and Kotis of elephants. At some places there are Kotis and Kotis of horses; at others there are camps, houses, at others there are swans, lions; at others there are Garudas; at other places there are peacocks, bulls and various other beings all fully equipped and arranged in due order. Similarly the above mentioned animals are yoked to Kotis and Kotis of chariots; there are coachmen (syces); at some places flags are fluttering high on them so as to reach the heavens and thus they are adding beauty. At other places the aerial cars are arranged in rows, countless, with various sounding instruments in them, with flags soaring high in the Heavens and endowed with various ensigns and emblems. O King! Next to this Vaidûrya enclosure, comes the fourteenth enclosure wall built of Indranîlamani; its height is ten Yojanas. The court inside, houses, roads, wells, tanks and reservoirs, etc., all are built of Indranîlamani. There is here a lotus consisting of sixteen petals extending to many Yojanas in width and shining like a second Sudars’ana Chakra. On these sixteen petals reside the sixteen S’aktis of Bhagavatî, with their hosts. Now I am mentioning the names of these. Hear :— Karâlî, Vikârâlî, Umâ, Sarasvatî, S’rî, Durgâ, Ûsâ, Laksmî, S’ruti, Smriti, Dhriti, S’raddhâ, Medhâ, Mati, Kânti, and Âryâ. These are the 16 S’aktis. They all are dark blue, of the colour of the fresh rain-cloud; they wield in their hands axes and shields. It seems they are ever eager to fight. O King! These S’aktis are the Rulers of all the separate S’aktis of the other Brahmândas. These are the forces of S’rî Devî.

72-90. Being strengthened by the Devî’s strength, these are always surrounded by various chariots and forces, various other S’aktis follow them. If they like, they can cause great agitation in the whole universe. Had I thousand faces, I would not have been able to describe what an <span id="p1183"><sup><small>[ p. 1183 ]</small></sup></span> amount of strength they wield. Now I describe the fifteenth enclosure wall. Listen. Next to this Indranîlamani enclosure, comes the enclosure made of pearls (muktâ), very wide and ten Yojanas high. The court inside, its space, trees, all are built of pearls. Within this enclosure there is a lotus with eight petals, all of pearls. On these petals reside the eight S’aktis, the advisers and ministers of the Devî. Their appearances, weapons, dresses, enjoyments, everything is like those of S’rî Devî. Their duty is to inform the Devî of what is going on in the Brahmândas. They are skilled in all sciences and arts and clever in all actions. They are very clever, skillful and clever in knowing beforehand the desires and intentions of S’rî Devî and they perform those things accordingly. Each one of them has many other S’aktis who also live here. By their Jñâna S’akti they know all the news concerning the Jîvas in every Brahmânda. Now I mention the names of those eight Sakhîs. Listen. Anangakusumâ, Anangakusumâ-turâ, Anangamadanâ, Ananga madanâturâ, Bhuvanapâla, Gaganavegâ, S’as’irekhâ, and Gaganarekhâ. These are the eight Sakhîs. They look red like the Rising Sun; and in their four hands they hold noose, goad, and signs of granting boons and “no fear.” At every instant they inform S’rî Devî of all the events of the Brahmânda. Next to this comes the sixteenth enclosure wall made of emerald (marakata); it is ten Yojanas high; the court inside, its space, and houses and everything are built of emeralds (marakata mani). Here exist all the good objects of enjoyments. This is hexagonal, of the Yantra shape. And at every corner reside the Devas. On the eastern corner resides the four-faced Brahmâ; he lives with Gâyatrî Devî; he holds Kamandalu, rosary, signs indicating “no fear” and Danda (rod). The Devî Gâyatrî is also decorated with these. Here all the Vedas, Smritis, the Purânas, and various weapons exist incarnate in their respective forms. All the Avatâras of Brahmâ, Gâyatrî, and Vyâhritis that exist in this Brahmânda, all live here. On the south-west corner Mahâ Visnu lives with Sâvitrî; He holds conch shell, disc, club, and lotus. Sâvitrî has got also all these. The Avatâras of Visnu that exist in every Brahmânda Matsya, Kûrma, etc., and all the Avatâras of Sâvitrî that exist in every universe, all dwell in this place. On the north western corner exists Mahâ Rudra with Sarasvatî. Both of them hold in their hands Paras’u, rosary, signs granting boons and “no fear.”

91-110. All the Avatâras of Rudra and Pârvatî (Gaurî, etc.) facing south that exist in all the Brahmândas, dwell here. All the chief Âgamas, sixty four in number and all the other Tantras reside here, incarnate in their due forms. On the south-eastern corner, the Lord of wealth, Kuvera, of Bhagavatî, surrounded by roads <span id="p1184"><sup><small>[ p. 1184 ]</small></sup></span> and shops resides here with Mahâ Laksmî and his hosts holding the jar of jewels (Mani Karandikâ). On the western corner exists always Madana with Rati, holding noose, goad, bow and arrow. All his amorous attendants reside here, incarnate in their forms. On the north-eastern corner resides always the great hero Ganes’a, the Remover of obstacles, holding noose and goad and with his Pusti Devî. O King! All the Vibhûtis (manifestations) of Ganes’a that exist in all the universes reside here. What more to say than this, that Brahmâ and the other Devas and Devîs here represent the sum-total of all the Brahmâs and the Devas and the Devîs that exist in all the Brahmândas. These all worship S’rî Bhagavatî, remaining in their own spheres respectively. O King! Next come the seventeenth enclosure wall made of Prabâla. It is red like saffron and it is one hundred Yojanas high. As before, the court inside, the ground and the houses all are made of Prabâla. The goddesses of the five elements, Hrillekhâ, Gaganâ, Raktâ, Karâlikâ, and Mahochchhusmâ reside here. The colours and lustres of the bodies of the goddessses resemble those of the elements over which they preside respectively. All of them are proud of their youth and hold in their four hands noose, goad and signs granting boons and “no fear.” They are dressed like S’rî Devî and reside here always. Next to this comes the eighteenth enclosure wall built of Navaratna (the nine jewels). It is many yojanas wide. This enclosure wall is superior to all others and it is higher also. On the four sides there exist innumerable houses, tanks, reservoirs, all built of Navaratna; these belong to the Devîs, the presiding Deities of Âmnâyas (that which is to be studied or learnt by heart; the Vedas). The ten Mahâ Vidyâs, Kâlî, Târâ, etc., of S’rî Devî and the Mahâbhedâs, that is, their all the Avatâras all dwell here with their respective Âvaranas, Vâhanas and ornaments. All the Avatâras of S’rî Devî for the killing of the Daityas and for showing favour to the devotees live here. They are Pas’amkus’es’varî, Bhuvanes’varî, Bhairavî, Kapâla Bhuvanes’varî, Amkus’a Bhuvanes’varî, Pramâda bhuvanes’varî, S’rî Krodha Bhuvanes’varî, Triputâs’vârûdhâ, Nityaklinnâ, Annapurnâ, Tvaritâ, and the other avatâras of Bhuvanes’varî, and Kâlî, Târâ and the other Mahâvidyâs are known as Mahâvidyâs. They live here with their Âvarana Devatâs, Vâhanas, and ornaments respectively. (Note :— The Âvarana Deities are the attendant Deities.) Here live also the seven Kotis of Devîs presiding over the Mahâ Mantras, all brilliant and fair like the Koti Suns. O King! Next to this enclosure wall comes the chief and crowning palace of S’rî Devî, built of <span id="p1185"><sup><small>[ p. 1185 ]</small></sup></span> Chintâmani gems. All the articles within this are built of Chintâmani gems. Within this palace are seen hundreds and thousands of pillars. Some of these pillars are built of Sûryakântamani, some are built of Chandrakânta mani, and some are built of Vidyutkânta mani. O King! The lustre and brilliance of these pillars is so strong that no articles within this palace are visible to the eye. (Note :— The face of the Goddess Kâlî is so bright that it appears like a shadow, i.e., black.)

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter on the description of the enclosure walls built of Padmarâga mani, etc., of the Mani Dvîpa in the Mahâpurânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c12"></span>

## Chapter XII

**On the description of Mani Dvîpa** <span id="p1185"><sup><small>[ p. 1185 ]</small></sup></span> 1-17. Vyâsa said :— O King Janamejaya! The Ratnagriha, above mentioned, is the Central, the Chief and the Crowning Place of Mûla Prakriti. \[The nine jewels are :— (1) Muktâ, (2) Mânikya, (3) Vaidûrya, (4) Gomeda, (5) Vajra, (6) Vidruma, (7) Padmarâga, (8) Marakata, and (9) Nîla.\] This is situated in the centre of all the enclosures. Within this there are the four Mandapas, i.e., halls built of one thousand (i.e., innumerable) pillars. These are the S’ringâra Mandapa, Mukti Mandapa, Jñâna Mandapa and Ekânta Mandapa; on the top there are canopies of various colours; within are many scented articles scented by the Dhûpas, etc. The brilliance of each of these is like that of one Koti Suns. On all sides of these four Mandapas there are nice groups of gardens of Kas’mîra, Mallikâ, and Kunda flowers. Various scents, and scented articles, for example, of musk, etc., are fully arranged in due order. There is a very big lotus tank here; the steps leading to it are built of jewels. Its water is nectar, on it are innumerable full-blown lotuses and the bees are humming always over them. Many birds, swans, Kârandavas, etc., are swimming to and fro. The sweet scents of lotuses are playing all round. In fact, the whole Manidvîpa is perfumed with various scented things. Within the S’ringâra Mandapa, the Devî Bhagavatî is situated in the centre on an Âsana (seat) and She hears the songs sung in tune by the other Devîs along with the other Devas. Similarly sitting on the Mukti Mandapa, She frees the Jîvas from the bondages of the world. Sitting on the Jñâna Mandapa, She gives instructions on Jñâna, and sitting on the fourth Ekânta Mandapa, She consults with Her ministers, the Sakhîs, Ananga Kusuma, etc., on the creation, preservation, etc., of the universe. O King! Now I shall describe about the main, Khâs, room of S’rî Devî. Listen. The Khâs Mahâl palace of the Devî Bhagavatî is named S’rî Chintâmani Griha. Within this is placed the raised <span id="p1186"><sup><small>[ p. 1186 ]</small></sup></span> platform, the dais and sofa whereon the Devî taketh Her honourable seat. The ten S’akti-tattvas form the staircases. The four legs are (1) Brahmâ, (2) Visnu, (3) Rudra, and (4) Mahes’vara. Sadâs’iva forms the upper covering plank. Over this S’rî Bhuvanes’vara Mahâ Deva or the Supreme Architect of the Universe is reigning. Now hear something about this Bhuvanes’vara. Before creation while intending to sport, the Devî Bhagavatî divided Her Body into two parts and from the right part created Bhuvanes’vara. He has five faces and each face has three eyes. He has four hands and He is holding in each hand speer, signs indicating do not fear, axe, and signs granting boons. He looks sixteen years old. The lustre of of His Body is more beautiful then Koti Kandarpas and more fiery than thousand Suns; and at the same time cool like Koti Suns. His colour is crystal white, and on His left lap S’rî Bhuvanes’varî Devî is always sitting.

18-29. On the hip of S’rî Bhuvanes’varî, is shining the girdle with small tinkling bells, built of various jewels; the ornaments on the arms are made of burnished gold studded with Vaidûryamanis; the Tâtanka ornaments on Her ears are very beautiful like S’rîchakra and they enhance very much the beauty of Her lotus face. The beauty of Her forehead vies with, or defies the Moon of the eighth bright lunar day. Her lips challenge the fully ripened Bimba fruits. Her face is shining with the Tilaka mark made of musk and saffron. The divine crown on Her head is beautified with the Sun and Moon made of jewels; the nose ornaments are like the star Venus and built of transparent gems, looking exceedingly beautiful and shedding charming lustre all around. The neck is decorated with necklaces built of gems and jewels. Her breasts are nicely decorated with camphor and saffron. Her neck is shining like a conchshell decorated with artistic designs. Her teeth look like fully ripe pomegranate fruits. On Her head is shining the jewel crown. Her lotus face is beautified with alakâ as if these are mad bees. Her navel is beautiful like the whirls in the river Bhâgirathî; Her fingers are decorated with jewel rings; She has three eyes like lotus leaves; the lustre of Her body is bright like Padmarâgamani cut and carved and sharpened on stone. The bracelets are adorned with jewel tinkling bells; Her neck ornaments and medals are studded with gems and jewels. Her hands are resplendent with the lustre of the jewels on the fingers; the braid of hair on Her head is wreathed with a garland of Mallikâ flowers; Her bodice (short jacket) is studded with various jewels.

30-45. O King! S’rî Devî is slightly bent down with the weight of Her very high hard breasts. She has four hands and She is holding noose, goad and signs granting boons and “do not fear.” The all beautiful all merciful Devî is full of love gestures and beauties. Her voice is sweeter than that of lute; the lustre of Her body is like Kotis and Kotis of Suns and <span id="p1187"><sup><small>[ p. 1187 ]</small></sup></span> Moons if they rise simultaneously on the sky. The Sakhîs, attendants, the Devas and the Devîs surround Her on all sides. Ichchâ S’akti, Jñâna S’akti, and Kriya S’akti all are present always before the Devî. Lajjâ, Tusti, Pusti, Kîrti, Kânti, Ksamâ, Dayâ, Buddhi, Medhâ, Smriti, and Laksmî are always seen here incarnate in their due Forms. The nine Pîtha S’aktis, Jayâ, Vijayâ, Ajitâ, Aparâjitâ, Nityâ, Vilâsinî, Dogdhrî, Aghorâ, and Mangalâ reside here always and are in the service of the Devî Bhuvanes’varî. On the side of the Devî are the two oceans of treasures; from these streams of Navaratna, gold, and seven Dhâtus (elements) go out and assume the forms of rivers and fall into the ocean Sudhâ Sindhu. Because such a Devî Bhuvanes’varî, resplendent with all powers and prosperities, sits on the left lap of Bhuvanes’vara, that He has, no doubt acquired His omnipotence. O King! Now I will describe the dimensions of the Chintâmani Griha. Listen. It is one thousand Yojanas wide; its centre is very big; the rooms situated further and further are twice those preceding them. It lies in Antarîksa (the intervening space) without any support. At the times of dissolution and creation it contracts and expands like a cloth. The lustre of this Chintâmani Griha is comparatively far more bright and beautiful than that of other enclosure walls. S’rî Devî Bhagavatî dwells always in this place. O King! All the great Bhaktas of the Devî in every Brahmânda, in the Devaloka, in Nâgaloka, in the world of men or in any other loka, all those that were engaged in the meditation of the Devî in the sacred places of the Devî and died there, they all come here and reside with the Devî in great joy and festivity.

46-59. On all sides rivers are flowing; some of ghee, some of milk, curd, honey, nectar, pomegranate juice, jambu juice, and some of mango juice, sugarcane juices are flowing on all sides. The trees here yield fruits according to one’s desires and the wells and tanks yield water also as people desire. Never is there any want felt here of anything. Never are seen here diseases, sorrow, old age, decrepitude, anxiety, anger, jealousy, and envy and other lower ideas. All the inhabitants of this place are full of youth and look like one thousand Suns. All enjoy with their wives and they worship S’rî Bhuvanes’varî. Some have attained Sâlokya, some Sâmîpya, some Sârûpya and some have attained Sârsti and pass their days in highest comfort. The Devas that are in every Brahmânda all live here and worship S’rî Devî. The seven Koti Mahâ Mantras and Mahâ Vidyâs here assume forms and worship the Mahâ Mâyâ S’rî Bhagavatî, Who is of the nature of Brahmâ. O King! Thus I have described to you all about this Manidvîpa. The lustre of Sun, Moon and Kotis and Kotis of lightnings cannot be one Kotieth of one Koti part of Its lustre. At some places the lustre is like Vidrumamani; some places as are illumined like the lustre of Marakata Mani; some, like Sûrya Kânta mani and some <span id="p1188"><sup><small>[ p. 1188 ]</small></sup></span> places are rendered brilliant like Kotis and Kotis of lightnings. The light at some places is like Sindûra; at some places like Indranîlamani; at some places, like Mânikya, and at some places like diamond. Some places are blazing like the conflagration of fire; and some places look like molten gold; some places seem filled with the lustre of Chandrakântamani, and some places look brilliant like Sûryakântamani.

60-73. The mountains here are all built of gems and jewels; the entrance gates and enclosures are built of gems and jewels; the trees and their leaves all are of gems; in fact all that exist here are all of gems and jewels. At some places numbers of peacocks are dancing; at some places cuckoos are captivating the minds of persons by cooing in the fifth tune and at others doves and pigeons and parrots are making sweet cackling sounds. Lakhs and lakhs of tanks are there with their pure crystal-like waters. The Red lotuses have blown fully and enhanced the beauty of the place. The captivating scents of these lotuses extend to a distance one hundred Yojanas all round and gladden the minds of people. The leaves are rustling with gentle breeze. The whole sky overhead is radiant with the lustre of Chintâmani gems and jewels. All the sides are illuminated with the brilliancy of the gems and jewels. O King! These jewels act like lamps. And the sweet scented trees emit their flagrance and it is transmitted by breeze all around. Thus these trees serve the purpose of dhûp (scent). The rays of these gems pierce through the openings of the jewel screens on the houses and fall on the mirrors inside, thus causing a nice brilliant appearance that captivates the mind and causes confusion. O King! And what shall I say of this place, more than this, that all the powers, and wealth, all the love sentiments, all the dress suited to amorous interviews, all the splendours, fire, energy, beauty and brilliance, the omniscience, the indomitable strength, all the excellent qualities and all mercy and kindness are present here! The All Comprehending Bliss and the Brahmânanda can always be witnessed here! O King! Thus I have described to you about the Manidvîpa, the most exalted place of the Devî Bhagavatî. At Her remembrance all the sins are instantly destroyed. The more so, if a man remembers the Devî and about this place at the time of death, He surely goes there. O King! He who daily reads the five Chapters, i.e., from the eighth to this twelfth chapter, is surely untouched by any obstacles due to the Bhûtas, Pretas and Pis’âchas. Especially the recitation of this at the time of building a new house and at the time of Vâstuyâga ensures all good and auspiciousness.

<span id="p1189"><sup><small>[ p. 1189 ]</small></sup></span>

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of Mani Dvîpa in the Mahâpurânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c13"></span>

## Chapter XIII

**On the description of Janamejaya’s Devî Yajñâ** <span id="p1189"><sup><small>[ p. 1189 ]</small></sup></span> 1-4. Vyâsa said :— O King Janamejaya! Thus I have answered all your nice queries; also what Nârâyana spoke to the highsouled Nârada is also said by me. He who hears this greatly wonderful Purânam S’rî Devî Bhâgavatam certainly becomes dear to the Devî and all his actions become fructified with success. Now as regards your mental distress, how you prevent any evil falling to your late father in his future life, I advise you to do the Yajñâ in the name of Bhagavatî; and certainly your father will be saved. And you also better take the Most Excellent Mantra of the Mahâ Devî duly, according to rules; and your human life will then be crowned with success; (your life will be saved; thus you as well as your father will be saved).

5-12. Sûta said :— O Risis! Hearing thus, the King asked Vyâsa Deva to initiate in the Great Devî Mantra and thus to become his Guru. He was then initiated duly according to rules with the Great Mantra of Bhagavatî united with Pranava. When the Navarâtra period arrived, he called Dhaumya and other Brâhmanas and performed the Navarâtra Vrata so very dear to the Devî, according to his state. At this time for the satisfaction of the Devî, he caused this Devî Bhâgavata Purâna to be read by the Brâhmanas and fed innumerable Brâhmanas and Kumârîs (virgins) and gave in charity lots of things to the poor, orphans, and the Brâhmin boys and thus finished the Vrata. O Risis! Thus completing the Devîyajñâ, while the King was sitting on his seat, the fiery Devarsi Nârada came there from above playing with his lute. Seeing him there, all on a sudden, the King got up, and paid due respects to him by asking him to take his seat, with other necessary things. When the Devarsi became relieved of his labour of journey, the King asked him about his welfare and then enquired into the cause of his coming there.

13-19. O Devarsi! Whence and what for are you now coming? By your arrival here I am become blessed and feel that my Lord has come to me; now what can I serve to you; kindly command and oblige. Hearing this, the Devarsi Nârada said :— “O King! Today I saw in the Devaloka a very wonderful event. I wanted eagerly to inform that to you. Hence I have come here. Your father met with a bad turn of fate for his bad action. I saw today he assumed a divine form and he was going on a chariot. The Devas were praising him and the Apsarâs were encircling him. It seemed he <span id="p1190"><sup><small>[ p. 1190 ]</small></sup></span> was going in that dress to the Mani Dvîpa. O King! You performed the Navarâtra Vrata and read the Devî Bhâgavata; it seems, as a result of that, your father has now been rewarded with such a noble and good turn of fate. Now you have become blessed and your actions have borne fruits. You have delivered your father from the hell and so you have become an ornament in your family. Today your name and fame have extended to the Devaloka.”

20-30. Sûta said :— O Risis! Hearing these words from the mouth of Nârada, the King Janamejaya became very much happy and delighted and fell prostrate at the feet of Vyâsa Deva of glorious deeds and said :— O Best of Munis! By Thy Grace, today I have become blessed. Now what return can I pay to Thee save bowing down to Thee. I pray that Thou dost shew such favours to me ever and again. O Risis! Hearing these words of the King Janamejaya, Vâdarâyana Veda Vyâsa blessed him and spoke to him in sweet words :— “O King! Now leave all other actions. Read always the Devî Bhâgavata and worship the Lotus Feet of S’rî Devî. Leave off all laziness and now perform the Devî Yajñâ with great eclât. And you will surely be able to cross this bondage of the world. True there are various Purânas, the Visnu Purâna, the S’iva Purâna, but those cannot compare with one sixteenth of this Devî Bhâgavatam. In fact, this Purâna is the Essence of all the Purânas. How can the other Purânas be compared with this, wherein is established the Devî Mûla Prakriti? Reading this Purâna from the beginning to the end yields the result of reading the Vedas. So the wise persons should try their best to study it always.” Thus saying to Janamejaya, Veda Vyâsa departed. Then the pure minded Dhaumya and the other Brâhmanas highly praised the Devî Bhâgavatam and went to their desired places. And the King Janamejaya, on the other hand, began to read and hear always the Devî Bhâgavatam and spent his days happily in governing his kingdom.

Here end the Thirteenth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of Janamejaya’s Devî Yajñâ in the Mahâ Purânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c14"></span>

## Chapter XIV

**On the recitation of the fruits of this Purânam** <span id="p1190"><sup><small>[ p. 1190 ]</small></sup></span> 1-17. Sûta said :— “O Risis! In days of yore, from the Lotus Face of the Devî Bhâgavata came out S’rî Mad Bhâgavatam in the form of half a S’loka, as the decided conclusion of the Vedas. About what She gave instructions to Visnu, sleeping on a leaf of a Banyan tree, that same thing, the seed of the S’rî Mad Bhâgavata, Brahmâ Himself expanded into <span id="p1191"><sup><small>[ p. 1191 ]</small></sup></span> one hundred Koti s’lokas. Then, Veda Vyâsa, in order to teach his own son S’uka Deva, condensed them into eighteen thousand s’lokas, in Twelve Books and named it S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the present volume. That voluminous book comprising one hundred Koti s’lokas compiled by Brahmâ are still extant in the Deva loka. There is no Purâna like the Devî Bhâgavatam, so merit-giving, holy and capable to destroy all the sins. The reading of every line yields the fruits of performing many As’vamedha sacrifices. Human beings addicted to worldly affairs will get the merit of giving lands to the Brâhmanas and they will enjoy also all the pleasures of the world and in the end will go to the region of the Devî, if they can hear, after they have fasted and controlled their passions, the recitation of this Purânam from the mouth of a Paurânik Brâhmana, who has been worshipped and given clothings and ornaments and is considered as a second Veda Vyâsa. Or, if anybody writes the whole of the Devî Bhâgavatam with his own hand or gets it written by a writer from the beginning to the end and gives to a Paurânik Brâhmin the book placed in a box of the form of a lion made up of gold and a cow yielding milk with her calf with gold as his sacrificial fee; or if he feeds as many Brâhmanas as there are the number of chapters of the Devî Bhâgavatam and worship as many Kumârîs (virgin girls) with saffron, sandalpaste and ornaments and feeds them with Pâysânna, he gets the merits of giving lands and enjoys all the pleasures of the world and goes in the end to the region of the Devî. He has no want of anything who daily hears with rapt devotion this Devî Bhâgavatam. One who has no wealth gets abundance of wealth, those who are students get knowledge, one who has no sons, gets sons if one hears this Devî Bhâgavatam with true devotion. A barren woman, or one who bears still-born children or whose offsprings never live long or who bears only a single child, gets all her defects removed, if she hears this Devî Bhâgavatam with a steadfast devotion. The house where this Purâna is worshipped, Laksmî and Sarasvatî dwell there, leaving their animosities towards each other. By the influence of this Devî Bhâgavatam the Dâkinîs, Vetâlas, Râksasas, and other ghosts cannot cast a glance even on its devotee. If anybody gets fever and if the S’rî Devî Bhâgavatam be read touching him with a concentrated attention, all the complaints disappear. By reading this Bhâgavatam, one hundred times even more difficult than the severe disease pthisis is cured.

18-20. If after performing the Sandhyâ, one reads only one chapter of this Bhâgavatam with a collected mind, he soon acquires the Real Knowledge. O Muni S’aunaka! While going to read this Bhâgavatam, first examine omens and then read. I have spoken already on this subject. If during the S’âradîya Pûjâ (the autumnal Durgâ Pûjâ), at the <span id="p1192"><sup><small>[ p. 1192 ]</small></sup></span> Navarâtra period, one reads with devotion this Bhâgavatam, the Devî Bhagavatî becomes greatly pleased and awards him results more than his desires.

21-31. During the Navarâtri period all can read well this book for the satisfaction of his Îsta Deva (his own deity) whether he be a Vaisnava, S’aiva, Saura, Gânapatya or a S’âkta. All can read this for the satisfaction of Laksmî, Umâ and other S’aktis. The Vaidik Brâhmanas are to recite this daily for the satisfaction of the Devî Gâyatrî. This Purânam is not contradictory to any sectarian belief. The reason of this being that to whatever deity he pays his worship, he must worship some S’akti or other, this is stated everywhere. So for the satisfaction of one’s own S’akti, all can read this, without contradicting each other. Never any woman nor any S’ûdra, is to read this herself or himself, even out of ignorance; rather they should hear this from the mouth of a Brâhmana. This is the rule of the S’âstras. (The vibrations and the consequent results would be truer then.) O Risis! What more to say on this book than this, that this Purânam is the most excellent of all and yields great merits. It is the essence of the Vedas. This I tell you with great certainty. There is not the least doubt in this. Reading or hearing this yields results equivalent to reading or hearing the Vedas. I now bow to the Devî of the nature of Hrîm and established by Gâyatrî, of the nature of Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss, Who stimulates our activities to the understanding of various subjects. Thus hearing the excellent words of Sûta, the great Paurânik, all the Munis of Naimisâranya worshipped him specially and as the result of hearing this Purânam glady became the servants of the Lotus Feet of the Devî and they attained the Highest Rest. The Munis expressed their humility and gratitude to Sûta frequently and bowed down to him again and again. And they said :— “O Sûta! It is you that have saved us from this ocean of world.” Thus (the great Bhâgavata) Sûta, the bee drinking the honey of the Lotus Feet of the Devî, recited before the assemblage of the best of the Munis this Purânam from the beginning to the end, the Secret of all the Nigamas and full of the Glories of the Devî Bhagavatî. After this the Risis bowed down to him and he blessed and honoured them.

Then he went away to his desired place. Here the Devî Bhâgavatam ends and is fully completed.

THE END.

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the recitation of the fruits of this Purânam in the Mahâ Purânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyâsa.

Here ends as well the Full Treatise, S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam.

Om. Om. Om. Om Tat Sat. Om Hari Om.




THE END


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Srimad_Devi_Bhagawatam/Book_12_10">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">The Twelfth Book — Chapter 1 to 10</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Srimad_Devi_Bhagawatam">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
