---
title: "The Tenth Book — Chapter 1 to 10"
description: "The S'rimad Devî Bhâgawatam"
published: true
date: 2025-1-14T22:24:17Z
tags: Hinduism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-1-14T22:24:17Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Srimad_Devi_Bhagawatam/Book_9_50">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">The Ninth Book — Chapter 41 to 50</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Srimad_Devi_Bhagawatam">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Srimad_Devi_Bhagawatam/Book_10_13">
          <span class="pr-2">The Tenth Book — Chapter 11 to 13</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="c1"></span>

## Chapter I

**On the story of Svâyambhuva Manu** <span id="p1022"><sup><small>[ p. 1022 ]</small></sup></span> 1-6. Nârada said :— O Nârâyana! O Thou, the Supporter of this whole world! The Preserver of all! Thou hast described the glorious characters of the Devî, that take away all the sins. Kindly describe now to me the several forms that the Devî assumed in every Manvantara in this world as well as Her Divine Greatness. O Thou, full of mercy! Describe also how and by whom She was worshipped and praised; how She, so kind to the devotees, having been thus pleased, fulfilled their desires. I am very eager to hear these, the very best and blissful characters of the Devî. S’rî Nârâyana said :— Hear, O Maharsi! The glories and greatness of the Devî Bhagavatî leading to the devotion of the devotees, capable of giving all sorts of wealth and destroying all sins. From the navel lotus of Visnu, the holder of the Chakra (discus), was born Brahmâ, the Creator of this universe, the great Energetic One, and the Grand Sire of all the worlds.

7-14. The four faced Brahmâ, on being born, produced from His mind Svâyambhuva Manu and his wife S’atarûpâ, the embodiment of all virtues. For this very reason, Svâyambbuva Manu has been known as the mind-born son of Brahmâ. Svâyambhuva Manu got from Brahmâ the task to create and multiply; he made an earthen image of the Devî Bhagavatî, the Bestower of all fortunes, on the beach of the sanctifying Ksîra Samudra (ocean of milk) and he engaged himself in worshipping Her and began to repeat the principal mystic mantra of Vâgbhava (the Deity of Speech). Thus engaged in worship, Svâyambhuva Manu conquered by and by his breath and food and observed Yama, Niyama and other vows and became lean and thin. For one hundred years he remained standing always on one leg and became successful in controlling his six        passions lust, anger, etc. He meditated on the feet of that Âdyâ S'akti (the Primordial S'akti) so much that he became inert like a vegetable or mineral matter. By his Tapas the Devî, the World Mother appeared before him and said :— “O King! Ask divine boons from Me.” Hearing these joyous words, the King wanted his long cherished and heart-felt boon, so very rare to the Devas.

15-22. Manu said :— O Large eyed Devî! Victory to Thee, residing in the hearts of all! O Thou honoured, worshipped! O Thou! the Upholdress of the world! O Thou, the Auspicious of all auspicious!

<span id="p1023"><sup><small>[ p. 1023 ]</small></sup></span>

By Thy Gracious Look, it is that the Lotus born has been able to create the worlds; Visnu is perserving and Rudra Deva is destroying in a minute. By Thy command it is that Indra, the Lord of S'achî, has got the charge of controlling the three Lokas; and Yama, the Lord of the departed, is awarding fruits and punishing according, to their merits or demerits, the deceased ones. O Mother! By Thy Grace, Varuna, the holder of the noose, has become the lord of all aquatic creatures and is preserving them; and Kuvera, the lord of the Yaksas, has become the lord of wealth. Agni (fire), Nairrit, Vâyu (wind), Îs'âna and Ananta Deva are Thy parts and have grown by Thy power. Then, O Devî! If Thou desirest to grant me my desired boon, then, O Thou! the Auspicious One! Let all the great obstacles to my work of procreating in this universe and increasing my dominions die away. And if anybody worships this great Vâgbhava Mantra or anybody hears with devotion this history or makes others hear this, they all shall be crowned with success and enjoyment and Mukti be easy to them.

23-24. Specially they would get the power to remember their past lives, acquire eloquence in speaking, all round beauty, success in obtaining knowledge, success in their deeds and especially in the increase of their posterity and children. O Bhagavatî! This is what I want most.

Here ends the First Chapter of the Tenth Book on the story of Svâyambhuva Manu in the Mahâpurânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c2"></span>

## Chapter II

**On the conversation between Nârada and the Bindhya Mountain** <span id="p1023"><sup><small>[ p. 1023 ]</small></sup></span> 1-6. The Devî said :— “O King! O Mighty armed One! All these I grant unto you. Whatever you have asked for, I give them to you. I am very much pleased with your hard Tapasyâ and with your Japam of the Vâgbhava Mantra. Know Me that My power is infallible in killing the Lords of the Daityas. O Child! Let your kingdom be free from enemies and let your prosperity be increased. Let your devotion be fixed on Me and in the end you will verily get Nirvâna Mukti.” O Nârada! Thus granting the boon to the highsouled Manu the Great Devî disappeared before him and went to the Bindhya Range. O Devarsi! This Bindhya mountain increased in height so much so that it was well nigh on the way to prevent the course of the Sun when it was arrested by Mahârsi Agastya, born of a kumbha (water jar). The younger sister of Visnu, Varades'varî, is staying here as Bindhyavâsinî. O Best of the Munis! This Devî is an object of worship of all. <span id="p1024"><sup><small>[ p. 1024 ]</small></sup></span> 7-8. Saunaka and the other Risis said :— O Sûta! Who is that Bindhya Mountain? And why did He intend to soar high up to the Heavens to resist the Sun's course? And why was it that Agastya, the son of Mitrâvaruna quietened that rising mountain? Kindly describe all these in detail.

9-15. O Saint! We are not as yet satisfied with hearing the Glories of the Devî, the ambrosial nectar, that have come out of your mouth. Rather our thirst has been increased. Sûta said :— O Risis! There was the Bindhya Mountain, highly honoured and reckoned as the chief of the mountains on the earth. It was covered with big forests and big trees. Creeping plants and shrubs flowered these and it looked very beautiful. On it were roaming deer, wild boars, buffaloes, monkeys, hares, foxes, tigers and bears, stout and cheerful, with full vigour and all very merrily. The Devas, Gandharbhas, Apsarâs, and Kinnaras come here and bathe in its rivers; all sorts of fruit trees can be seen here. On such a beautiful Bindhya Mountain, came there one day the ever joyful Devarsi Nârada on his voluntary tour round the world. Seeing the Mahârsi Nârada, the Bindhya Mountain got up and worshipped him with pâdya and arghya and gave him a very good Âsana to sit. When the Muni took his seat and found himself happy, the Mountain began to speak.

16-17. Bindhya said :— “O Devarsi! Now be pleased to say whence you are coming; your coming here is so very auspicious! My house is sanctified today by your coming. O Deva! Your wandering is, like the Sun, the cause of inspiring the beings with freedom from fear. So, O Nârada! Kindly give out your intention as to your coming here which seems rather wonderful.”

18-28. Nârada said :— “O Bindhya! O Enemy of Indra! (Once the mountains had a very great influence. Indra cut off their wings and so destroyed their influence. Hence the mountains are enemies of Indra). I am coming from the Sumeru Mountain. There I saw the nice abodes of Indra, Agni, Yama, and Varuna. There I saw the houses of these Dikpâlas (the Regents of the several quarters), which abound in objects of all sorts of enjoyments.” Thus saying, Nârada gave out a heavy sigh. Bindhya, the king of mountains, seeing the Muni heaving a long sigh, asked him again with great eagerness, “O Devarsi! Why have you heaved such a long sigh? Kindly say.” Hearing this, Nârada said :— “O Child! Hear the cause why I sighed. See! The Himâlayâ Mountain is the father of Gaurî and the father-in-law of Mahâdeva; therefore he is the most worshipped of all the mountains. The Kailâs'a Mountain again, is the residence of Mahâdeva; hence that is also <span id="p1025"><sup><small>[ p. 1025 ]</small></sup></span> worshipped and chanted as capable of destroying all the sins. So the Nisadha, Nîla, and Gandhamâdana and other mountains are worshipped at their own places. What more than this, that the Sumeru Mountain, round whom the thousand-rayed Sun, the Soul of the universe, circumambulates along with the planets and stars, thinks himself the supreme and greatest amongst the mountains, “I am the supreme; there is none like me in the three worlds.” Remembering this self-conceit of Sumeru, I sighed so heavily. O Bindhya! We are asceties and though we have no need to discuss these things, yet by way of conversation I have told this to you. Now I go to my own abode.”

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Tenth Book on the conversation between Nârada and the Bindhya Mountain in the Mahâ Purânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahârsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c3"></span>

## Chapter III

**On the obstruction of the Sun’s course by the Bindhya Mountain** <span id="p1025"><sup><small>[ p. 1025 ]</small></sup></span> 1-16. Sûta said :— O Risis! Thus advising, the Devarsi, the great Jñanî and Muni going wherever he likes, went to the Brahmaloka. After the Muni had gone, the Bindhya became immersed in great anxiety and becoming always very sorrowful, could not get peace. What shall I do now so as to overthrow Meru? Until I do that, I won't be able to get the peace of my mind or my health. The highsouled persons always praised me for my enthusiasm and energy. Fie to my energy, honour, fame and family! Fie to my strength and heroism! O Risis! With all these cogitations in his mind, Bindhya came finally to this crooked conclusion :— “Daily the Sun, stars and planets circumambulate round the Sumeru; hence Sumeru is always so arrogant; now if I can resist the Sun's course in the heavens by my peaks, He will not be able to circumambulate round the Sumeru. If I can do this, certainly I will be able to curb the Sumeru in his pride.” Thus coming to a conclusion, Bindhya raised his arms that were the peaks high up to the heavens and blocking the passage in the Heavens, remained so and passed that night with great uneasiness and difficulty, thinking when the Sun would rise and he would obstruct His passage. At last, when the morning broke out, all the quarters were clear. The Sun, destroying the darkness, rose in Udaya Giri. The sky looked clear with His rays; the lotus, seeing Him, blew out with joy; while the excellent white water-lilies, at the bereavement of the Moon, contracted their leaves and closed as if at the separation of one's lover, gone to a distant place. The people began to do their own works on the appearance of the day; the worship of the gods, the offerings to the Gods, <span id="p1026"><sup><small>[ p. 1026 ]</small></sup></span> the Homas and the offerings to the Pitris were set a going on (in the morning, afternoon and evening respectively). The Sun marched on in His course. He divided the day into three parts, morning, midday, and afternoon. First of all he consoled the eastern quarter which seemed like a woman suffering from the bereavement of her lover; then he consoled the south eartern corner; then as He wanted to go quickly towards the south, His horses could not go further. The charioteer Aruna, seeing this, informed the Sun what had happened.

17\. Aruna spoke :— “O Sun! The Bindhya has become very jealous of the Sumeru as You circumambulate round the Sumeru Mountain daily. He has risen very high and obstructed your course in the Heavens, hoping that you would circumambulate round him. He is thus vying with the Sumeru Mountain.”

18-26. Sûta said :— O Risis! Hearing the words of Aruna, the charioteer, the Sun began to think thus :— “Oh! The Bindhya is going to obstruct My course! What can a great hero not do, when he is in the wrong path? Oh! My horses' motions are stopped to-day! The fate is the strongest of all (Because Bindhya is strong today by Daiva, therefore he is doing this). Even when eclipsed by Râhu (the ascending node) I do not stop for a moment even; and now obstructed in My passage, I am waiting here for a long time. The Daiva is powerful; what can I do?” The Sun's course having been thus obstructed, all from the Gods to the lowest became helpless and could not make out what to do. Chitragupta and others ascertain their time through the Sun's course; and that Sun is now rendered motionless by the Bindhya mountain! What a great adverse fate is this! When the Sun was thus obstructed by the Bindhya out of his arrogance, the sacrifices to the Devas, the offerings to the Pitris all were stopped; the world was going to rack and ruin. The people that lived on the west and south had their nights prolonged and they remained asleep. The people of the east and the north were scorched by the strong rays of the Sun and some of them died; some of them lost their health and so forth. The whole earth became devoid of S'râddhas and worships and a cry of universal distress arose on all sides. Indra and the other Devas became very anxious and began to think what they should do at that moment.

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Tenth Book on the obstruction of the Sun's course by the Bindhya Mountain in the Mahâ Purânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c4"></span>

## Chapter IV

**On the Devas going to Mahâ Deva** <span id="p1027"><sup><small>[ p. 1027 ]</small></sup></span> 1-2. Sûta said :— O Risis! Then Indra and all the other Devas taking Brahmâ along with them and placing Him at the front, went to Mahâdeva and took His refuge. They bowed down to Him and chanted sweet and great hymns to Him, Who holds Moon on His forehead, Deva of the Devas, thus :—

3-5. O Thou, the Leader of the host of Gods! Victory to Thee! O Thou, Whose lotus feet are served by Umâ, Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Giver of the eight Siddhis and Vibhûtis (extraordinary powers) to Thy devotees, Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Background of this Great Theatrical Dance of this Insurmountable Mâyâ! Thou art the Supreme Spirit in Thy True Nature! Thou ridest on Thy vehicle, the Bull, and residest in Kâilâs'a; yet Thou art the Lord of all the Devas. O Thou, Whose ornament is snakes, Who art the Honoured and the Giver of honours to persons! O Thou! the Unborn, yet comprising all forms, O Thou S'ambhu! That findest pleasure in this Thy Own Self! Victory toThee!

6-9. O Thou, the Lord of Thy attendants! O Thou, Giris'a! The Giver of the great powers, praised by Mahâ Visnu! O Thou, That livest in the heart lotus of Visnu, and deeply absorbed in Mahâ Yoga! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou that can'st be known through Yoga, and nothing but the Yoga itself; Thou, the Lord of the Yoga! We bow down to Thee. Thou awardest the fruits of yoga to the Yogins. O Thou, the Lord of the helpless! The Incarnate of the ocean of mercy! The Relief of the diseased and the most powerful! O Thou, whose forms are the three gunas, Sattva, Rajo, Tamas! O Thou! Whose Emblem (carrier) is the Bull (Dharma); Thou art verily the Great Kâla; yet Thou art the Lord of Kâla! Obeisance to Thee! (The Bull represents the Dharma or Speech).

10\. Thus praised by the Devas, who take the offerings in sacrifices the Lord of the Devas, whose emblem is Bull, smilingly told the Devas in a deep voice :—

11\. O Thou, the excellent Devas! The residents of the Heavens! I am pleased with the praises that you have sung of Me. I will fulfil the desires of you, all the Devas.

12-15. The Devas said :— O Lord of all the Devas! O Giris'a! Thou whose forehead is adorned with Moon! O Thou, the Doer of good to the distressed. O Thou, the Powerful! Dost Thou do good to us. O Thou, the Sinless One! The Bindhya Mountain has become jealous of the Sumeru Mountain, and has risen very high up in the Heavens and he has obstructed the Sun's course, thereby causing great troubles to all. O

<span id="p1028"><sup><small>[ p. 1028 ]</small></sup></span>

Thou, the Doer of good to all! O Îs'âna! Dost Thou check the mountain's abnormal rise. How can we fix time if the Sun's course be obstructed! And when there is no knowledge, what is now the time, the sacrifices to the Devas and the offerings to the Pitris are now almost dead and gone. O Deva! Who will now protect us? We see Thee as the Destroyer of the fear of us and of those who are terrified. O Deva! O Lord of Giris'â! Be pleased with us.

16-18. S’rî Bhagavân said :— O Devas! I have no power to curb the Bindhya Mountain. Let us go to the Lord of Ramâ and pay our respects to Him. He is our Lord, fit to be worshipped. He is Gobinda, Bhagavân Visnu, the Cause of all causes. We will go to Him and tell Him all our sorrows. He will remove them.

19\. Hearing thus the words of Girîs'a, Indra and the other Devas with Brahmâ placed Mahâdeva at their front and went to the region of Vaikuntha, trembling with fear.

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the going of the Devas to Mahâdeva in the Mahâ Purânam S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahârsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c5"></span>

## Chapter V

**On the Devas going to Visnu** <span id="p1028"><sup><small>[ p. 1028 ]</small></sup></span> 1-5. Sûta said :— Then the Devas, on arriving at Vaikuntha, saw the Lord of Laksmî, the Deva of the Devas, the World-Teacher, with his eyes beautiful like Padmâ Palâsa (lotus-leaves), shining with brilliance and began to praise Him in a voice choked with intense feelings of devotion, thus :— “Victory to Visnu! O Lord of Ramâ! Thou art prior to the Virât Purusa. O Enemy of the Daityas! O Thou, the Generator of desires in all and the Bestower of the fruits of those desires to all! O Gobinda! Thou art the Great Boar and Thou art of the nature of Great Sacrifices! O Mahâ Visnu! O Lord of Dharma! Thou art the Cause of the origin of this world! Thou didst support the earth in Thy Fish Incarnation for the deliverance of the Vedas! O Thou Satyavrata of the form of a Fish! We bow down to Thee. O Thou! The Enemy of the Daityas! The Ocean of mercy! Thou dost do the actions of the Devas out of mercy. O Thou! the Tortoise Incarnation! That grantest Mukti to others! Obeisance to Thee!

6-18. O Thou! That didst assume the form of a Boar for the destruction of the Daityas Jaya and others and for raising the earth from the waters! Obeisance to Thee! Thou didst assume that form - Half man and half Lion of the Nrisimha Mûrti and tore asunder <span id="p1029"><sup><small>[ p. 1029 ]</small></sup></span> Hiranya Kas'ipu, proud of his boons, by Thy nails. We bow down to Thee! Obeisance to Thee! That in Thy Dwarf Incarnation, didst deceive Bali, whose head got crazed by the acquisition of the kingdom over the three Lokas. We bow down to Thee, that in Thy Paras'u Râma Incarnation, didst slay Kârta Vîryâryuna, the thousand handed, and the other wicked Ksattriyas! Obeisance to Thee! That wert born of the womb of Renukâ as the son of Jamadagni. Obeisance to Thee, of great prowess and valour, that in Thy Râma Incarnation as the son of Das'aratha, didst cut off the heads of the wicked Râksasa, the son of Pulastya! We bow down again and again to Thee, the Great Lord, that in Thy Krisna incarnation, didst deliver this earth from the clutches of the wicked King Duryodhana, Kamsa and others and didst establish the religion by removing the then prevailing vicious ideas and doctrines. We bow down to Thy Buddha Incarnation, that Great Deva who didst come down here to put a stop to the slaughtering of the innocent animals and to the performance of the wicked sacrificial ceremonies! Obeisance to the Deva! When almost all the persons in this world will turn out in future as Mlechchas and when the wicked Kings will oppress them, right and left, Thou wilt then incarnate Thyself again as Kalki and redress all the grievances! We bow down to Thy Kalki Form! O Deva! These are Thy Ten Incarnations, for the preservation of Thy devotees, for the killing of the wicked Daityas. Therefore Thou art called as the Great Reliever of all our troubles. O Thou! Victory to Thee! The Deva Who assumest the forms of women and water for destroying the ailings of the devotees! Who else can be so kind! O Thou, the Ocean of mercy!” O Risis! Thus praising the yellow robed Visnu, the Lord of all the Devas, the whole host of the Devas bowed down to Him and made Shâstâmgas. Then Visnu Gadâdhara, hearing their hymns, gladdened them and spoke :—

19-27. S’rî Bhagavâna said :— “O Devas! I am pleased with your stotra. You need not be sorrowful. I will remove all your troubles that have become unbearable to you. O Devas! I am very glad to hear the praises that you have offered on Me. Better ask boons from Me. I will grant them though very rare even and obtained with difficulty. Any person who rises early in the morning and recites with devotion this stotra sung by you, will never experience any sorrow. O Devas! No poverty, no bad symptoms, no Vetâlas nor planets nor Brahmâ Râksasas nor any misfortunes will overtake him. No disease, due to Vâta (windy temperament), Pitta (bile) and Kapha (phlegm) nor untimely death will visit him. His family will not <span id="p1030"><sup><small>[ p. 1030 ]</small></sup></span> be extinct and happiness will always reign there. O Devas! This stotra can give everything. Both the enjoyment and freedom will come within anyone's easy access. There is no doubt in this. Nov what is your difficulty? Give out. I will remove it at once. There is not a bit of doubt in this.” Hearing these words of S’rî Bhagavân, the Devas became glad and spoke to Visnu.

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devas' going to Visnu, in the Mahâ Purânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahârsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c6"></span>

## Chapter VI

**On the Devas praying to the Muni Agastya** <span id="p1030"><sup><small>[ p. 1030 ]</small></sup></span> 1-6. Sûta said :— O Risis! Hearing the words of the Lord of Laksmî, all the Devas became pleased and they spoke. The Devas said :— O Deva of the Devas! O Mahâ Visnu! O Thou, the Creator, Preserver and the Destroyer of the Universe! O Visnu! The Bindhya mountain has risen very high and it has stopped the Sun's course. Therefore all the works on earth are suspended. We are not receiving our share of Yajñas. Now where we will go, what we will do, we do not know. S’rî Bhagavân said :— “O Devas! There is now in Benares the Muni Agastya of indomitable power, in devoted service of that Primordial S'akti Bhagavatî, the Creatrix of this Universe. This Muni alone can put a stop to this abnormal Bindhya Range. Therefore it behoves you all to go to that fiery Dvija Agastya at Benares where the people get Nirvâna; the Highest Place and pray to him (to kindly fulfil your object).”

7-19. Sûta said: — O Risis! Thus ordered by Visnu, the gods felt themselves comforted and, saluting Him, went to the city of Benares.

In a moment they went to the Holy City of Benares, and bathing there at the Manikarnikâ ghât, worshipped the Devas with devotion and offered Tarpanas to the Pitris and duly made their charities. Then they went to the excellent Âs'rama of the Muni Agastya. The hermitage was full of quiet quadruped animals; adorned with various trees, peacocks, herons, geese and Chakravâkas and various other birds, tigers, wolves, deer, the wild boars, rhinoceros, young elephants, Ruru deer and others. Though there were the ferocious animals, yet the place was free from fear and it looked exceedingly beautiful. On arriving before the Muni, the gods fell prostrate before him and bowed down again and again to him. They then chanted hymns to him and said :— O Lord of Dvijas! O Thou honoured and most worshipful! Victory to Thee. Thou art sprung from a water jar. Thou art the destroyer of <span id="p1031"><sup><small>[ p. 1031 ]</small></sup></span> Vâtâpî, the Asura. Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, full of S’rî, the son of Mitrâvaruna! Thou art the husband of Lopâmudrâ. Thou art the store house of all knowledge. Thou art the source of all the S'âstras. Obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise, the waters of the ocean become bright and clear; so obeisance to Thee! At Thy rise (Canopus) the Kâs'a flower blossoms. Thou art adorned with clots of matted hair on Thy head and Thou always livest with Thy disciples. S’rî Râma Chandra is one of Thy chief disciples. O great Muni! Thou art entitled to praise from all the Devas! O Best! The Store-house of all qualities! O great Muni! We now bow down to Thee and Thy wife Lopâmudrâ! O Lord! O very Energetic! We all are very much tormented by an unbearable pain inflicted on us by the Bindhya Range and we therefore take refuge of Thee. Be gracious unto us. Thus praised by the gods, the highly religious Muni Agastya, the twice born, smiled and graciously said :—

20-27. O Devas! You are the lords of the three worlds, superior to all, highsouled, and the preserver of the Lokas. If you wish, you can favour, disfavour, do anything. Especially He who is the Lord of heavens, whose weapon is the thunderbolt, and the eight Siddhis are ever at his service is your Indra, the Lord of the Devas. What is there that he cannot do? Then there is Agni, Who burns everything and always carries oblations to the gods and the Pitris, Who is the mouth piece of the Devas. Is there anything impracticable with him! O Devas! Then again Yama is there amongst you, the Lord of the Râksasas, the Witness of all actions, and always quick in giving punishment to the offenders, that terrible looking Yama Râja. What is there that he cannot accomplish?

Still, O Devas! if there be anything required by you that awaits my co-operation, give out at once and I will do it undoubtedly. Hearing these words of the Muni, the Devas became very glad and joyfully began to say what they wanted. O Mahârsi! The Bindhya mountain has risen very high and thwarted the Sun's course in the Heavens. A cry of universal distress and consternation has arisen and the three worlds are now verging to the ruins. O Muni! Now what we want is this that Thou, by Thy power of Tapas, curbest the rise of this Bindhya Mountain. O Agastya! Certainly, by Thy fire and austerities, that mountain will be brought down and humiliated. This is what we want.

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devas' praying to the Muni Agastya for checking the abnormal rise of the Bindhya Range in the Mahâ Purânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahârsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c7"></span>

## Chapter VII

**On the checking of the rise of the Bindhya Range** <span id="p1032"><sup><small>[ p. 1032 ]</small></sup></span> 1-21. Sûta said :— Hearing the words of the Devas, Agastya, the Best of the Brâhmins promised that he would carry out their works. O Risis! All the Devas then became very glad when the Muni, born of the water jar, promised thus. They then bade good-bye to him and went back gladly to their own abodes. The Muni then spoke to his wife thus :— “O daughter of the King! The Bindhya Mountain has baffled the progress of the Sun's course and has thus caused a great mischief. What the Munis, the Seers of truths said before referring to Kâs’î, all are now coming to my mind when I am thinking why this disturbance has overtaken me. They said that various hindrances would come to him at every step, who is a Sâdhu intending to settle at Kâs'î. Let him who wants Mukti, never quit Kâs'î, the Avimukta place in any case. But, O Dear! Today I have got one hindrance during my stay at Kâs'î.” Thus talking with much regret on various subjects with his wife, the Muni bathed in the Manikarnikâ ghât, saw the Lord Vis'ves'vara worshipped Dandapânî and went to the Kâla Bhairava. He said in the following terms :— “O Mighty armed Kâlabhairava! Thou destroyest the fear of the Bhaktas; Thou art the God of this Kâs'î City. Then why art Thou driving me away from this Kâs'îdhâm. O Lord! Thou removest all the obstacles of the devotees and Thou preservest them. Then why, O Destroyer of the sorrows of the Bhaktas! art Thou removing me from here? Never I blamed others; nor did I practise any hypocrisy with any person nor did I lie; then under what sin, Thou art driving me away from Kâs'î.” O Risis! Thus praying to Kâla Bhairava, the Muni Agastya, born of water jar and the husband of Lopâmudrâ, went to Sâksi Ganes'a, the Destroyer of all evils and seeing and worshipping Him, went out of Kâs'î and proceeded to the south. The Muni, the ocean of great fortune, left Kâs'î; but he became very much distressed to leave it and he remembered it always. He began to march on with his wife. As if riding on his car of asceticism he arrived at the Bindhya mountain in the twinkling of an eye and saw that the Mountain had risen very high and obstructed the passage of the Sun in the Heavens. The Bindhya Mountain, seeing the Muni Agastya in front, began to tremble and as if desirous to speak something to the earth in a whisper became low and dwarfish and bowed down to the Muni and fell down with devotion in sâstângas with devotion just like a stick dropped flat on the ground before the Muni.

<span id="p1033"><sup><small>[ p. 1033 ]</small></sup></span>

Seeing the Bindhya thus low, the Muni Agastya became pleased and spoke with a gracious look :— “O Child! Better remain in this state until I come back. For, O Child! I am quite unable to ascend to your lofty heights.” Thus saying, the Muni became eager to go to the south; and, crossing the peaks of the Bindhya, alighted gradually again to the plains. He went on further to the south and saw the S’rî S'aila Mountain and at last went to the Malayâchala and there, building his Âs'rama (hermitage), settled himself. O Saunaka! The Devî Bhagavatî, worshipped by the Muni went to the Bindhya Mountain and settled there and became known, in the three worlds, by the name of Bindhyavâsinî.

22-26. Sûta said :— Anybody who hears this highly pure narrative of the Muni Agastya and Bindhya, becomes freed of all his sins. All his enemies are destroyed in no time. This hearing gives knowledge to the Brâhmanas, victory to the Ksattriyas, wealth and corn to the Vais'yas and happiness to the S’ûdras.

If anybody once hears this narrative, he gets Dharma if he want Dharma, gets unbounded wealth if he wants wealth and gets all desires if he wants his desires fulfilled. In ancient times Svâyambhuva Manu worshipped this Devî with devotion and got his kingdom for his own Manvantara period. O Saunaka! Thus I have described to you the holy character of the Devî in this Manvantara. What more shall I say? Mention please.

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the checking of the rise of the Bindhya Range in the Mahâ Purânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c8"></span>

## Chapter VIII

**On the origin of Manu** <span id="p1033"><sup><small>[ p. 1033 ]</small></sup></span> 1\. Saunaka said :— “O Sûta! You have described the beautiful narrative of the first Manu Svâyambhuva. Now kindly describe to us the narratives of other highly energetic Deva-like Manus.”

2-3. Sûta said :— “O Risis! The very wise Nârada, well versed in the knowledge of S’rî Devî, hearing the glorious character of the first Svâyambhuva Manu, became desirous to hear of the other Manus and asked the Eternal Nârâyana :— O Deva! Now favour me by reciting the origin and narratives of the other Manus.”

4\. Nârâyana said :— O Devarsi! I have already spoken to you everything regarding the first Manu. He had worshipped the Devî Bhagavatî, and thus he got his foeless kingdom. You know that then.

5-24 Manu had two sons of great prowess, Priyavrata and Uttânapâda. They governed their kingdoms with fame. The son of this Priyavrata, <span id="p1034"><sup><small>[ p. 1034 ]</small></sup></span> of indomitable valour, is known by the wise as the second Svârochisa Manu. Dear to all the beings, this Svârochisa Manu built his hermitage near the banks of the Kâlindî (the Jumnâ) and there making an earthen image of the Devî Bhagavatî, worshipped the Devî with devotion, subsisting on dry leaves and thus practised severe austerities. Thus he passed his twelve years in that forest; when, at last, the Devî Bhagavatî, resplendent with brilliance of the thousand Suns, became visible to him. She got very much pleased with his devotional stotrams. The Devî, the Saviour of the Devas, and Who was of good vows, granted to him the sovereignty for one Manvantara. Thus the Devî became famous by the name Târinî Jagaddhâtrî. O Nârada! Thus, by worshipping the Devî Târinî, Svârochisa obtained safely the foeless kingdom. Then establishing the Dharma duly, he enjoyed his kingdom with his sons; and, when the period of his manvantara expired, he went to the Heavens. Priyavrata's son named Uttama became the third Manu. On the banks of the Ganges, be practised tapasyâ and repeated the Vîja Mantra of Vâgbhava, in a solitary place for three years and became blessed with the favour of the Devî. With rapt devotion he sang hymns wholly to the Devî with his mind full; and, by Her boon, got the foeless kingdom and a continual succession of sons and grandsons. Thus, enjoying the pleasures of his kingdom and the gifts of the Yuga Dharma, got in the end, the excellent place, obtained by the best Râjarsis. A very happy result. Priyavarata's another son named Tâmasa became the fourth Manu. He practised austerities and repeated the Kâma Vîja Mantra, the Spiritual Password of Kâma on the southern banks of the Narmadâ river and worshipped the World Mother. In the spring and in the autumn he observed the nine nights' vow ( the Navarâtri) and worshipped the excellent lotus eyed Deves'î and pleased Her. On obtaining the Devî's favour, he chanted excellent hymns to Her and made pranâms. There he enjoyed the extensive kingdom without any fear from any foe or from any other source of danger. He generated, in the womb of his wife, ten sons, all very powerful and mighty, and then he departed, to the excellent region in the Heavens.

The young brother of Tâmasa, Raivata became the Fifth Manu and practised austerities on the banks of the Kâlindî (the Jumnâ) and repeated the Kâma Vîja Mantra, the spiritual password of Kâma, the resort of the Sâdhakas, capable to give the highest power of speech and to yield all the Siddhis, and thus he worshipped the Devî. He obtained excellent heavens, indomitable power, unhampered and capable of all success and a continual line of sons, grandsons, etc. Then the unrivalled excellent hero Raivata Manu established the several divisions of Dharma and enjoying all the worldly pleasures, went to the excellent region of Indra.

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the origin of Manu in the Mahâpuranam S'ri Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c9"></span>

## Chapter IX

**On the narrative of Châksusa Manu** <span id="p1035"><sup><small>[ p. 1035 ]</small></sup></span> 1-7. Nârâyana said :— O Nârada! I will now narrate the supreme glories of the Devî and the anecdote how Manu, the son of Anga, obtained excellent kingdom by worshipping the Devî Bhagavatî. The son of the king Anga, named Châksusa became the Sixth Manu. One day he went to the Brahmârsi Pulaha Risi and taking his refuge said :— O Brahmârsi! Thou removest all the sorrows and afflictions of those that come under Thy refuge; I now take Thy refuge. Kindly advise Thy servant how he may become the Lord of an endless amount of wealth. O Muni! What can I do so that I may get the sole undisputed sway over the world? How my arms can wield the weapons and manipulate them so that they may not be baffled? How my race and line be constant and my youth remain ever the same, undecayed? And how can I, in the end, attain Mukti? O Muni! Kindly dost Thou give instructions to me on these points and oblige. Hearing thus, the Muni wanted him to worship the Devî and said :— “O King! Listen attentively to what I say you today. Worship today the all auspicious S'akti; by Her grace, all your desires will be fulfilled.”

8\. Châksusa said :— “O Muni! What is that very holy worship of S’rî Bhagavatî? How to do it? Kindly describe all these in detail.”

9-20. The Muni said :— O King! I will now disclose all about the excellent Pûja of the Devî Bhagavatî. Hear. You recite (mentally) always the seed mantra of Vâkbhava (Speech) (The Deity being Mahâ Sarasvatî). If any one makes japam (recites slowly) of the Vâkbhava Vîja thrice a day, one gets both the highest enjoyment here and, in the end, release (Mukti). O Son of a Ksattriya! There is no other Vîja Mantra (word) better than this of Vâk (the Word). Through the Japam of this Vîja Mantra comes the increase of strength and prowess and all successes. By the Japam of this, Brahmâ is so powerful and has become the Creator; Visnu preserves the Universe and Mahes'vara has become the Destroyer of the Universe. The other Dikpâlas (the Regents of the quarters) and the other Siddhas have become very powerful by the power of this Mantra, and are capable of favouring or disfavouring others. So, O King! You, too, worship the Devî of the Devas, the World Mother and ere long you will become the Lord of unbounded wealth. There is no doubt in <span id="p1036"><sup><small>[ p. 1036 ]</small></sup></span> this. O Nârada! Thus advised by Pulaha Risi, the son of the King Anga went to the banks of the Virajâ river to practise austerities. There the king Châksusa remained absorbed in making Japam of the Vâkbhava Vîja Mantra and took for his food the leaves of the trees that dropped on the ground and thus practised severe austerities.

The first year he ate leaves; the second year he drank water and in the third year he sustained his life by breathing air simply and thus remained steady like a pillar. Thus he remained without food for twelve years. He went on making Japam of the Vâkbhava Mantra and his heart and mind became purified. While he was sitting alone, absorbed in the meditation of the Devî Mantra, there appeared before him suddenly the Parames'varî, the World Mother, the Incarnate of Laksmî. The Highest Deity, full of dauntless fire and the Embodiment of all the Devas, spoke graciously in sweet words to Châksusa, the son of Anga.

21-29. O Regent of the earth! I am pleased with your Tapasyâ. Now ask any boon that you want. I will give that to you. Châksusa said :— “O Thou, worshipped by the Devas! O Sovereign of the Deva of the Devas! Thou art the Controller Inside; Thou art the Controller Outside. Thou knowest everything what I desire in my mind. Still, O Devî! When I am so fortunate as to see Thee, I say Thou grantest me the kingdom for the Manvantara period.” The Devî said :— “O Best of the Ksattriyas! I grant unto you the kingdom of the whole world for one manvantara. You will have many sons, very powerful, indeed, and well qualified. Your kingdom will be free from any danger till at last you will certainly get Mukti.” Thus granting the excellent boon to Manu, She disappeared then and there, after being praised by Manu, with deep devotion. The Sixth Manu, then favoured by the Devî, enjoyed the sovereignty of the earth and other pleasures and became the best of the Manus. His sons became the devotees of the Devî, very powerful and expert and became respected by all and enjoyed the pleasures of the kingdom. Thus getting the supremacy by the worship of the Devî, the Châksusa Manu became merged in the end in the Holy Feet of the Devî.

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the narrative of Châksusa Manu in the Mahâpurânam S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahârsi Veda Vyâsa.


<span id="c10"></span>

## Chapter X

**On the anecdote of the King Suratha** <span id="p1037"><sup><small>[ p. 1037 ]</small></sup></span> 1-4. Nârâyana said :— Now the Seventh Manu is the Right Hon'ble His Excellency the Lord Vaivasvata Manu S'râddha Deva, honoured by all the kings, and the Enjoyer of the Highest Bliss, Brahmânanda. I will now speak of this seventh Manu. He, too, practised austerities before the Highest Devî and by Her Grace, got the sovereignty of the earth for one Manvantara.

The Eighth Manu is the Sun's son, known as Sâvarni. This personage, a devotee of the Devî, honoured by the kings, gentle, patient and powerful king Sâvarni worshipped the Devî in his previous births and, by Her boon, became the Lord of the Manvantara.

5\. Nârada said :— O Bhagavân! How did this Sâvarni Manu worship in his previous birth the earthen image of the Devî. Kindly describe this to me.

6-13. Nârâyana said :— O Nârada! This Eighth Manu had been, before, in the time of Svârochisa Manu (the second Manu), a famous king, known by the name of Suratha, born of the family of Chaitra, and very powerful. He could well appreciate merits, clever in the science of archery, amassed abundance of wealth, a generous donor, a very liberal man and he was a celebrated poet and honoured by all. He was skilled in all arts of warfare with weapons and indomitable in crushing his foes. Once on a time, some of his powerful enemies destroyed the city of Kolâ, belonging to the revered king and succeeded in besieging his capital wherein he remained. Then the king Suratha, the conqueror of all his foes went out to fight with the enemies but he was defeated by them. Taking advantage of this opportunity, the king's ministers robbed him of all his wealth. The illustrious king then went out of the city and with a sorrowful heart rode alone on his horse on the plea of having a game and walked to and fro, as if, absent-minded.

14-25. The king, then, went to the hermitage of the Muni Sumedhâ, who could see far-reaching things (a Man of the Fourth Dimension). It was a nice, quiet Âs'rama, surrounded by quiet and peaceful animals and filled with disciples. There in that very sacred Âs'rama, his heart became relieved and he went on living there.

One day, when the Muni finished his worship, etc., the king went to him and saluted him duly and humbly asked him the following :— “O Muni! I am suffering terribly from my mental pain. O Deva on the earth! Why I am suffering so much though I know everything, as if I am quite an ignorant man. After my defeat from my enemies, why does my mind become now <span id="p1038"><sup><small>[ p. 1038 ]</small></sup></span> compassionate towards those who stole away my kingdom. O Best of the knowers of the Vedas! What am I to do now? Where to go? How can I make me happy? Please speak on these. O Muni! Now I am in want of your good grace.” The Muni said :— “O Lord of the earth! Hear the extremely wonderful glories of the Devî that have no equal and that can fructify all desires. She, the Mahâ Mâyâ, Who is all this world, is the Mother of Brahmâ, Visnu and Mahes'a. O King! Know verily that it is She and She alone, that can forcibly attract the hearts of all the Jîvas and throw them in dire utter delusion. She is always the Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of the Universe in the form of Hara. This Mahâ Mâyâ fulfills the desires of all the Jîvas and She is known as the insurmountable Kâlarâtri. She is Kâlî, the Destructrix of all this universe and She is Kamalâ residing in the lotus. Know that this whole world rests on Her and it will become dissolved in Her. She is therefore, the Highest and Best. O King! Know, verily, that he alone can cross the delusion (Moha) on whom the Grace of the Devî falls and otherwise no one can escape from this Anâdi Moha.”

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the anecdote of the King Suratha in the Mahâ Purânam S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahârsi Veda Vyâsa.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Srimad_Devi_Bhagawatam/Book_9_50">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">The Ninth Book — Chapter 41 to 50</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Srimad_Devi_Bhagawatam">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Hinduism/The_Srimad_Devi_Bhagawatam/Book_10_13">
          <span class="pr-2">The Tenth Book — Chapter 11 to 13</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
