---
title: "11. Raag Bihaagra"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/10">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">10. Raag Dayv</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/12">
          <span class="pr-2">12. Raag Wadahans</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 001

One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Raag Bihaagraa, Chau-Padas, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
To associate with your arch enemies,
is to live with poisonous snakes;
I have made the effort to shake them off. ||1||
Then, I repeated the Name of the Lord, Har, Har,
and I obtained celestial peace. ||1||Pause||
False is the love of the many emotional attachments,
which suck the mortal into the whirlpool of reincarnation. ||2||
All are travellers,
who have gathered under the world-tree,
and are bound by their many bonds. ||3||
Eternal is the Company of the Holy,
where the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung.
Nanak seeks this Sanctuary. ||4||1||
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Raag Bihaagraa, Ninth Mehl:
No one knows the state of the Lord.
The Yogis, the celibates, the penitents, and all sorts of clever people have failed. ||1||Pause||
In an instant, He changes the beggar into a king, and the king into a beggar.
He fills what is empty, and empties what is full - such are His ways. ||1||
He Himself spread out the expanse of His Maya, and He Himself beholds it.
He assumes so many forms, and plays so many games, and yet, He remains detached from it all. ||2||
Incalculable, infinite, incomprehensible and immaculate is He, who has misled the entire world.
Cast off all your doubts; prays Nanak, O mortal, focus your consciousness on His Feet. ||3||1||2||
Raag Bihaagraa, Chhant, Fourth Mehl, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my soul; as Gurmukh, meditate on the invaluable Name of the Lord.
My mind is pierced through by the sublime essence of the Lord's Name. The Lord is dear to my mind. With the sublime essence of the Lord's Name, my mind is washed clean.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 002

Under Guru's Instructions, hold your mind steady; O my soul, do not let it wander anywhere.
One who utters the Bani of the Praises of the Lord God, O Nanak, obtains the fruits of his heart's desires. ||1||
Under Guru's Instruction, the Ambrosial Name abides within the mind, O my soul; with your mouth, utter the words of ambrosia.
The Words of the devotees are Ambrosial Nectar, O my soul; hearing them in the mind, embrace loving affection for the Lord.
Separated for so very long, I have found the Lord God; He holds me close in His loving embrace.
Servant Nanak's mind is filled with bliss, O my soul; the unstruck sound-current of the Shabad vibrates within. ||2||
If only my friends and companions would come and unite me with my Lord God, O my soul.
I offer my mind to the one who recites the sermon of my Lord God, O my soul.
As Gurmukh, ever worship the Lord in adoration, O my soul, and you shall obtain the fruits of your heart's desires.
O Nanak, hurry to the Lord's Sanctuary; O my soul, those who meditate on the Lord's Name are very fortunate. ||3||
By His Mercy, God comes to meet us, O my soul; through the Guru's Teachings, He reveals His Name.
Without the Lord, I am so sad, O my soul - as sad as the lotus without water.
The Perfect Guru has united me, O my soul, with the Lord, my best friend, the Lord God.
Blessed, blessed is the Guru, who has shown me the Lord, O my soul; servant Nanak blossoms forth in the Name of the Lord. ||4||1||
Raag Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Ambrosial Nectar, O my soul; through the Guru's Teachings, this Nectar is obtained.
Pride in Maya is poison, O my soul; through the Ambrosial Nectar of the Name, this poison is eradicated.
The dry mind is rejuvenated, O my soul, meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
The Lord has given me the pre-ordained blessing of high destiny, O my soul; servant Nanak merges in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||
My mind is attached to the Lord, O my soul, like the infant, sucking his mother's milk.
Without the Lord, I find no peace, O my soul; I am like the song-bird, crying out without the rain drops.
Go, and seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru, O my soul; He shall tell you of the Glorious Virtues of the Lord God.
Servant Nanak has merged into the Lord, O my soul; the many melodies of the Shabad resound within his heart. ||2||
Through egotism, the self-willed manmukhs are separated, O my soul; bound to poison, they are burnt by egotism.
Like the pigeon, which itself falls into the trap, O my soul, all the self-willed manmukhs fall under the influence of death.
Those self-willed manmukhs who focus their consciousness on Maya, O my soul, are foolish, evil demons.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 003

The Lord's humble servants beseech and implore Him, and enter His Sanctuary, O my soul; Guru Nanak becomes their Divine Protector. ||3||
The Lord's humble servants are saved, through the Love of the Lord, O my soul; by their pre-ordained good destiny, they obtain the Lord.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the ship, O my soul, and the Guru is the helmsman. Through the Word of the Shabad, He ferries us across.
The Lord, Har, Har, is all-powerful and very kind, O my soul; through the Guru, the True Guru, He seems so sweet.
Shower Your Mercy upon me, and hear my prayer, O Lord, Har, Har; please, let servant Nanak meditate on Your Name. ||4||2||
Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
In this world, the best occupation is to sing the Praises of the Naam, O my soul. Singing the Praises of the Lord, the Lord is enshrined in the mind.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is immaculate and pure, O my soul. Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, one is saved.
All sins and errors are erased, O my soul; with the Naam, the Gurmukh washes off this filth.
By great good fortune, servant Nanak meditates on the Lord; even fools and idiots like me have been saved. ||1||
Those who meditate on the Lord's Name, O my soul, overpower the five passions.
The nine treasures of the Naam are within, O my soul; the Great Guru has made me see the unseen Lord.
The Guru has fulfilled my hopes and desires, O my soul; meeting the Lord, all my hunger is satisfied.
O servant Nanak, he alone sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, O my soul, upon whose forehead God has inscribed such pre-ordained destiny. ||2||
I am a deceitful sinner, O my soul, a cheat, and a robber of others' wealth.
But, by great good fortune, I have found the Guru, O my soul; through the Perfect Guru, I have found the way to salvation.
The Guru has poured the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Name into my mouth, O my soul, and now, my dead soul has come to life again.
O servant Nanak: those who meet the True Guru, O my soul, have all of their pains taken away. ||3||
The Name of the Lord is sublime, O my soul; chanting it, one's sins are washed away.
The Guru, the Lord, has purified even the sinners, O my soul; now, they are famous and respected in the four directions and throughout the four ages.
The filth of egotism is totally wiped away, O my soul, by bathing in the Ambrosial Pool of the Lord's Name.
Even sinners are carried across, O my soul, if they are imbued with the Lord's Name, even for an instant, O servant Nanak. ||4||3||
Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
I am a sacrifice, O my soul, to those who take the Support of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
The Guru, the True Guru, implanted the Name within me, O my soul, and He has carried me across the terrifying world-ocean of poison.
Those who have meditated one-pointedly on the Lord, O my soul - I proclaim the Victory of those saintly beings.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 004

Nanak has found peace, meditating on the Lord, O my soul; the Lord is the Destroyer of all pain. ||1||
Blessed, blessed is that tongue, O my soul, which sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord God.
Sublime and splendid are those ears, O my soul, which listen to the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
Sublime, pure and pious is that head, O my soul, which falls at the Guru's Feet.
Nanak is a sacrifice to that Guru, O my soul; the Guru has placed the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in my mind. ||2||
Blessed and approved are those eyes, O my soul, which gaze upon the Holy True Guru.
Sacred and sanctified are those hands, O my soul, which write the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har.
I worship continually the feet of that humble being, O my soul, who walks on the Path of Dharma - the path of righteousness.
Nanak is a sacrifice to those, O my soul, who hear of the Lord, and believe in the Lord's Name. ||3||
The earth, the nether regions of the underworld, and the Akaashic ethers, O my soul, all meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Wind, water and fire, O my soul, continually sing the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
The woods, the meadows and the whole world, O my soul, chant with their mouths the Lord's Name, and meditate on the Lord.
O Nanak, one who, as Gurmukh, focuses his consciousness on the Lord's devotional worship - O my soul, he is robed in honor in the Court of the Lord. ||4||4||
Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
Those who do not remember the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my soul - those self-willed manmukhs are foolish and ignorant.
Those who attach their consciousness to emotional attachment and Maya, O my soul, depart regretfully in the end.
They find no place of rest in the Court of the Lord, O my soul; those self-willed manmukhs are deluded by sin.
O servant Nanak, those who meet the Guru are saved, O my soul; chanting the Name of the Lord, they are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||1||
Go, everyone, and meet the True Guru; O my soul, He implants the Name of the Lord, Har, har, within the heart.
Do not hesitate for an instant - meditate on the Lord, O my soul; who knows whether he shall draw another breath?
That time, that moment, that instant, that second is so fruitful, O my soul, when my Lord comes into my mind.
Servant Nanak has meditated on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O my soul, and now, the Messenger of Death does not draw near him. ||2||
The Lord continually watches, and hears everything, O my soul; he alone is afraid, who commits sins.
One whose heart is pure within, O my soul, casts off all his fears.
One who has faith in the Fearless Name of the Lord, O my soul - all his enemies and attackers speak against him in vain.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 005

Nanak has served the Perfect Guru, O my soul, who causes all to fall at His feet. ||3||
Serve such a Lord continuously, O my soul, who is the Great Lord and Master of all.
Those who single-mindedly worship Him in adoration, O my soul, are not subservient to anyone.
Serving the Guru, I have obtained the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, O my soul; all the slanderers and trouble-makers bark in vain.
Servant Nanak has meditated on the Name, O my soul; such is the pre-ordained destiny which the Lord written on his forehead. ||4||5||
Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
All beings are Yours - You permeate them all. O my Lord God, You know what they do in their hearts.
The Lord is with them, inwardly and outwardly, O my soul; He sees everything, but the mortal denies the Lord in his mind.
The Lord is far away from the self-willed manmukhs, O my soul; all their efforts are in vain.
Servant Nanak, as Gurmukh, meditates on the Lord, O my soul; he beholds the Lord ever-present. ||1||
They are devotees, and they are servants, O my soul, who are pleasing to the Mind of my God.
They are robed in honor in the Court of the Lord, O my soul; night and day, they remain absorbed in the True Lord.
In their company, the filth of one's sins is washed away, O my soul; imbued with the Lord's Love, one comes to bear the Mark of His Grace.
Nanak offers his prayer to God, O my soul; joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he is satisfied. ||2||
O tongue, chant the Name of God; O my soul, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, your desires shall be extinguished.
He, unto whom my Supreme Lord God shows Mercy, O my soul, enshrines the Name in his mind.
One who meets the Perfect True Guru, O my soul, obtains the treasure of the Lord's wealth.
By great good fortune, one joins the Company of the Holy, O my soul. O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3||
In the places and interspaces, O my soul, the Supreme Lord God, the Great Giver, is pervading.
His limits cannot be found, O my soul; He is the Perfect Architect of Destiny.
He cherishes all beings, O my soul, as the mother and father cherish their child.
By thousands of clever tricks, He cannot be obtained, O my soul; servant Nanak, as Gurmukh, has come to know the Lord. ||4||6||
First Set of Six||
Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
I have seen one miracle of the Lord, O my Dear Beloved - whatever He does is righteous and just.
The Lord has fashioned this beautiful arena, O my Dear Beloved, where all come and go.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 006

The One who fashioned the world causes them to come and go.
Some meet the True Guru - the Lord invites them into the Mansion of His Presence; others wander around, deluded by doubt.
You alone know Your limits; You are contained in all.
Nanak speaks the Truth: listen, Saints - the Lord dispenses even-handed justice. ||1||
Come and join me, O my beautiful dear beloveds; let's worship the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Let's serve the Perfect True Guru, O my dear beloveds, and clear away the Path of Death.
Having cleared the treacherous path, as Gurmukhs, we shall obtain honor in the Court of the Lord.
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny, lovingly focus their consciousness on the Lord, night and day.
Self-conceit, egotism and emotional attachment are eradicated when one joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Says servant Nanak, one who contemplates the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is liberated. ||2||
Let's join hands, O Saints; let's come together, O my dear beloveds, and worship the imperishable, Almighty Lord.
I sought Him through uncounted forms of adoration, O my dear beloveds; now, I dedicate my entire mind and body to the Lord.
The mind, body and all wealth belong to God; so what can anyone offer to Him in worship?
He alone merges in the lap of God, unto whom the Merciful Lord Master becomes compassionate.
One who has such pre-ordained destiny written on his forehead, comes to bear love for the Guru.
Says servant Nanak, joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, let's worship the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||
I wandered around, searching in the ten directions, O my dear beloveds, but I came to find the Lord in the home of my own being.
The Dear Lord has fashioned the body as the temple of the Lord, O my dear beloveds; the Lord continues to dwell there.
The Lord and Master Himself is pervading everywhere; through the Guru, He is revealed.
Darkness is dispelled, and pains are removed, when the sublime essence of the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar trickles down.
Wherever I look, the Lord and Master is there. The Supreme Lord God is everywhere.
Says servant Nanak, meeting the True Guru, I have found the Lord, within the home of my own being. ||4||1||
Raag Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl:
He is dear to me; He fascinates my mind; He is the ornament of my heart, the support of the breath of life.
The Glory of the Beloved, Merciful Lord of the Universe is beautiful; He is infinite and without limit.
O Compassionate Sustainer of the World, Beloved Lord of the Universe, please, join with Your humble soul-bride.
My eyes long for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; the night passes, but I cannot sleep.
I have applied the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom to my eyes; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my food. These are all my decorations.
Prays Nanak, let's meditate on the Saint, that he may unite us with our Husband Lord. ||1||
I endure thousands of reprimands, and still, my Lord has not met with me.
I make the effort to meet with my Lord, but none of my efforts work.
Unsteady is my consciousness, and unstable is my wealth; without my Lord, I cannot be consoled.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 007

Food, drink and decorations are useless; without my Husband Lord, how can I survive?
I yearn for Him, and desire Him night and day. I cannot live without Him, even for an instant.
Prays Nanak, O Saint, I am Your slave; by Your Grace, I meet my Husband Lord. ||2||
I share a bed with my Beloved, but I do not behold the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
I have endless demerits - how can my Lord call me to the Mansion of His Presence?
The worthless, dishonored and orphaned soul-bride prays, “Meet with me, O God, treasure of mercy.”
The wall of doubt has been shattered, and now I sleep in peace, beholding God, the Lord of the nine treasures, even for an instant.
If only I could come into the Mansion of my Beloved Lord's Presence! Joining with Him, I sing the songs of joy.
Prays Nanak, I seek the Sanctuary of the Saints; please, reveal to me the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||3||
By the Grace of the Saints, I have obtained the Lord, Har, Har.
My desires are fulfilled, and my mind is at peace; the fire within has been quenched.
Fruitful is that day, and beauteous is that night, and countless are the joys, celebrations and pleasures.
The Lord of the Universe, the Beloved Sustainer of the World, has been revealed. With what tongue can I speak of His Glory?
Doubt, greed, emotional attachment and corruption are taken away; joining with my companions, I sing the songs of joy.
Prays Nanak, I meditate on the Saint, who has led me to merge with the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||2||
Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl:
Shower Your Mercy upon me, O Guru, O Perfect Supreme Lord God, that I might chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, night and day.
I speak the Ambrosial Words of the Guru's Bani, praising the Lord. Your Will is sweet to me, Lord.
Show kindness and compassion, O Sustainer of the Word, Lord of the Universe; without You, I have no other.
Almighty, sublime, infinite, perfect Lord - my soul, body, wealth and mind are Yours.
I am foolish, stupid, masterless, fickle, powerless, lowly and ignorant.
Prays Nanak, I seek Your Sanctuary - please save me from coming and going in reincarnation. ||1||
In the Sanctuary of the Holy Saints, I have found the Dear Lord, and I constantly sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Applying the dust of the devotees to the mind and body, O Dear Lord, all sinners are sanctified.
The sinners are sanctified in the company of those who have met the Creator Lord.
Imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they are given the gift of the life of the soul; their gifts increase day by day.
Wealth, the supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas, and the nine treasures come to those who meditate on the Lord, and conquer their own soul.
Prays Nanak, it is only by great good fortune that the Holy Saints, the Lord's companions, are found, O friends. ||2||
Those who deal in Truth, O Dear Lord, are the perfect bankers.
They possess the great treasure, O Dear Lord, and they reap the profit of the Lord's Praise.
Sexual desire, anger and greed do not cling to those who are attuned to God.
They know the One, and they believe in the One; they are intoxicated with the Lord's Love.
They fall at the Feet of the Saints, and seek their Sanctuary; their minds are filled with joy.
Prays Nanak, those who have the Naam in their laps are the true bankers. ||3||
O Nanak, meditate on that Dear Lord, who supports all by His almighty strength.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 008

In their minds, the Gurmukhs do not forget the Dear Lord, the Primal Creator Lord.
Pain, disease and fear do not cling to those who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har.
By the Grace of the Saints, they cross over the terrifying world-ocean, and obtain their pre-ordained destiny.
They are congratulated and applauded, their minds are at peace, and they meet the infinite Lord God.
Prays Nanak, by meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har, my desires are fulfilled. ||4||3||
Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O peaceful night, grow longer - I have come to enshrine love for my Beloved.
O painful sleep, grow shorter, so that I may constantly grasp His Feet.
I long for the dust of His Feet, and beg for His Name; for His Love, I have renounced the world.
I am imbued with the Love of my Beloved, and I am naturally intoxicated with it; I have forsaken my awful evil-mindedness.
He has taken me by the arm, and I am saturated with His Love; I have met my Beloved on the Path of Truth.
Prays Nanak, please Lord, shower Your Mercy on me, that I may remain attached to Your Feet. ||1||
O my friends and companions, let us remain attached to the Feet of God.
Within my mind is great love for my Beloved; I beg for the Lord's devotional worship.
The Lord's devotional worship is obtained, meditating on God. Let us go and meet the humble servants of the Lord.
Renounce pride, emotional attachment and corruption, and dedicate this body, wealth and mind to Him.
The Lord God is great, perfect, glorious, absolutely perfect; meeting the Lord, Har, Har, the wall of doubt is torn down.
Prays Nanak, hear these teachings, O friends - chant the Lord's Name constantly, over and over again. ||2||
The Lord's bride is a happy wife; she enjoys all pleasures.
She does not sit around like a widow, because the Lord God lives forever.
She does not suffer pain - she meditates on God. She is blessed, and very fortunate.
She sleeps in peaceful ease, her sins are erased, and she wakes to the joy and love of the Naam.
She remains absorbed in her Beloved - the Lord's Name is her ornament. The Words of her Beloved are sweet and pleasing to her.
Prays Nanak, I have obtained my mind's desires; I have met my eternal Husband Lord. ||3||
The songs of bliss resound, and millions of pleasures are found in that house;
the mind and body are permeated by God, the Lord of supreme bliss.
My Husband Lord is infinite and merciful; He is the Lord of wealth, the Lord of the Universe, the Saving Grace of sinners.
God, the Giver of mercy, the Lord, the Destroyer of pride, carries us across the terrifying world-ocean of poison.
The Lord lovingly embraces whoever comes to the Lord's Sanctuary - this is the way of the Lord and Master.
Prays Nanak, I have met my Husband Lord, who plays with me forever. ||4||1||4||
Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl:
The Lord's Feet are the Pools of Ambrosial Nectar; your dwelling is there, O my mind.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 009

Take your cleansing bath in the Ambrosial Pool of the Lord, and all of your sins shall be wiped away, O my soul.
Take your cleansing ever in the Lord God, O friends, and the pain of darkness shall be dispelled.
Birth and death shall not touch you, and the noose of Death shall be cut away.
So join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and be imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord; there, your hopes shall be fulfilled.
Prays Nanak, shower Your Mercy upon me, O Lord, that I might dwell at Your Lotus Feet. ||1||
There is bliss and ecstasy there always, and the unstruck celestial melody resounds there.
Meeting together, the Saints sing God's Praises, and celebrate His Victory.
Meeting together, the Saints sing the Praises of the Lord Master; they are pleasing to the Lord, and saturated with the sublime essence of His love and affection.
They obtain the profit of the Lord, eliminate their self-conceit, and meet Him, from whom they were separated for so long.
Taking them by the arm, He makes them His own; God, the One, inaccessible and infinite, bestows His kindness.
Prays Nanak, forever immaculate are those who sing the Praises of the True Word of the Shabad. ||2||
Listen, O most fortunate ones, to the Ambrosial Bani of the Word of the Lord.
He alone, whose karma is so pre-ordained, has it enter into his heart.
He alone knows the Unspoken Speech, unto whom God has shown His Mercy.
He becomes immortal, and shall not die again; his troubles, disputes and pains are dispelled.
He finds the Sanctuary of the Lord; he does not forsake the Lord, and does not leave. God's Love is pleasing to his mind and body.
Prays Nanak, sing forever the Sacred Ambrosial Bani of His Word. ||3||
My mind and body are intoxicated - this state cannot be described.
We originated from Him, and into Him we shall merge once again.
I merge into God's Light, through and through, like water merging into water.
The One Lord permeates the water, the land and the sky - I do not see any other.
He is totally permeating the woods, meadows and the three worlds. I cannot express His worth.
Prays Nanak, He alone knows - He who created this creation. ||4||2||5||
Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl:
The Saints go around, searching for God, the support of their breath of life.
They lose the strength of their bodies, if they do not merge with their Beloved Lord.
O God, my Beloved, please, bestow Your kindness upon me, that I may merge with You; by Your Mercy, attach me to the hem of Your robe.
Bless me with Your Name, that I may chant it, O Lord and Master; beholding the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, I live.
He is all-powerful, perfect, eternal and unchanging, exalted, unapproachable and infinite.
Prays Nanak, bestow Your Mercy upon me, O Beloved of my soul, that I may merge with You. ||1||
I have practiced chanting, intensive meditation and fasting, to see Your Feet, O Lord.
But still, my burning is not quenched, without the Sanctuary of the Lord Master.
I seek Your Sanctuary, God - please, cut away my bonds and carry me across the world-ocean.
I am masterless, worthless, and I know nothing; please do not count up my merits and demerits.
O Lord, Merciful to the meek, Sustainer of the world, O Beloved, Almighty Cause of causes.
Nanak, the song-bird, begs for the rain-drop of the Lord's Name; meditating on the Feet of the Lord, Har, Har, he lives. ||2||

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 010

Drink in the Ambrosial Nectar from the pool of the Lord; chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
In the Society of the Saints, one meets the Lord; meditating on Him, one's affairs are resolved.
God is the One who accomplishes everything; He is the Dispeller of pain. Never forget Him from your mind, even for an instant.
He is blissful, night and day; He is forever True. All Glories are contained in the Lord in the Universe.
Incalculable, lofty and infinite is the Lord and Master. Unapproachable is His home.
Prays Nanak, my desires are fulfilled; I have met the Lord, the Greatest Lover. ||3||
The fruits of many millions of charitable feasts come to those who listen to and sing the Lord's Praise.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, all one's generations are carried across.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, one is beautified; what Praises of His can I chant?
I shall never forget the Lord; He is the Beloved of my soul. My mind constantly yearns for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
Auspicious is that day, when God, the lofty, inaccessible and infinite, hugs me close in His embrace.
Prays Nanak, everything is fruitful - I have met my supremely beloved Lord God. ||4||3||6||
Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
Why are you imbued with the love of another? That path is very dangerous.
O sinner, no one is your friend.
No one shall be your friend, and you shall forever regret your actions.
You have not chanted with your tongue the Praises of the Sustainer of the World; when will these days come again?
The leaf, separated from the branch, shall not be joined with it again; all alone, it falls on its way to death.
Prays Nanak, without the Lord's Name, the soul wanders, forever suffering. ||1||
You are practicing deception secretly, but the Lord, the Knower, knows all.
When the Righteous Judge of Dharma reads your account, you shall be squeezed like a sesame seed in the oil-press.
For the actions you committed, you shall suffer the penalty; you shall be consigned to countless reincarnations.
Imbued with the love of Maya, the great enticer, you shall lose the jewel of this human life.
Except for the One Name of the Lord, you are clever in everything else.
Prays Nanak, those who have such pre-ordained destiny are attracted to doubt and emotional attachment. ||2||
No one advocates for the ungrateful person, who is separated from the Lord.
The hard-hearted Messenger of Death comes and seizes him.
He seizes him, and leads him away, to pay for his evil deeds; he was imbued with Maya, the great enticer.
He was not Gurmukh - he did not chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe; and now, the hot irons are put to his chest.
He is ruined by sexual desire, anger and egotism; deprived of spiritual wisdom, he comes to regret.
Prays Nanak, by his cursed destiny he has gone astray; with his tongue, he does not chant the Name of the Lord. ||3||
Without You, God, no one is our savior.
It is Your Nature, Lord, to save the sinners.
O Savior of sinners, I have entered Your Sanctuary, O Lord and Master, Compassionate Ocean of Mercy.
Please, rescue me from the deep, dark pit, O Creator, Cherisher of all hearts.
I seek Your Sanctuary; please, cut away these heavy bonds, and give me the Support of the One Name.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 011

Prays Nanak, please, give me Your Hand and save me, O Lord of the Universe, Merciful to the meek. ||4||
That day is judged to be fruitful, when I merged with my Lord.
Total happiness was revealed, and pain was taken far away.
Peace, tranquility, joy and eternal happiness come from constantly singing the Glorious Praises of the Sustainer of the World.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I lovingly remember the Lord; I shall not wander again in reincarnation.
He has naturally hugged me close in His Loving Embrace, and the seed of my primal destiny has sprouted.
Prays Nanak, He Himself has met me, and He shall never again leave me. ||5||4||7||
Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
Listen to my prayer, O my Lord and Master.
I am filled with millions of sins, but still, I am Your slave.
O Destroyer of pain, Bestower of Mercy, Fascinating Lord, Destroyer of sorrow and strife,
I have come to Your Sanctuary; please preserve my honor. You are all-pervading, O Immaculate Lord.
He hears and beholds all; God is with us, the nearest of the near.
O Lord and Master, hear Nanak's prayer; please save the servants of Your household. ||1||
You are eternal and all-powerful; I am a mere beggar, Lord.
I am intoxicated with the love of Maya - save me, Lord!
Bound down by greed, emotional attachment and corruption, I have made so many mistakes.
The creator is both attached and detached from entanglements; one obtains the fruits of his own actions.
Show kindness to me, O Purifier of sinners; I am so tired of wandering through reincarnation.
Prays Nanak, I am the slave of the Lord; God is the Support of my soul, and my breath of life. ||2||
You are great and all-powerful; my understanding is so inadequate, O Lord.
You cherish even the ungrateful ones; Your Glance of Grace is perfect, Lord.
Your wisdom is unfathomable, O Infinite Creator. I am lowly, and I know nothing.
Forsaking the jewel, I have saved the shell; I am a lowly, ignorant beast.
I have kept that which forsakes me, and is very fickle, continually committing sins, again and again.
Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary, Almighty Lord and Master; please, preserve my honor. ||3||
I was separated from Him, and now, He has united me with Himself.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Singing the Praises of the Lord of the Universe, the ever-sublime blissful Lord is revealed to me.
My bed is adorned with God; my God has made me His own.
Abandoning anxiety, I have become carefree, and I shall not suffer in pain any longer.
Nanak lives by beholding the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, the ocean of excellence. ||4||5||8||
Bihaagraa, Fifth Mehl, Chhant:
O you of sublime faith, chant the Lord's Name; why do you remain silent?
with your eyes, you have seen the treacherous ways of Maya.
Nothing shall go along with you, except the Name of the Lord of the Universe.
Land, clothes, gold and silver - all of these things are useless.
Children, spouse, worldly honors, elephants, horses and other corrupting influences shall not go with you.
Prays Nanak, without the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the whole world is false. ||1||

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 012

O king, why are you sleeping? Why don't you wake up to reality?
It is useless to cry and whine about Maya, but so many cry out and bewail.
So many cry out for Maya, the great enticer, but without the Name of the Lord, there is no peace.
Thousands of clever tricks and efforts will not succeed. One goes wherever the Lord wills him to go.
In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, He is all-pervading everywhere; He is in each and every heart.
Prays Nanak, those who join the Saadh Sangat go to the house of the Lord with honor. ||2||
O king of mortals, know that your palaces and wise servants shall be of no use in the end.
You shall certainly have to separate yourself from them, and their attachment shall make you feel regret.
Beholding the phantom city, you have gone astray; how can you now find stability?
Absorbed in things other than the Name of the Lord, this human life is wasted in vain.
Indulging in egotistical actions, your thirst is not quenched. Your desires are not fulfilled, and you do not attain spiritual wisdom.
Prays Nanak, without the Name of the Lord, so many have departed with regret. ||3||
Showering His blessings, the Lord has made me His own.
Grasping me by the arm, He has pulled me out of the mud, and He has blessed me with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Worshipping the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, all my sins and sufferings are burnt away.
This is the greatest religion, and the best act of charity; this alone shall go along with you.
My tongue chants in adoration the Name of the One Lord and Master; my mind and body are drenched in the Lord's Name.
O Nanak, whoever the Lord unites with Himself, is filled with all virtues. ||4||6||9||
Vaar Of Bihaagraa, Fourth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Serving the Guru, peace is obtained; do not search for peace anywhere else.
The soul is pierced by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. The Lord dwells ever with the soul.
O Nanak, they alone obtain the Naam, the Name of the Lord, who are blessed by the Lord with His Glance of Grace. ||1||
Third Mehl:
The treasure of the Lord's Praise is such a blessed gift; he alone obtains it to spend, unto whom the Lord bestows it.
Without the True Guru, it does not come to hand; all have grown weary of performing religious rituals.
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs of the world lack this wealth; when they are hungry in the next world, what will they have to eat there? ||2||
Pauree:
All are Yours, and You belong to all. You created all.
You are pervading within all - all meditate on You.
You accept the devotional worship of those who are pleasing to Your Mind.
Whatever pleases the Lord God happens; all act as You cause them to act.
Praise the Lord, the greatest of all; He preserves the honor of the Saints. ||1||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
O Nanak, the spiritually wise one has conquered all others.
Through the Name, his affairs are brought to perfection; whatever happens is by His Will.
Under Guru's Instruction, his mind is held steady; no one can make him waver.
The Lord makes His devotee His own, and his affairs are adjusted.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 013

The self-willed manmukhs have been led astray from the very beginning; within them lurks greed, avarice and ego.
Their nights and days pass in argument, and they do not reflect upon the Word of the Shabad.
The Creator has taken away their subtle intellect, and all their speech is corrupt.
No matter what they are given, they are not satisfied; within them is desire, and the great darkness of ignorance.
O Nanak, it is right to break with the self-willed manmukhs; to them, the love of Maya is sweet. ||1||
Third Mehl:
What can fear and doubt do to those, who have given their heads to the Creator, and to the True Guru?
He who has preserved honor from the beginning of time, He shall preserve their honor as well.
Meeting their Beloved, they find peace; they reflect upon the True Word of the Shabad.
O Nanak, I serve the Giver of Peace; He Himself is the Assessor. ||2||
Pauree:
All beings are Yours; You are the wealth of all.
One unto whom You give, obtains everything; there is no one else to rival You.
You alone are the Great Giver of all; I offer my prayer unto You, Lord.
One with whom You are pleased, is accepted by You; how blessed is such a person!
Your wondrous play is pervading everywhere. I place my pain and pleasure before You. ||2||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
The Gurmukhs are pleasing to the True Lord; they are judged to be true in the True Court.
The minds of such friends are filled with bliss, as they reflect upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
They enshrine the Shabad within their hearts; their pain is dispelled, and the Creator blesses them with the Divine Light.
O Nanak, the Savior Lord shall save them, and shower them with His Mercy. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Serve the Guru, and wait upon Him; as you work, maintain the Fear of God.
As you serve Him, you will become like Him, as you walk according to His Will.
O Nanak, He Himself is everything; there is no other place to go. ||2||
Pauree:
You alone know Your greatness - no one else is as great as You.
If there were some other rival as great as You, then I would speak of him. You alone are as great as You are.
One who serves You obtains peace; who else can compare to You?
You are all-powerful to destroy and create, O Great Giver; with palms pressed together, all stand begging before You.
I see none as great as You, O Great Giver; You give in charity to the beings of all the continents, worlds, solar systems, nether regions and universes. ||3||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
O mind, you have no faith, and you have not embraced love for the Celestial Lord;
you do not enjoy the sublime taste of the Word of the Shabad - what Praises of the Lord will you stubborn-mindedly sing?
O Nanak, his coming alone is approved, who, as Gurmukh, merges into the True Lord. ||1||
Third Mehl:
The fool does not understand his own self; he annoys others with his speech.
His underlying nature does not leave him; separated from the Lord, he suffers cruel blows.
Through the fear of the True Guru, he has not changed and reformed himself, so that he might merge in the lap of God.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 014

Night and day, his doubts never stop; without the Word of the Shabad, he suffers in pain.
Sexual desire, anger and greed are so powerful within him; he passes his life constantly entangled in worldly affairs.
His feet, hands, eyes and ears are exhausted; his days are numbered, and his death is immanent.
The True Name does not seem sweet to him - the Name by which the nine treasures are obtained.
But if he remains dead while yet alive, then by so dying, he truly lives; thus, he attains liberation.
But if he is not blessed with such pre-ordained karma, then without this karma, what can he obtain?
Meditate in remembrance on the Word of the Guru's Shabad, you fool; through the Shabad, you shall obtain salvation and wisdom.
O Nanak, he alone finds the True Guru, who eliminates self-conceit from within. ||2||
Pauree:
One whose consciousness is filled with my Lord Master - why should he feel anxious about anything?
The Lord is the Giver of Peace, the Lord of all things; why would we turn our faces away from His meditation, even for a moment, or an instant?
One who meditates on the Lord obtains all pleasures and comforts; let us go each and every day, to sit in the Saints' Society.
All the pain, hunger, and disease of the Lord's servant are eradicated; the bonds of the humble beings are torn away.
By the Lord's Grace, one becomes the Lord's devotee; beholding the face of the Lord's humble devotee, the whole world is saved and carried across. ||4||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Let that tongue, which has not tasted the Name of the Lord, be burnt.
O Nanak, one whose mind is filled with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har - his tongue savors the Word of the Shabad. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Let that tongue, which has forgotten the Name of the Lord, be burnt.
O Nanak, the tongue of the Gurmukh chants the Lord's Name, and loves the Name of the Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
The Lord Himself is the Master, the servant and the devotee; the Lord Himself is the Cause of causes.
The Lord Himself beholds, and He Himself rejoices. As He wills, so does He enjoin us.
The Lord places some on the Path, and the Lord leads others into the wilderness.
The Lord is the True Master; True is His justice. He arranges and beholds all His plays.
By Guru's Grace, servant Nanak speaks and sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. ||5||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
How rare is the dervish, the Saintly renunciate, who understands renunciation.
Cursed is the life, and cursed are the clothes, of one who wanders around, begging from door to door.
But, if he abandons hope and anxiety, and as Gurmukh receives the Name as his charity,
then Nanak washes his feet, and is a sacrifice to him. ||1||
Third Mehl:
O Nanak, the tree has one fruit, but two birds are perched upon it.
They are not seen coming or going; these birds have no wings.
One enjoys so many pleasures, while the other, through the Word of the Shabad, remains in Nirvaanaa.
Imbued with the subtle essence of the fruit of the Lord's Name, O Nanak, the soul bears the True Insignia of God's Grace. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself is the field, and He Himself is the farmer. He Himself grows and grinds the corn.
He Himself cooks it, He Himself puts the food in the dishes, and He Himself sits down to eat.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 015

He Himself is the water, He Himself gives the tooth-pick, and He Himself offers the mouthwash.
He Himself calls and seats the congregation, and He Himself bids them goodbye.
One whom the Lord Himself blesses with His Mercy - the Lord causes him to walk according to His Will. ||6||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Rituals and religions are all just entanglements; bad and good are bound up with them.
Those things done for the sake of children and spouse, in ego and attachment, are just more bonds.
Wherever I look, there I see the noose of attachment to Maya.
O Nanak, without the True Name, the world is engrossed in blind entanglements. ||1||
Fourth Mehl:
The blind receive the Divine Light, when they merge with the Will of the True Guru.
They break their bonds, and dwell in Truth, and the darkness of ignorance is dispelled.
They see that everything belongs to the One who created and fashioned the body.
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Creator - the Creator preserves his honor. ||2||
Pauree:
When the Creator, sitting all by Himself, created the Universe, he did not consult with any of His servants;
so what can anyone take, and what can anyone give, when He did not create any other like Himself?
Then, after fashioning the world, the Creator blessed all with His blessings.
He Himself instructs us in His service, and as Gurmukh, we drink in His Ambrosial Nectar.
He Himself is formless, and He Himself is formed; whatever He Himself does, comes to pass. ||7||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
The Gurmukhs serve God forever; night and day, they are steeped in the Love of the True Lord.
They are in bliss forever, singing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord; in this world and in the next, they keep Him clasped to their hearts.
Their Beloved dwells deep within; the Creator pre-ordained this destiny.
O Nanak, He blends them into Himself; He Himself showers His Mercy upon them. ||1||
Third Mehl:
By merely talking and speaking, He is not found. Night and day, sing His Glorious Praises continually.
Without His Merciful Grace, no one finds Him; many have died barking and bewailing.
When the mind and body are saturated with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord Himself comes to dwell in his mind.
O Nanak, by His Grace, He is found; He unites us in His Union. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself is the Vedas, the Puraanas and all the Shaastras; He Himself chants them, and He Himself is pleased.
He Himself sits down to worship, and He Himself creates the world.
He Himself is a householder, and He Himself is a renunciate; He Himself utters the Unutterable.
He Himself is all goodness, and He Himself causes us to act; He Himself remains detached.
He Himself grants pleasure and pain; the Creator Himself bestows His gifts. ||8||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
O Shaykh, abandon your cruel nature; live in the Fear of God and give up your madness.
Through the Fear of the Guru, many have been saved; in this fear, find the Fearless Lord.
Pierce your stone heart with the Word of the Shabad; let peace and tranquility come to abide in your mind.
If good deeds are done in this state of peace, they are approved by the Lord and Master.
O Nanak, through sexual desire and anger, no one has ever found God - go, and ask any wise man. ||1||
Third Mehl:

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 016

The self-willed manmukh is emotionally attached to Maya - he has no love for the Naam.
He practices falsehood, gathers in falsehood, and makes falsehood his sustenance.
He collects the poisonous wealth of Maya, and then dies; in the end, it is all reduced to ashes.
He practices religious rituals, purity and austere self-discipline, but within, there is greed and corruption.
O Nanak, whatever the self-willed manmukh does, is not acceptable; in the Court of the Lord, he is dishonored. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself created the four sources of creation, and He Himself fashioned speech; He Himself formed the worlds and solar systems.
He Himself is the ocean, and He Himself is the sea; He Himself puts the pearls in it.
By His Grace, the Lord enables the Gurmukh to find these pearls.
He Himself is the terrifying world-ocean, and He Himself is the boat; He Himself is the boatman, and He Himself ferries us across.
The Creator Himself acts, and causes us to act; no one else can equal You, Lord. ||9||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Fruitful is service to the True Guru, if one does so with a sincere mind.
The treasure of the Naam, is obtained, and the mind comes to be free of anxiety.
The pains of birth and death are eradicated, and the mind is rid of egotism and self-conceit.
One achieves the ultimate state, and remains absorbed in the True Lord.
O Nanak, the True Guru comes and meets those who have such pre-ordained destiny. ||1||
Third Mehl:
The True Guru is imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He is the boat in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
One who becomes Gurmukh crosses over; the True Lord dwells within him.
He remembers the Naam, he gathers in the Naam, and he obtains honor through the Naam.
Nanak has found the True Guru; by His Grace, the Name is obtained. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself is the Philosopher's Stone, He Himself is the metal, and He Himself is transformed into gold.
He Himself is the Lord and Master, He Himself is the servant, and He Himself is the Destroyer of sins.
He Himself enjoys every heart; the Lord Master Himself is the basis of all illusion.
He Himself is the discerning one, and He Himself is the Knower of all; He Himself breaks the bonds of the Gurmukhs.
Servant Nanak is not satisfied by merely praising You, O Creator Lord; You are the Great Giver of peace. ||10||
Shalok, Fourth Mehl:
Without serving the True Guru, the deeds which are done are only chains binding the soul.
Without serving the True Guru, they find no place of rest. They die, only to be born again - they continue coming and going.
Without serving the True Guru, their speech is insipid. They do not enshrine the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in the mind.
O Nanak, without serving the True Guru, they are bound and gagged, and beaten in the City of Death; they depart with blackened faces. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Some wait upon and serve the True Guru; they embrace love for the Lord's Name.
O Nanak, they reform their lives, and redeem their generations as well. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself is the school, He Himself is the teacher, and He Himself brings the students to be taught.
He Himself is the father, He Himself is the mother, and He Himself makes the children wise.
In one place, He teaches them to read and understand everything, while in another place, He Himself makes them ignorant.
Some, You summon to the Mansion of Your Presence within, when they are pleasing to Your Mind, O True Lord.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 017

That Gurmukh, whom You have blessed with greatness - that humble being is known in Your True Court. ||11||
Shalok, Mardaanaa:
The Dark Age of Kali Yuga is the vessel, filled with the wine of sexual desire; the mind is the drunkard.
Anger is the cup, filled with emotional attachment, and egotism is the server.
Drinking too much in the company of falsehood and greed, one is ruined.
So let good deeds be your distillery, and Truth your molasses; in this way, make the most excellent wine of Truth.
Make virtue your bread, good conduct the ghee, and modesty the meat to eat.
As Gurmukh, these are obtained, O Nanak; partaking of them, one's sins depart. ||1||
MARDAANAA:
The human body is the vat, self-conceit is the wine, and desire is the company of drinking buddies.
The cup of the mind's longing is overflowing with falsehood, and the Messenger of Death is the cup-bearer.
Drinking in this wine, O Nanak, one takes on countless sins and corruptions.
So make spiritual wisdom your molasses, the Praise of God your bread, and the Fear of God the meat you eat.
O Nanak, this is the true food; let the True Name be your only Support. ||2||
If the human body is the vat, and self-realization is the wine, then a stream of Ambrosial Nectar is produced.
Meeting with the Society of the Saints, the cup of the Lord's Love is filled with this Ambrosial Nectar; drinking it in, one's corruptions and sins are wiped away. ||3||
Pauree:
He Himself is the angelic being, the heavenly herald, and the celestial singer. He Himself is the one who explains the six schools of philosophy.
He Himself is Shiva, Shankara and Mahaysh; He Himself is the Gurmukh, who speaks the Unspoken Speech.
He Himself is the Yogi, He Himself is the Sensual Enjoyer, and He Himself is the Sannyaasee, wandering through the wilderness.
He discusses with Himself, and He teaches Himself; He Himself is discrete, graceful and wise.
Staging His own play, He Himself watches it; He Himself is the Knower of all beings. ||12||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
That evening prayer alone is acceptable, which brings the Lord God to my consciousness.
Love for the Lord wells up within me, and my attachment to Maya is burnt away.
By Guru's Grace, duality is conquered, and the mind becomes stable; I have made contemplative meditation my evening prayer.
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukh may recite his evening prayers, but his mind is not centered on it; through birth and death, he is ruined. ||1||
Third Mehl:
I wandered over the whole world, crying out, “Love, O Love!”, but my thirst was not quenched.
O Nanak, meeting the True Guru, my desires are satisfied; I found my Beloved, when I returned to my own home. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself is the supreme essence, He Himself is the essence of all. He Himself is the Lord and Master, and He Himself is the servant.
He Himself created the people of the eighteen castes; God Himself acquired His domain.
He Himself kills, and He Himself redeems; He Himself, in His Kindness, forgives us. He is infallible
\- He never errs; the justice of the True Lord is totally True.
Those whom the Lord Himself instructs as Gurmukh - duality and doubt depart from within them. ||13||
Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
That body, which does not remember the Lord's Name in meditation in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, shall be reduced to dust.
Cursed and insipid is that body, O Nanak, which does not know the One who created it. ||1||

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 018

Fifth Mehl:
Let the Lotus Feet of the Lord abide within your heart, and with your tongue, chant God's Name.
O Nanak, meditate in remembrance on God, and nurture this body. ||2||
Pauree:
The Creator Himself is the sixty-eight sacred places of pilgrimage; He Himself takes the cleansing bath in them.
He Himself practices austere self-discipline; the Lord Master Himself causes us to chant His Name.
He Himself becomes merciful to us; the Destroyer of fear Himself gives in charity to all.
One whom He has enlightened and made Gurmukh, ever obtains honor in His Court.
One whose honor the Lord Master has preserved, comes to know the True Lord. ||14||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
O Nanak, without meeting the True Guru, the world is blind, and it does blind deeds.
It does not focus its consciousness on the Word of the Shabad, which would bring peace to abide in the mind.
Always afflicted with the dark passions of low energy, it wanders around, passing its days and nights burning.
Whatever pleases Him, comes to pass; no one has any say in this. ||1||
Third Mehl:
The True Guru has commanded us to do this:
through the Guru's Gate, meditate on the Lord Master.
The Lord Master is ever-present. He tears away the veil of doubt, and installs His Light within the mind.
The Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar - take this healing medicine!
Enshrine the Will of the True Guru in your consciousness, and make the True Lord's Love your self-discipline.
O Nanak, you shall be kept in peace here, and hereafter, you shall celebrate with the Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself is the vast variety of Nature, and He Himself makes it bear fruit.
He Himself is the Gardener, He Himself irrigates all the plants, and He Himself puts them in His mouth.
He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself is the Enjoyer; He Himself gives, and causes others to give.
He Himself is the Lord and Master, and He Himself is the Protector; He Himself is permeating and pervading everywhere.
Servant Nanak speaks of the greatness of the Lord, the Creator, who has no greed at all. ||15||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
One person brings a full bottle, and another fills his cup.
Drinking the wine, his intelligence departs, and madness enters his mind;
he cannot distinguish between his own and others, and he is struck down by his Lord and Master.
Drinking it, he forgets his Lord and Master, and he is punished in the Court of the Lord.
Do not drink the false wine at all, if it is in your power.
O Nanak, the True Guru comes and meets the mortal; by His Grace, one obtains the True Wine.
He shall dwell forever in the Love of the Lord Master, and obtain a seat in the Mansion of His Presence. ||1||
Third Mehl:
When this world comes to understand, it remains dead while yet alive.
When the Lord puts him to sleep, he remains asleep; when He wakes him up, he regains consciousness.
O Nanak, when the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, He causes him to meet the True Guru.
By Guru's Grace, remain dead while yet alive, and you shall not have to die again. ||2||
Pauree:
By His doing, everything happens; what does He care for anyone else?
O Dear Lord, everyone eats whatever You give - all are subservient to You.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 019

One who praises You obtains everything; You bestow Your Mercy upon him, O Immaculate Lord.
He alone is a true banker and trader, who loads the merchandise of the wealth of the Your Name, O Lord.
O Saints, let everyone praise the Lord, who has destroyed the pile of the love of duality. ||16||
Shalok:
Kabeer, the world is dying - dying to death, but no one knows how to truly die.
Whoever dies, let him die such a death, that he does not have to die again. ||1||
Third Mehl:
What do I know? How will I die? What sort of death will it be?
If I do not forget the Lord Master from my mind, then my death will be easy.
The world is terrified of death; everyone longs to live.
By Guru's Grace, one who dies while yet alive, understands the Lord's Will.
O Nanak, one who dies such a death, lives forever. ||2||
Pauree:
When the Lord Master Himself becomes merciful, the Lord Himself causes His Name to be chanted.
He Himself causes us to meet the True Guru, and blesses us with peace. His servant is pleasing to the Lord.
He Himself preserves the honor of His servants; He causes others to fall at the feet of His devotees.
The Righteous Judge of Dharma is a creation of the Lord; he does not approach the humble servant of the Lord.
One who is dear to the Lord, is dear to all; so many others come and go in vain. ||17||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
The entire world roams around, chanting, “Raam, Raam, Lord, Lord”, but the Lord cannot be obtained like this.
He is inaccessible, unfathomable and so very great; He is unweighable, and cannot be weighed.
No one can evaluate Him; He cannot be purchased at any price.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, His mystery is known; in this way, He comes to dwell in the mind.
O Nanak, He Himself is infinite; by Guru's Grace, He is known to be permeating and pervading everywhere.
He Himself comes to blend, and having blended, remains blended. ||1||
Third Mehl:
O my soul, this is the wealth of the Naam; through it, comes peace, forever and ever.
It never brings any loss; through it, one earns profits forever.
Eating and spending it, it never decreases; He continues to give, forever and ever.
One who has no skepticism at all never suffers humiliation.
O Nanak, the Gurmukh obtains the Name of the Lord, when the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself is deep within all hearts, and He Himself is outside them.
He Himself is prevailing unmanifest, and He Himself is manifest.
For thirty-six ages, He created the darkness, abiding in the void.
There were no Vedas, Puraanas or Shaastras there; only the Lord Himself existed.
He Himself sat in the absolute trance, withdrawn from everything.
Only He Himself knows His state; He Himself is the unfathomable ocean. ||18||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
In egotism, the world is dead; it dies and dies, again and again.

## Section 11 - Raag Bihaagra - Part 020

As long as there is breath in the body, he does not remember the Lord; what will he do in the world hereafter?
One who remembers the Lord is a spiritual teacher; the ignorant one acts blindly.
O Nanak, whatever one does in this world, determines what he shall receive in the world hereafter. ||1||
Third Mehl:
From the very beginning, it has been the Will of the Lord Master, that He cannot be remembered without the True Guru.
Meeting the True Guru, he realizes that the Lord is permeating and pervading deep within him; he remains forever absorbed in the Lord's Love.
With each and every breath, he constantly remembers the Lord in meditation; not a single breath passes in vain.
His fears of birth and death depart, and he obtains the honored state of eternal life.
O Nanak, He bestows this rank upon that mortal, upon whom He showers His Mercy. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself is all-wise and all-knowing; He Himself is supreme.
He Himself reveals His form, and He Himself enjoins us to His meditation.
He Himself poses as a silent sage, and He Himself speaks spiritual wisdom.
He does not seem bitter to anyone; He is pleasing to all.
His Praises cannot be described; forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him. ||19||
Shalok, First Mehl:
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, O Nanak, the demons have taken birth.
The son is a demon, and the daughter is a demon; the wife is the chief of the demons. ||1||
First Mehl:
The Hindus have forgotten the Primal Lord; they are going the wrong way.
As Naarad instructed them, they are worshipping idols. They are blind and mute, the blindest of the blind.
The ignorant fools pick up stones and worship them.
But when those stones themselves sink, who will carry you across? ||2||
Pauree:
Everything is in Your power; You are the True King.
The devotees are imbued with the Love of the One Lord; they have perfect faith in Him.
The Name of the Lord is the ambrosial food; His humble servants eat their fill.
All treasures are obtained - meditative remembrance on the Lord is the true profit.
The Saints are very dear to the Supreme Lord God, O Nanak; the Lord is unapproachable and unfathomable. ||20||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Everything comes by the Lord's Will, and everything goes by the Lord's Will.
If some fool believes that he is the creator, he is blind, and acts in blindness.
O Nanak, the Gurmukh understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command; the Lord showers His Mercy upon him. ||1||
Third Mehl:
He alone is a Yogi, and he alone finds the Way, who, as Gurmukh, obtains the Naam.
In the body-village of that Yogi are all blessings; this Yoga is not obtained by outward show.
O Nanak, such a Yogi is very rare; the Lord is manifest in his heart. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself created the creatures, and He Himself supports them.
He Himself is seen to be subtle, and He Himself is obvious.
He Himself remains a solitary recluse, and He Himself has a huge family.
Nanak asks for the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints of the Lord.
I cannot see any other Giver; You alone are the Giver, O Lord. ||21||1|| Sudh||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/10">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">10. Raag Dayv</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/12">
          <span class="pr-2">12. Raag Wadahans</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
