---
title: "12. Raag Wadahans"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/11">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">11. Raag Bihaagra</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/13">
          <span class="pr-2">13. Raag Sorat'h</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 001

One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Raag Wadahans, First Mehl, First House:
To the addict, there is nothing like the drug; to the fish, there is nothing else like water.
Those who are attuned to their Lord - everyone is pleasing to them. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, cut apart into pieces, a sacrifice to Your Name, O Lord Master. ||1||Pause||
The Lord is the fruitful tree; His Name is ambrosial nectar.
Those who drink it in are satisfied; I am a sacrifice to them. ||2||
You are not visible to me, although You dwell with everyone.
How can the thirst of the thirsty be quenched, with that wall between me and the pond? ||3||
Nanak is Your merchant; You, O Lord Master, are my merchandise.
My mind is cleansed of doubt, only when I praise You, and pray to You. ||4||1||
Wadahans, First Mehl:
The virtuous bride enjoys her Husband Lord; why does the unworthy one cry out?
If she were to become virtuous, then she too could enjoy her Husband Lord. ||1||
My Husband Lord is loving and playful; why should the soul-bride enjoy anyone else? ||1||Pause||
If the soul-bride does good deeds, and strings them on the thread of her mind,
she obtains the jewel, which cannot be purchased for any price, strung upon the thread of her consciousness. ||2||
I ask, but do not follow the way shown to me; still, I claim to have reached my destination.
I do not speak with You, O my Husband Lord; how then can I come to have a place in Your home? ||3||
O Nanak, without the One Lord, there is no other at all.
If the soul-bride remains attached to You, then she shall enjoy her Husband Lord. ||4||2||
Wadahans, First Mehl, Second House:
The peacocks are singing so sweetly, O sister; the rainy season of Saawan has come.
Your beauteous eyes are like a string of charms, fascinating and enticing the soul-bride.
I would cut myself into pieces for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan; I am a sacrifice to Your Name.
I take pride in You; without You, what could I be proud of?
So smash your bracelets along with your bed, O soul-bride, and break your arms, along with the arms of your couch.
In spite of all the decorations which you have made, O soul-bride, your Husband Lord is enjoying someone else.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 002

You don't have the bracelets of gold, nor the good crystal jewelry; you haven't dealt with the true jeweller.
Those arms, which do not embrace the neck of the Husband Lord, burn in anguish.
All my companions have gone to enjoy their Husband Lord; which door should I, the wretched one, go to?
O friend, I may look very attractive, but I am not pleasing to my Husband Lord at all.
I have woven my hair into lovely braids, and saturated their partings with vermillion;
but when I go before Him, I am not accepted, and I die, suffering in anguish.
I weep; the whole world weeps; even the birds of the forest weep with me.
The only thing which doesn't weep is my body's sense of separateness, which has separated me from my Lord.
In a dream, He came, and went away again; I cried so many tears.
I can't come to You, O my Beloved, and I can't send anyone to You.
Come to me, O blessed sleep - perhaps I will see my Husband Lord again.
One who brings me a message from my Lord and Master - says Nanak, what shall I give to Him?
Cutting off my head, I give it to Him to sit upon; without my head, I shall still serve Him.
Why haven't I died? Why hasn't my life just ended? My Husband Lord has become a stranger to me. ||1||3||
Wadahans, Third Mehl, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
When the mind is filthy, everything is filthy; by washing the body, the mind is not cleaned.
This world is deluded by doubt; how rare are those who understand this. ||1||
O my mind, chant the One Name.
The True Guru has given me this treasure. ||1||Pause||
Even if one learns the Yogic postures of the Siddhas, and holds his sexual energy in check,
still, the filth of the mind is not removed, and the filth of egotism is not eliminated. ||2||
This mind is not controlled by any other discipline, except the Sanctuary of the True Guru.
Meeting the True Guru, one is transformed beyond description. ||3||
Prays Nanak, one who dies upon meeting the True Guru, shall be rejuvenated through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
The filth of his attachment and possessiveness shall depart, and his mind shall become pure. ||4||1||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
By His Grace, one serves the True Guru; by His Grace, service is performed.
By His grace, this mind is controlled, and by His Grace, it becomes pure. ||1||
O my mind, think of the True Lord.
Think of the One Lord, and you shall obtain peace; you shall never suffer in sorrow again. ||1||Pause||
By His Grace, one dies while yet alive, and by His Grace, the Word of the Shabad is enshrined in the mind.
By His Grace, one understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command, and by His Command, one merges into the Lord. ||2||
That tongue, which does not savor the sublime essence of the Lord - may that tongue be burned off!
It remains attached to other pleasures, and through the love of duality, it suffers in pain. ||3||
The One Lord grants His Grace to all; He Himself makes distinctions.
O Nanak, meeting the True Guru, the fruits are obtained, and one is blessed with the Glorious Greatness of the Naam. ||4||2||

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 003

Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Emotional attachment to Maya is darkness; without the Guru, there is no wisdom.
Those who are attached to the Word of the Shabad understand; duality has ruined the people. ||1||
O my mind, under Guru's Instruction, do good deeds.
Dwell forever and ever upon the Lord God, and you shall find the gate of salvation. ||1||Pause||
The Lord alone is the treasure of virtue; He Himself gives, and then one receives.
Without the Name, all are separated from the Lord; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, one meets the Lord. ||2||
Acting in ego, they lose, and nothing comes into their hands.
Meeting the True Guru, they find Truth, and merge into the True Name. ||3||
Hope and desire abide in this body, but the Lord's Light shines within as well.
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs remain in bondage; the Gurmukhs are liberated. ||4||3||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
The faces of the happy soul-brides are radiant forever; through the Guru, they are peacefully poised.
They enjoy their Husband Lord constantly, eradicating their ego from within. ||1||
O my mind, meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
The True Guru has led me to understand the Lord. ||1||Pause||
The abandoned brides cry out in their suffering; they do not attain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
In the love of duality, they appear so ugly; they suffer in pain as they go to the world beyond. ||2||
The virtuous soul-bride constantly chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord; she enshrines the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within her heart.
The unvirtuous woman suffers, and cries out in pain. ||3||
The One Lord and Master is the Husband Lord of all; His Praises cannot be expressed.
O Nanak, He has separated some from Himself, while others are to His Name. ||4||4||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam is always sweet to me; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I come to taste it.
Through the True Word of the Guru's Bani, I am merged in peace and poise; the Dear Lord is enshrined in the mind. ||1||
The Lord, showing His Mercy, has caused me to meet the True Guru.
Through the Perfect True Guru, I meditate on the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Through Brahma, the hymns of the Vedas were revealed, but the love of Maya spread.
The wise one, Shiva, remains absorbed in himself, but he is engrossed in dark passions and excessive egotism. ||2||
Vishnu is always busy reincarnating himself - who will save the world?
The Gurmukhs are imbued with spiritual wisdom in this age; they are rid of the darkness of emotional attachment. ||3||
Serving the True Guru, one is emancipated; the Gurmukh crosses over the world-ocean.
The detached renunciates are imbued with the True Name; they attain the gate of salvation. ||4||
The One True Lord is pervading and permeating everywhere; He cherishes everyone.
O Nanak, without the One Lord, I do not know any other; He is the Merciful Master of all. ||5||5||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
The Gurmukh practices true self-discipline, and attains the essence of wisdom.
The Gurmukh meditates on the True Lord. ||1||

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 004

As Gurmukh, O my mind, remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
It shall stand by you always, and go with you. ||Pause||
The True Lord is the social status and honor of the Gurmukh.
Within the Gurmukh, is God, his friend and helper. ||2||
He alone becomes Gurmukh, whom the Lord so blesses.
He Himself blesses the Gurmukh with greatness. ||3||
The Gurmukh lives the True Word of the Shabad, and practices good deeds.
The Gurmukh, O Nanak, emancipates his family and relations. ||4||6||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
My tongue is intuitively attracted to the taste of the Lord.
My mind is satisfied, meditating on the Name of the Lord. ||1||
Lasting peace is obtained, contemplating the Shabad, the True Word of God.
I am forever a sacrifice to my True Guru. ||1||Pause||
My eyes are content, lovingly focused on the One Lord.
My mind is content, having forsaken the love of duality. ||2||
The frame of my body is at peace, through the Shabad, and the Name of the Lord.
The fragrance of the Naam permeates my heart. ||3||
O Nanak, one who has such great destiny written upon his forehead,
through the Bani of the Guru's Word, easily and intuitively becomes free of desire. ||4||7||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
From the Perfect Guru, the Naam is obtained.
Through the Shabad, the True Word of God, one merges in the True Lord. ||1||
O my soul, obtain the treasure of the Naam,
by submitting to the Will of your Guru. ||1||Pause||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, filth is washed away from within.
The Immaculate Naam comes to abide within the mind. ||2||
Deluded by doubt, the world wanders around.
It dies, and is born again, and is ruined by the Messenger of Death. ||3||
O Nanak, very fortunate are those who meditate on the Name of the Lord.
By Guru's Grace, they enshrine the Name within their minds. ||4||8||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Ego is opposed to the Name of the Lord; the two do not dwell in the same place.
In egotism, selfless service cannot be performed, and so the soul goes unfulfilled. ||1||
O my mind, think of the Lord, and practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
If you submit to the Hukam of the Lord's Command, then you shall meet with the Lord; only then will your ego depart from within. ||Pause||
Egotism is within all bodies; through egotism, we come to be born.
Egotism is total darkness; in egotism, no one can understand anything. ||2||
In egotism, devotional worship cannot be performed, and the Hukam of the Lord's Command cannot be understood.
In egotism, the soul is in bondage, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, does not come to abide in the mind. ||3||
O Nanak, meeting with the True Guru, egotism is eliminated, and then, the True Lord comes to dwell in the mind||
One starts practicing truth, abides in truth and by serving the True One gets absorbed in Him. ||4||9||12||
Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
There is one bed, and One Lord God.
The Gurmukh enjoys the Lord, the ocean of peace. ||1||
My mind longs to meet my Beloved Lord.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 005

The Perfect Guru leads me to meet my Beloved; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to my Guru. ||1||Pause||
My body is over-flowing with corruption;
how can I meet my Perfect Beloved? ||2||
The virtuous ones obtain my Beloved;
I do not have these virtues. How can I meet Him, O my mother? ||3||
I am so tired of making all these efforts.
Please protect Nanak, the meek one, O my Lord. ||4||1||
Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:
My Lord God is so beautiful. I do not know His worth.
Abandoning my Lord God, I have become entangled in duality. ||1||
How can I meet with my Husband? I don't know.
She who pleases her Husband Lord is a happy soul-bride. She meets with her Husband Lord - she is so wise. ||1||Pause||
I am filled with faults; how can I attain my Husband Lord?
You have many loves, but I am not in Your thoughts, O my Husband Lord. ||2||
She who enjoys her Husband Lord, is the good soul-bride.
I don't have these virtues; what can I, the discarded bride, do? ||3||
The soul-bride continually, constantly enjoys her Husband Lord.
I have no good fortune; will He ever hold me close in His embrace? ||4||
You, O Husband Lord, are meritorious, while I am without merit.
I am worthless; please forgive Nanak, the meek. ||5||2||
Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Within my mind there is such a great yearning; how will I attain the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan?
I go and ask my True Guru; with the Guru's advice, I shall teach my foolish mind.
The foolish mind is instructed in the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and meditates forever on the Lord, Har, Har.
O Nanak, one who is blessed with the Mercy of my Beloved, focuses his consciousness on the Lord's Feet. ||1||
I dress myself in all sorts of robes for my Husband, so that my True Lord God will be pleased.
But my Beloved Husband Lord does not even cast a glance in my direction; how can I be consoled?
For His sake, I adorn myself with adornments, but my Husband is imbued with the love of another.
O Nanak, blessed, blessed, blessed is that soul-bride, who enjoys her True, Sublime Husband Lord. ||2||
I go and ask the fortunate, happy soul-bride, “How did you attain Him - your Husband Lord, my God?”
She answers, "My True Husband blessed me with His Mercy; I abandoned the distinction between mine and yours.
Dedicate everything, mind, body and soul, to the Lord God; this is the Path to meet Him, O sister.”
If her God gazes upon her with favor, O Nanak, her light merges into the Light. ||3||
I dedicate my mind and body to the one who brings me a message from my Lord God.
I wave the fan over him every day, serve him and carry water for him.
Constantly and continuously, I serve the Lord's humble servant, who recites to me the sermon of the Lord, Har, Har.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 006

Hail, hail unto the Guru, the Guru, the Perfect True Guru, who fulfills Nanak's heart's desires. ||4||
O Lord, let me meet the Guru, my best friend; meeting Him, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
I seek the Lord's sermon from the Guru, the True Guru; joining with Him, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Each and every day, forever, I sing the Lord's Praises; my mind lives by hearing Your Name.
O Nanak, that moment when I forget my Lord and Master - at that moment, my soul dies. ||5||
Everyone longs to see the Lord, but he alone sees Him, whom the Lord causes to see Him.
One upon whom my Beloved bestows His Glance of Grace, cherishes the Lord, Har, Har forever.
He alone cherishes the Lord, Har, Har, forever and ever, who meets my Perfect True Guru.
O Nanak, the Lord's humble servant and the Lord become One; meditating on the Lord, he blends with the Lord. ||6||1||3||
Wadahans, Fifth Mehl, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
His Darbaar, His Court, is the most lofty and exalted.
It has no end or limitations.
Millions, millions, tens of millions seek,
but they cannot find even a tiny bit of His Mansion. ||1||
What is that auspicious moment, when God is met? ||1||Pause||
Tens of thousands of devotees worship Him in adoration.
Tens of thousands of ascetics practice austere discipline.
Tens of thousands of Yogis practice Yoga.
Tens of thousands of pleasure seekers seek pleasure. ||2||
He dwells in each and every heart, but only a few know this.
Is there any friend who can rip apart the screen of separation?
I can only make the effort, if the Lord is merciful to me.
I sacrifice my body and soul to Him. ||3||
After wandering around for so long, I have finally come to the Saints;
all of my pains and doubts have been eradicated.
God summoned me to the Mansion of His Presence, and blessed me with the Ambrosial Nectar of His Name.
Says Nanak, my God is lofty and exalted. ||4||1||
Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
Blessed is that time, when the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is given;
I am a sacrifice to the feet of the True Guru. ||1||
You are the Giver of souls, O my Beloved God.
My soul lives by reflecting upon the Name of God. ||1||Pause||
True is Your Mantra, Ambrosial is the Bani of Your Word.
Cooling and soothing is Your Presence, all-knowing is Your gaze. ||2||
True is Your Command; You sit upon the eternal throne.
My eternal God does not come or go. ||3||
You are the Merciful Master; I am Your humble servant.
O Nanak, the Lord and Master is totally permeating and pervading everywhere. ||4||2||
Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
You are infinite - only a few know this.
By Guru's Grace, some come to understand You through the Word of the Shabad. ||1||
Your servant offers this prayer, O Beloved:

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 007

I live by meditating on Your Feet, God. ||1||Pause||
O my Merciful and Almighty God, O Great Giver,
he alone knows You, whom You so bless. ||2||
Forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to You.
Here and hereafter, I seek Your Protection. ||3||
I am without virtue; I know none of Your Glorious Virtues.
O Nanak, seeing the Holy Saint, my mind is imbued with You. ||4||3||
Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
God is perfect - He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
He blesses us with the gift of the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||1||
Bless me with Your Grace, God, O Merciful to the meek.
I seek Your Protection, O Perfect Lord, Sustainer of the World. ||1||Pause||
He is totally pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky.
God is near at hand, not far away. ||2||
One whom He blesses with His Grace, meditates on Him.
Twenty-four hours a day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3||
He cherishes and sustains all beings and creatures.
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's Door. ||4||4||
Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
You are the Great Giver, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
God, the Perfect Lord and Master, is permeating and pervading in all. ||1||
The Name of my Beloved God is my only support.
I live by hearing, continually hearing Your Name. ||1||Pause||
I seek Your Sanctuary, O my Perfect True Guru.
My mind is purified by the dust of the Saints. ||2||
I have enshrined His Lotus Feet within my heart.
I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||3||
Show mercy unto me, that I may sing Your Glorious Praises.
O Nanak, chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I obtain peace. ||4||5||
Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, drink in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord.
The soul does not die, nor does it ever waste away. ||1||
By great good fortune, one meets the Perfect Guru.
By Guru's Grace, one meditates on God. ||1||Pause||
The Lord is the jewel, the pearl, the gem, the diamond.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God, I am in ecstasy. ||2||
Wherever I look, I see the Sanctuary of the Holy.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, my soul becomes immaculately pure. ||3||
Within each and every heart, dwells my Lord and Master.
O Nanak, one obtains the Naam, the Name of the Lord, when God bestows His Mercy. ||4||6||
Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
Do not forget me, O God, Merciful to the meek.
I seek Your Sanctuary, O Perfect, Compassionate Lord. ||1||Pause||
Wherever You come to mind, that place is blessed.
The moment I forget You, I am stricken with regret. ||1||
All beings are Yours; You are their constant companion.
Please, give me Your hand, and pull me up out of this world-ocean. ||2||
Coming and going are by Your Will.
One whom You save is not afflicted by suffering. ||3||
You are the One and only Lord and Master; there is no other.
Nanak offers this prayer with his palms pressed together. ||4||7||
Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
When You allow Yourself to be known, then we know You.
We chant Your Name, which You have given to us. ||1||
You are wonderful! Your creative potency is amazing! ||1||Pause||

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 008

You Yourself are the Cause of causes, You Yourself are the Creator.
By Your Will, we are born, and by Your Will, we die. ||2||
Your Name is the Support of our mind and body.
This is Your blessing to Nanak, Your slave. ||3||8||
Wadahans, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Deep within me, there is a longing to meet my Beloved; how can I attain my Perfect Guru?
Even though a baby may play hundreds of games, he cannot survive without milk.
The hunger within me is not satisfied, O my friend, even though I am served hundreds of dishes.
My mind and body are filled with love for my Beloved; how can my soul find relief, without the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan? ||1||
Listen, O my dear friends and siblings - lead me to my True Friend, the Giver of peace.
He knows all the troubles of my soul; every day, he tells me stories of the Lord.
I cannot live without Him, even for an instant. I cry out for Him, just as the song-bird cries for the drop of water.
Which of Your Glorious Virtues should I sing? You save even worthless beings like me. ||2||
I have become depressed, waiting for my Husband Lord, O my friend; when shall my eyes behold my Husband?
I have forgotten how to enjoy all pleasures; without my Husband Lord, they are of no use at all.
These clothes do not please my body; I cannot dress myself.
I bow to those friends of mine, who have enjoyed their Beloved Husband Lord. ||3||
I have adorned myself with all sorts of decorations, O my friend, but without my Husband Lord, they are of no use at all.
When my Husband does not care for me, O my friend, then my youth passes, totally useless.
Blessed, blessed are the happy soul-brides, O my friend, who are blended with their Husband Lord.
I am a sacrifice to those happy soul-brides; I wash their feet again and again. ||4||
As long as I suffered from duality and doubt, O my friend, I thought God was far away.
But when I met the Perfect True Guru, O my friend, then all my hopes and desires were fulfilled.
I have obtained all pleasures and comforts, O my friend; my Husband Lord is all-pervading everywhere.
Servant Nanak enjoys the Lord's Love, O my friend; I fall at the feet of the Guru, the True Guru. ||5||1||9||
Wadahans, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
True is the Bani of His Word, and True is the melody; True is contemplative meditation on the Word of the Shabad.
Night and day, I praise the True Lord. Blessed, blessed is my great good fortune. ||1||
O my mind, let yourself be a sacrifice to the True Name.
If you become the slave of the Lord's slaves, you shall obtain the True Name. ||1||Pause||

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 009

True is the tongue which is imbued with Truth, and true are the mind and body.
By praising any other than the True Lord, one's whole life is wasted. ||2||
Let Truth be the farm, Truth the seed, and Truth the merchandise you trade.
Night and day, you shall earn the profit of the Lord's Name; you shall have the treasure overflowing with the wealth of devotional worship. ||3||
Let Truth be your food, and let Truth be your clothes; let your True Support be the Name of the Lord.
One who is so blessed by the Lord, obtains a seat in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||4||
In Truth we come, and in Truth we go, and then, we are not consigned to reincarnation again.
The Gurmukhs are hailed as True in the True Court; they merge in the True Lord. ||5||
Deep within they are True, and their minds are True; they sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
In the true place, they praise the True Lord; I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||6||
True is the time, and true is the moment, when one falls in love with the True Lord.
Then, he sees Truth, and speaks the Truth; he realizes the True Lord pervading the entire Universe. ||7||
O Nanak, one merges with the True Lord, when He merges with Himself.
As it pleases Him, He preserves us; He Himself ordains His Will. ||8||1||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
His mind wanders in the ten directions - how can he sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord?
The sensory organs are totally engrossed in sensuality; sexual desire and anger constantly afflict him. ||1||
Waaho! Waaho! Hail! Hail! Chant His Glorious Praises.
The Lord's Name is so difficult to obtain in this age; under Guru's Instruction, drink in the subtle essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Remembering the Word of the Shabad, the mind becomes immaculately pure, and then, one sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Under Guru's Instruction, one comes to understand his own self, and then, he comes to dwell in the home of his inner self. ||2||
O my mind, be imbued forever with the Lord's Love, and sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
The Immaculate Lord is forever the Giver of peace; from Him, one receives the fruits of his heart's desires. ||3||
I am lowly, but I have been exalted, entering the Sanctuary of the Lord.
He has lifted up the sinking stone; True is His glorious greatness. ||4||
From poison, I have been transformed into Ambrosial Nectar; under Guru's Instruction, I have obtained wisdom.
From bitter herbs, I have been transformed into sandalwood; this fragrance permeates me deep within. ||5||
This human birth is so precious; one must earn the right to come into the world.
By perfect destiny, I met the True Guru, and I meditate on the Lord's Name. ||6||
The self-willed manmukhs are deluded; attached to corruption, they waste away their lives in vain.
The Name of the Lord is forever an ocean of peace, but the manmukhs do not love the Word of the Shabad. ||7||
Everyone can chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har with their mouths, but only a few enshrine it within their hearts.
O Nanak, those who enshrine the Lord within their hearts, attain liberation and emancipation. ||8||2||
Wadahans, First Mehl, Chhant:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Why bother to wash the body, polluted by falsehood?
One's cleansing bath is only approved, if he practices Truth.
When there is Truth within the heart, then one becomes True, and obtains the True Lord.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 010

Without pre-ordained destiny, understanding is not attained; talking and babbling, one wastes his life away.
Wherever you go and sit, speak well, and write the Word of the Shabad in your consciousness.
Why bother to wash the body which is polluted by falsehood? ||1||
When I have spoken, I spoke as You made me speak.
The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is pleasing to my mind.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, seems so sweet to my mind; it has destroyed the dwelling of pain.
Peace came to dwell in my mind, when You gave the Order.
It is Yours to bestow Your Grace, and it is mine to speak this prayer; You created Yourself.
When I have spoken, I spoke as You made me speak. ||2||
The Lord and Master gives them their turn, according to the deeds they have done.
Do not speak ill of others, or get involved in arguments.
Do not get into arguments with the Lord, or you shall ruin yourself.
If you challenge the One, with whom you must abide, you will cry in the end.
Be satisfied with what God gives you; tell your mind not to complain uselessly.
The Lord and Master gives them their turn, according to the deeds they have done. ||3||
He Himself created all, and He blesses then with His Glance of Grace.
No one asks for that which is bitter; everyone asks for sweets.
Let everyone ask for sweets, and behold, it is as the Lord wills.
Giving donations to charity, and performing various religious rituals are not equal to the contemplation of the Naam.
O Nanak, those who are blessed with the Naam have had such good karma pre-ordained.
He Himself created all, and He blesses them with His Glance of Grace. ||4||1||
Wadahans, First Mehl:
Show mercy to me, that I may chant Your Name.
You Yourself created all, and You are pervading among all.
You Yourself are pervading among all, and You link them to their tasks.
Some, You have made kings, while others go about begging.
You have made greed and emotional attachment seem sweet; they are deluded by this delusion.
Be ever merciful to me; only then can I chant Your Name. ||1||
Your Name is True, and ever pleasing to my mind.
My pains are dispelled, and I am permeated with peace.
The angels, the mortals and the silent sages sing of You.
The angels, the mortals and the silent sages sing of You; they are pleasing to Your Mind.
Enticed by Maya, they do not remember the Lord, and they waste away their lives in vain.
Some fools and idiots never think of the Lord; whoever has come, shall have to go.
Your Name is True, and ever pleasing to my mind. ||2||
Beauteous is Your time, O Lord; the Bani of Your Word is Ambrosial Nectar.
Your servants serve You with love; these mortals are attached to Your essence.
Those mortals are attached to Your essence, who are blessed with the Ambrosial Name.
Those who are imbued with Your Name, prosper more and more, day by day.
Some do not practice good deeds, or live righteously; nor do they practice self-restraint. They do not realize the One Lord.
Ever beauteous is Your time, O Lord; the Bani of Your Word is Ambrosial Nectar. ||3||
I am a sacrifice to the True Name.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 011

Your rule shall never end.
Your rule is eternal and unchanging; it shall never come to an end.
He alone becomes Your servant, who contemplates You in peaceful ease.
Enemies and pains shall never touch him, and sin shall never draw near him.
I am forever a sacrifice to the One Lord, and Your Name. ||4||
Throughout the ages, Your devotees sing the Kirtan of Your Praises, O Lord Master, at Your Door.
They meditate on the One True Lord.
Only then do they meditate on the True Lord, when they enshrine Him in their minds.
Doubt and delusion are Your making; when these are dispelled,
then, by Guru's Grace, You grant Your Grace, and save them from the noose of Death.
Throughout the ages, they are Your devotees. ||5||
O my Great Lord and Master, You are unfathomable and infinite.
How should I make and offer my prayer? I do not know what to say.
If You bless me with Your Glance of Grace, I realize the Truth.
Only then do I come to realize the Truth, when You Yourself instruct me.
The pain and hunger of the world are Your making; dispel this doubt.
Prays Nanak, ones skepticism is taken away, when he understands the Guru's wisdom.
The Great Lord Master is unfathomable and infinite. ||6||
Your eyes are so beautiful, and Your teeth are delightful.
Your nose is so graceful, and Your hair is so long.
Your body is so precious, cast in gold.
His body is cast in gold, and He wears Krishna's mala; meditate on Him, O sisters.
You shall not have to stand at Death's door, O sisters, if you listen to these teachings.
From a crane, you shall be transformed into a swan, and the filth of your mind shall be removed.
Your eyes are so beautiful, and Your teeth are delightful. ||7||
Your walk is so graceful, and Your speech is so sweet.
You coo like a songbird, and your youthful beauty is alluring.
Your youthful beauty is so alluring; it pleases You, and it fulfills the heart's desires.
Like an elephant, You step with Your Feet so carefully; You are satisfied with Yourself.
She who is imbued with the Love of such a Great Lord, flows intoxicated, like the waters of the Ganges.
Prays Nanak, I am Your slave, O Lord; Your walk is so graceful, and Your speech is so sweet. ||8||2||
Wadahans, Third Mehl, Chhant:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Let yourself be imbued with the Love of your Husband Lord, O beautiful, mortal bride.
Let yourself remain merged in the True Word of the Shabad, O mortal bride; savor and enjoy the Love of your Beloved Husband Lord.
The Husband Lord embellishes His beloved bride with His True Love; she is in love with the Lord, Har, Har.
Renouncing her self-centeredness, she attains her Husband Lord, and remains merged in the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
That soul bride is adorned, who is attracted by His Love, and who treasures the Love of her Beloved within her heart.
O Nanak, the Lord blends that soul bride with Himself; the True King adorns her. ||1||
O worthless bride, see your Husband Lord ever-present.
One who, as Gurmukh, enjoys her Husband Lord, O mortal bride, knows Him to be all-pervading everywhere.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 012

The Lord is all-pervading everywhere; behold Him ever-present. Throughout the ages, know Him as the One.
The young, innocent bride enjoys her Husband Lord; she meets Him, the Architect of karma.
One who tastes the sublime essence of the Lord, and utters the sublime Word of the Shabad, remains immersed in the Lord's Ambrosial Pool.
O Nanak, that soul bride is pleasing to her Husband Lord, who, through the Shabad, remains in His Presence. ||2||
Go and ask the happy soul-brides, O mortal bride, who have eradicated their self-conceit from within.
Those who have not eradicated their self-conceit, O mortal bride, do not realize the Hukam of their Husband Lord's Command.
Those who eradicate their self-conceit, obtain their Husband Lord; they delight in His Love.
Ever imbued with His Love, in perfect poise and grace, she repeats His Name, night and day.
Very fortunate is that bride, who focuses her consciousness on Him; her Lord's Love is so sweet to her.
O Nanak, that soul-bride who is adorned with Truth, is imbued with her Lord's Love, in the state of perfect poise. ||3||
Overcome your egotism, O mortal bride, and walk in the Guru's Way.
Thus you shall ever enjoy your Husband Lord, O mortal bride, and obtain an abode in the home of your own inner being.
Obtaining an abode in the home of her inner being, she vibrates the Word of the Shabad, and is a happy soul-bride forever.
The Husband Lord is delightful, and forever young; night and day, He embellishes His bride.
Her Husband Lord activates the destiny written on her forehead, and she is adorned with the True Shabad.
O Nanak, the soul-bride is imbued with the Love of the Lord, when she walks according to the Will of the True Guru. ||4||1||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
All dealings of the Gurmukh are good, if they are accomplished with poise and grace.
Night and day, he repeats the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and he earns his profits, drinking in the subtle essence of the Lord.
He earns the profit of the subtle essence of the Lord, meditating on the Lord, and repeating the Naam, night and day.
He gathers in merits, and eliminates demerits, and realizes his own self.
Under Guru's Instruction, he is blessed with glorious greatness; he drinks in the essence of the True Word of the Shabad.
O Nanak, devotional worship of the Lord is wonderful, but only a few Gurmukhs perform it. ||1||
As Gurmukh, plant the crop of the Lord within the field of your body, and let it grow.
Within the home of your own being, enjoy the Lord's subtle essence, and earn profits in the world hereafter.
This profit is earned by enshrining the Lord within your mind; blessed is this farming and trade.
Meditating on the Lord's Name, and enshrining Him within your mind, you shall come to understand the Guru's Teachings.
The self-willed manmukhs have grown weary of this farming and trade; their hunger and thirst will not go away.
O Nanak, plant the seed of the Name within your mind, and adorn yourself with the True Word of the Shabad. ||2||
Those humble beings engage in the Lord's Trade, who have the jewel of such pre-ordained destiny upon their foreheads.
Under Guru's Instruction, the soul dwells in the home of the self; through the True Word of the Shabad, she becomes unattached.
By the destiny written upon their foreheads, they become truly unattached, and by reflective meditation, they are imbued with Truth.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the whole world is insane; through the Shabad, the ego is conquered.
Attached to the True Word of the Shabad, wisdom comes forth. The Gurmukh obtains the Naam, the Name of the Husband Lord.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 013

O Nanak, through the Shabad, one meets the Lord, the Destroyer of fear, and by the destiny written on her forehead, she enjoys Him. ||3||
All farming and trading is by Hukam of His Will; surrendering to the Lord's Will, glorious greatness is obtained.
Under Guru's Instruction, one comes to understand the Lord's Will, and by His Will, he is united in His Union.
By His Will, one merges and easily blends with Him. The Shabads of the Guru are incomparable.
Through the Guru, true greatness is obtained, and one is embellished with Truth.
He finds the Destroyer of fear, and eradicates his self-conceit; as Gurmukh, he is united in His Union.
Says Nanak, the Name of the immaculate, inaccessible, unfathomable Commander is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||4||2||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
O my mind, contemplate the True Lord forever.
Dwell in peace in the home of your own self, and the Messenger of Death shall not touch you.
The noose of the Messenger of Death shall not touch you, when you embrace love for the True Word of the Shabad.
Ever imbued with the True Lord, the mind becomes immaculate, and its coming and going is ended.
The love of duality and doubt have ruined the self-willed manmukh, who is lured away by the Messenger of Death.
Says Nanak, listen, O my mind: contemplate the True Lord forever. ||1||
O my mind, the treasure is within you; do not search for it on the outside.
Eat only that which is pleasing to the Lord, and as Gurmukh, receive the blessing of His Glance of Grace.
As Gurmukh, receive the blessing of His Glance of Grace, O my mind; the Name of the Lord, your help and support, is within you.
The self-willed manmukhs are blind, and devoid of wisdom; they are ruined by the love of duality.
Without the Name, no one is emancipated. All are bound by the Messenger of Death.
O Nanak, the treasure is within you; do not search for it on the outside. ||2||
O my mind, obtaining the blessing of this human birth, some are engaged in the trade of Truth.
They serve their True Guru, and the Infinite Word of the Shabad resounds within them.
Within them is the Infinite Shabad, and the Beloved Naam, the Name of the Lord; through the Naam, the nine treasures are obtained.
The self-willed manmukhs are engrossed in emotional attachment to Maya; they suffer in pain, and through duality, they lose their honor.
But those who conquer their ego, and merge in the True Shabad, are totally imbued with Truth.
O Nanak, it is so difficult to obtain this human life; the True Guru imparts this understanding. ||3||
O my mind, those who serve their True Guru are the most fortunate beings.
Those who conquer their minds are beings of renunciation and detachment.
They are beings of renunciation and detachment, who lovingly focus their consciousness on the True Lord; they realize and understand their own selves.
Their intellect is steady, deep and profound; as Gurmukh, they naturally chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Some are lovers of beautiful young women; emotional attachment to Maya is very dear to them. The unfortunate self-willed manmukhs remain asleep.
O Nanak, those who intuitively serve their Guru, have perfect destiny. ||4||3||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Purchase the jewel, the invaluable treasure; the True Guru has given this understanding.
The profit of profits is the devotional worship of the Lord; one's virtues merge into the virtues of the Lord.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 014

One's virtues merge into the virtues of the Lord; he comes to understand his own self. He earns the profit of devotional worship in this world.
Without devotion, there is no peace; through duality, one's honor is lost, but under Guru's Instruction, he is blessed with the Support of the Naam.
He ever earns the profit of the merchandise of the Naam, whom the Lord employs in this Trade.
He purchases the jewel, the invaluable treasure, unto whom the True Guru has given this understanding. ||1||
The love of Maya is totally painful; this is a bad deal.
Speaking falsehood, one eats poison, and the evil within increases greatly.
The evil within increases greatly, in this world of doubt; without the Name, one's honor is lost.
Reading and studying, the religious scholars argue and debate; but without understanding, there is no peace.
Their comings and goings never end; emotional attachment to Maya is dear to them.
The love of Maya is totally painful; this is a bad deal. ||2||
The counterfeit and the genuine are all assayed in the Court of the True Lord.
The counterfeit are cast out of the Court, and they stand there, crying out in misery.
They stand there, crying out in misery; the foolish, idiotic, self-willed manmukhs have wasted their lives.
Maya is the poison which has deluded the world; it does not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
The self-willed manmukhs are resentful toward the Saints; they harvest only pain in this world.
The counterfeit and the genuine are assayed in that True Court of the Lord. ||3||
He Himself acts; who else should I ask? No one else can do anything.
As He pleases, He engages us; such is His glorious greatness.
Such is His glorious greatness - He Himself causes all to act; no one is a warrior or a coward.
The Life of the World, the Great Giver, the Architect of karma - He Himself grants forgiveness.
By Guru's Grace, self-conceit is eradicated, O Nanak, and through the Naam, honor is obtained.
He Himself acts; who else should I ask? No one else can do anything. ||4||4||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
The True merchandise is the Lord's Name. This is the true trade.
Under Guru's Instruction, we trade in the Lord's Name; its value is very great.
The value of this true trade is very great; those who are engaged in the true trade are very fortunate.
Inwardly and outwardly, they are imbued with devotion, and they enshrine love for the True Name.
One who is blessed with the Lord's Favor, obtains Truth, and reflects upon the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Name find peace; they deal only in the True Name. ||1||
Egotistical involvement in Maya is filth; Maya is overflowing with filth.
Under Guru's Instruction, the mind is made pure and the tongue tastes the subtle essence of the Lord.
The tongue tastes the subtle essence of the Lord, and deep within, the heart is drenched with His Love, contemplating the True Word of the Shabad.
Deep within, the well of the heart is overflowing with the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar; the water-carrier draws and drinks in the water of the Shabad.
One who is blessed with the Lord's favor is attuned to the Truth; with his tongue, he chants the Lord's Name.
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, are immaculate. The others are full of the filth of egotism. ||2||
All the religious scholars and astrologers read and study, and argue and shout. Who are they trying to teach?

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 015

The filth of attachment to Maya clings to their hearts; they deal in Maya alone.
They love to deal in Maya in this world; coming and going, they suffer in pain.
The worm of poison is addicted to poison; it is immersed in manure.
He does what is pre-ordained for him; no one can erase his destiny.
O Nanak, imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, lasting peace is found; the ignorant fools die screaming. ||3||
Their minds are colored by emotional attachment to Maya; because of this emotional attachment, they do not understand.
The soul of the Gurmukh is imbued with the Lord's Love; the love of duality departs.
The love of duality departs, and the soul merges in Truth; the warehouse is overflowing with Truth.
One who becomes Gurmukh, comes to understand; the Lord embellishes him with Truth.
He alone merges with the Lord, whom the Lord causes to merge; nothing else can be said or done.
O Nanak, without the Name, one is deluded by doubt; but some, imbued with the Name, enshrine love for the Lord. ||4||5||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
O my mind, the world comes and goes in birth and death; only the True Name shall emancipate you in the end.
When the True Lord Himself grants forgiveness, then one does not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation again.
He does not have to enter the cycle of reincarnation again, and he is emancipated in the end; as Gurmukh, he obtains glorious greatness.
Imbued with love for the True Lord, he is intoxicated with celestial bliss, and he remains absorbed in the Celestial Lord.
The True Lord is pleasing to his mind; he enshrines the True Lord in his mind; attuned to the Word of the Shabad, he is emancipated in the end.
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam, merge in the True Lord; they are not cast into the terrifying world-ocean again. ||1||
Emotional attachment to Maya is total madness; through the love of duality, one is ruined.
Mother and father - all are subject to this love; in this love, they are entangled.
They are entangled in this love, on account of their past actions, which no one can erase.
The One who created the Universe, beholds it; no other is as great as He.
The blind, self-willed manmukh is consumed by his burning rage; without the Word of the Shabad, peace is not obtained.
O Nanak, without the Name, everyone is deluded, ruined by emotional attachment to Maya. ||2||
Seeing that this world on fire, I have hurried to the Sanctuary of the Lord.
I offer my prayer to the Perfect Guru: please save me, and bless me with Your glorious greatness.
Preserve me in Your Sanctuary, and bless me with the glorious greatness of the Name of the Lord; there is no other Giver as great as You.
Those who are engaged in serving You are very fortunate; throughout the ages, they know the One Lord.
You may practice celibacy, truth, austere self-discipline and rituals, but without the Guru, you shall not be emancipated.
O Nanak, he alone understands the Word of the Shabad, who goes and seeks the Lord's Sanctuary. ||3||
That understanding, imparted by the Lord, wells up; there is no other understanding.
Deep within, and beyond as well, You alone are, O Lord; You Yourself impart this understanding.
One whom He Himself blesses with this understanding, does not love any other. As Gurmukh, he tastes the subtle essence of the Lord.
In the True Court, he is forever True; with love, he chants the True Word of the Shabad.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 016

Within his home, he finds the home of his own being; the True Guru blesses him with glorious greatness.
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; their understanding is true, and approved. ||4||6||
Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, Chhant:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
My mind, my mind - the True Guru has blessed it with the Lord's Love.
He has enshrined the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, within my mind.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, dwells within my mind; He is the Destroyer of all pain.
By great good fortune, I have obtained the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan; blessed, blessed is my True Guru.
While standing up and sitting down, I serve the True Guru; serving Him, I have found peace.
My mind, my mind - the True Guru has blessed it with the Lord's Love. ||1||
I live, I live, and I blossom forth, beholding the True Guru.
The Name of the Lord, the Name of the Lord, He has implanted within me; chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I blossom forth.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the heart-lotus blossoms forth, and through the Name of the Lord, I have obtained the nine treasures.
The disease of egotism has been eradicated, suffering has been eliminated, and I have entered the Lord's state of celestial Samaadhi.
I have obtained the glorious greatness of Name of the Lord from the True Guru; beholding the Divine True Guru, my mind is at peace.
I live, I live, and I blossom forth, beholding the True Guru. ||2||
If only someone would come, if only someone would come, and lead me to meet my Perfect True Guru.
My mind and body, my mind and body - I cut my body into pieces, and I dedicate these to Him.
Cutting my mind and body apart, cutting them into pieces, I offer these to the one, who recites to me the Words of the True Guru.
My unattached mind has renounced the world; obtaining the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan, it has found peace.
O Lord, Har, Har, O Giver of Peace, please, grant Your Grace, and bless me with the dust of the feet of the True Guru.
If only someone would come, if only someone would come, and lead me to meet my Perfect True Guru. ||3||
A Giver as great as the Guru, as great as the Guru - I cannot see any other.
He blesses me with the gift of the Lord's Name, the gift of the Lord's Name; He is the Immaculate Lord God.
Those who worship in adoration the Name of the Lord, Har, Har - their pain, doubts and fears are dispelled.
Through their loving service, those very fortunate ones, whose minds are attached to the Guru's Feet, meet Him.
Says Nanak, the Lord Himself causes us to meet the Guru; meeting the Almighty True Guru, peace is obtained.
A Giver as great as the Guru, as great as the Guru - I cannot see any other. ||4||1||
Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:
Without the Guru, I am - without the Guru, I am totally dishonored.
The Life of the World, the Life of the World, the Great Giver has led me to meet and merge with the Guru.
Meeting with the True Guru, I have merged into the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and meditate on it.
I was seeking and searching for Him, the Lord, my best friend, and I have found Him within the home of my own being.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 017

I see the One Lord, and I know the One Lord; I realize Him within my soul.
Without the Guru, I am - without the Guru, I am totally dishonored. ||1||
Those who have found the True Guru, the True Guru, the Lord God unites them in His Union.
Their feet, their feet, I adore; I fall at their feet.
O Lord, Har, Har, I adore the feet of those who meditate on the True Guru, and the Almighty Lord God.
You are the Greatest Giver, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; please, reward my faith, O Lord King.
Meeting the Gursikh, my faith is rewarded; night and day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Those who have found the True Guru, the True Guru, the Lord God unites them in His Union. ||2||
I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to the Gursikhs, my dear friends.
They chant the Lord's Name, the Lord's Name; the Beloved Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my only Support.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is the companion of my breath of life; without it, I cannot live for an instant or a moment.
The Lord, Har, Har, the Giver of peace, shows His Mercy, and the Gurmukh drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar.
The Lord blesses him with faith, and unites him in His Union; He Himself adorns him.
I am a sacrifice, I am a sacrifice to the Gursikhs, my dear friends. ||3||
The Lord Himself, the Lord Himself, is the Immaculate Almighty Lord God.
The Lord Himself, the Lord Himself, unites us with Himself; that which He does, comes to pass.
Whatever is pleasing to the Lord God, that alone comes to pass; nothing else can be done.
Even by very clever tricks, He cannot be obtained; all have grown weary of practicing cleverness.
By Guru's Grace, servant Nanak beholds the Lord; without the Lord, I have no other at all.
The Lord Himself, the Lord Himself, is the Immaculate Almighty Lord God. ||4||2||
Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:
The Lord, the True Guru, the Lord, the True Guru - if only I could meet the Lord, the True Guru; His Lotus Feet are so pleasing to me.
The darkness of my ignorance was dispelled, when the Guru applied the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom to my eyes.
The True Guru has applied the healing ointment of spiritual wisdom to my eyes, and the darkness of ignorance has been dispelled.
Serving the Guru, I have obtained the supreme status; I meditate on the Lord with every breath, and every morsel of food.
Those, upon whom the Lord God has bestowed His Grace, are committed to the service of the True Guru.
The Lord, the True Guru, the Lord, the True Guru - if only I could meet the Lord, the True Guru; His Lotus Feet are so pleasing to me. ||1||
My True Guru, my True Guru is my Beloved; without the Guru, I cannot live.
He gives me the Name of the Lord, the Name of the Lord, my only companion in the end.
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is my only companion in the end; the Guru, the True Guru, has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me.
There, where neither child nor spouse shall accompany you, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har shall emancipate you.
Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, the Immaculate, Almighty Lord God; meeting Him, I meditate on the Name of the Lord.
My True Guru, my True Guru is my Beloved; without the Guru, I cannot live. ||2||

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 018

Those who have not obtained the Blessed Vision, the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the True Guru, the Almighty Lord God,
they have fruitlessly, fruitlessly wasted their whole lives in vain.
They have wasted away their whole lives in vain; those faithless cynics die a regretful death.
They have the jewel-treasure in their own homes, but still, they are hungry; those unlucky wretches are far away from the Lord.
O Lord, please, let me not see those who do not meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har,
and who have not obtained the Blessed Vision, the Blessed Vision of the Darshan of the True Guru, the Almighty Lord God. ||3||
I am a song-bird, I am a meek song-bird; I offer my prayer to the Lord.
If only I could meet the Guru, meet the Guru, O my Beloved; I dedicate myself to the devotional worship of the True Guru.
I worship the Lord, Har, Har, and the True Guru; the Lord God has granted His Grace.
Without the Guru, I have no other friend. The Guru, the True Guru, is my very breath of life.
Says Nanak, the Guru has implanted the Naam within me; the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the True Name.
I am a song-bird, I am a meek song-bird; I offer my prayer to the Lord. ||4||3||
Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:
O Lord, show Your Mercy, show Your Mercy, and let me meet the True Guru, the Giver of peace.
I go and ask, I go and ask from the True Guru, about the sermon of the Lord.
I ask about the sermon of the Lord from the True Guru, who has obtained the treasure of the Naam.
I bow at His Feet constantly, and pray to Him; the Guru, the True Guru, has shown me the Way.
He alone is a devotee, who looks alike upon pleasure and pain; he is imbued with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
O Lord, show Your Mercy, show Your Mercy, and let me meet the True Guru, the Giver of peace. ||1||
Listen as Gurmukh, listen as Gurmukh, to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; all egotism and sins are eradicated.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the troubles of the world vanish.
Those who contemplate the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, are rid of their suffering and sins.
The True Guru has placed the sword of spiritual wisdom in my hands; I have overcome and slain the Messenger of Death.
The Lord God, the Giver of peace, has granted His Grace, and I am rid of pain, sin and disease.
Listen as Gurmukh, listen as Gurmukh, to the Naam, the Name of the Lord; all egotism and sins are eradicated. ||2||
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is so pleasing to my mind.
Speaking as Gurmukh, speaking as Gurmukh, chanting the Naam, all disease is eradicated.
As Gurmukh, chanting the Naam, all disease is eradicated, and the body becomes free of disease.
Night and day, one remains absorbed in the Perfect Poise of Samaadhi; meditate on the Name of the Lord, the inaccessible and unfathomable Lord.
Whether of high or low social status, one who meditates on the Naam obtains the supreme treasure.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind. ||3||

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 019

Grant Your Grace, grant Your Grace, O Lord, and save me.
I am a sinner, I am a worthless sinner, I am meek, but I am Yours, O Lord.
I am a worthless sinner, and I am meek, but I am Yours; I seek Your Sanctuary, O Merciful Lord.
You are the Destroyer of pain, the Giver of absolute peace; I am a stone - carry me across and save me.
Meeting the True Guru, servant Nanak has obtained the subtle essence of the Lord; through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he is saved.
Grant Your Grace, grant Your Grace, Lord, and save me. ||4||4||
Wadahans, Fourth Mehl, Ghorees ~ The Wedding Procession Songs:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
This body-horse was created by the Lord.
Blessed is human life, which is obtained by virtuous actions.
Human life is obtained only by the most virtuous actions; this body is radiant and golden.
The Gurmukh is imbued with the deep red color of the poppy; he is imbued with the new color of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, Har.
This body is so very beautiful; it chants the Name of the Lord, and it is adorned with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
By great good fortune, the body is obtained; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is its companion; O servant Nanak, the Lord has created it. ||1||
I place the saddle on the body-horse, the saddle of realization of the Good Lord.
Riding this horse, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
The terrifying world-ocean is rocked by countless waves, but the Gurmukh is carried across.
Embarking upon the boat of the Lord, the very fortunate ones cross over; the Guru, the Boatman, carries them across through the Word of the Shabad.
Night and day, imbued with the Lord's Love, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Lord's lover loves the Lord.
Servant Nanak has obtained the state of Nirvaanaa, the state of ultimate goodness, the state of the Lord. ||2||
For a bridle in my mouth, the Guru has implanted spiritual wisdom within me.
He has applied the whip of the Lord's Love to my body.
Applying the whip of the Lord's Love to his body, the Gurmukh conquers his mind, and wins the battle of life.
He trains his untrained mind with the Word of the Shabad, and drinks in the rejuvenating essence of the Lord's Nectar.
Listen with your ears to the Word, uttered by the Guru, and attune your body-horse to the Lord's Love.
Servant Nanak has crossed over the long and treacherous path. ||3||
The transitory body-horse was created by the Lord.
Blessed, blessed is that body-horse which meditates on the Lord God.
Blessed and acclaimed is that body-horse which meditates on the Lord God; it is obtained by the merits of past actions.
Riding the body-horse, one crosses over the terrifying world ocean; the Gurmukh meets the Lord, the embodiment of supreme bliss.
The Lord, Har, Har, has perfectly arranged this wedding; the Saints have come together as a marriage party.
Servant Nanak has obtained the Lord as his Spouse; joining together, the Saints sing the songs of joy and congratulations. ||4||1||5||
Wadahans, Fourth Mehl:
The body is the Lord's horse; the Lord imbues it with the fresh and new color.
From the Guru, I ask for the Lord's spiritual wisdom.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 020

I ask for the Lord's spiritual wisdom, and the Lord's sublime sermon; through the Name of the Lord, I have come to know His value and His state.
The Creator has made my life totally fruitful; I chant the Name of the Lord.
The Lord's humble servant begs for the Lord's Name, for the Lord's Praises, and for devotional worship of the Lord God.
Says servant Nanak, listen, O Saints: devotional worship of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, is sublime and good. ||1||
The golden body is saddled with the saddle of gold.
It is adorned with the jewel of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Adorned with the jewel of the Naam, one obtains the Lord of the Universe; he meets the Lord, sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and obtains all sorts of comforts.
He obtains the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and he meditates on the Name of the Lord; by great good fortune, he assumes the color of the Lord's Love.
He meets his Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts; His body is ever-new, and His color is ever-fresh.
Nanak chants and realizes the Naam; he begs for the Name of the Lord, the Lord God. ||2||
The Guru has placed the reins in the mouth of the body-horse.
The mind-elephant is overpowered by the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
The bride obtains the supreme status, as her mind is brought under control; she is the beloved of her Husband Lord.
Deep within her inner self, she is in love with her Lord; in His home, she is beautiful - she is the bride of her Lord God.
Imbued with the Lord's Love, she is intuitively absorbed in bliss; she obtains the Lord God, Har, Har.
Servant Nanak, the Lord's slave, says that only the very fortunate meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||
The body is the horse, upon which one rides to the Lord.
Meeting with the True Guru, one sings the songs of joy.
Sing the songs of joy to the Lord, serve the Name of the Lord, and become the servant of His servants.
You shall go and enter the Mansion of the Beloved Lord's Presence, and lovingly enjoy His Love.
I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, so pleasing to my mind; following the Guru's Teachings, I meditate on the Lord within my mind.
The Lord has showered His Mercy upon servant Nanak; mounting the body-horse, he has found the Lord. ||4||2||6||
Raag Wadahans, Fifth Mehl, Chhant, Fourth House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Meeting with the Guru, I have found my Beloved Lord God.
I have made this body and mind a sacrifice, a sacrificial offering to my Lord.
Dedicating my body and mind, I have crossed over the terrifying world-ocean, and shaken off the fear of death.
Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, I have become immortal; my comings and goings have ceased.
I have found that home, of celestial Samaadhi; the Name of the Lord is my only Support.
Says Nanak, I enjoy peace and pleasure; I bow in reverence to the Perfect Guru. ||1||
Listen, O my friend and companion
\- the Guru has given the Mantra of the Shabad, the True Word of God.
Meditating on this True Shabad, I sing the songs of joy, and my mind is rid of anxiety.
I have found God, who never leaves; forever and ever, He sits with me.
One who is pleasing to God receives true honor. The Lord God blesses him with wealth.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 021

Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to such a humble being. O Lord, You bless all with Your bountiful blessings. ||2||
When it pleases You, then I am satisfied and satiated.
My mind is soothed and calmed, and all my thirst is quenched.
My mind is soothed and calmed, the burning has ceased, and I have found so many treasures.
All the Sikhs and servants partake of them; I am a sacrifice to my True Guru.
I have become fearless, imbued with the Love of my Lord Master, and I have shaken off the fear of death.
Slave Nanak, Your humble servant, lovingly embraces Your meditation; O Lord, be with me always. ||3||
My hopes and desires have been fulfilled, O my Lord.
I am worthless, without virtue; all virtues are Yours, O Lord.
All virtues are Yours, O my Lord and Master; with what mouth should I praise You?
You did not consider my merits and demerits; you forgave me in an instant.
I have obtained the nine treasures, congratulations are pouring in, and the unstruck melody resounds.
Says Nanak, I have found my Husband Lord within my own home, and all my anxiety is forgotten. ||4||1||
Shalok:
Why do you listen to falsehood? It shall vanish like a gust of wind.
O Nanak, those ears are acceptable, which listen to the True Master. ||1||
Chhant:
I am a sacrifice to those who listen with their ears to the Lord God.
Blissful and comfortable are those, who with their tongues chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
They are naturally embellished, with priceless virtues; they have come to save the world.
God's Feet are the boat, which carries so many across the terrifying world-ocean.
Those who are blessed with the favor of my Lord and Master, are not asked to render their account.
Says Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who listen to God with their ears. ||1||
Shalok:
With my eyes, I have seen the Light of the Lord, but my great thirst is not quenched.
O Nanak, those eyes are different, which behold my Husband Lord. ||1||
Chhant:
I am a sacrifice to those who have seen the Lord God.
In the True Court of the Lord, they are approved.
They are approved by their Lord and Master, and acclaimed as supreme; they are imbued with the Lord's Love.
They are satiated with the sublime essence of the Lord, and they merge in celestial peace; in each and every heart, they see the all-pervading Lord.
They alone are the friendly Saints, and they alone are happy, who are pleasing to their Lord and Master.
Says Nanak, I am forever a sacrifice to those who have seen the Lord God. ||2||
Shalok:
The body is blind, totally blind and desolate, without the Naam.
O Nanak, fruitful is the life of that being, within whose heart the True Lord and Master abides. ||1||
Chhant:
I am cut into pieces as a sacrifice, to those who have seen my Lord God.
His humble servants partake of the Sweet Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord, Har, Har, and are satiated.
The Lord seems sweet to their minds; God is merciful to them, His Ambrosial Nectar rains down upon them, and they are at peace.
Pain is eliminated and doubt is dispelled from the body; chanting the Name of the Lord of the World, their victory is celebrated.
They are rid of emotional attachment, their sins are erased, and their association with the five passions is broken off.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 022

Says Nanak, I am every bit a sacrifice to those, within whose hearts my Lord God abides. ||3||
Shalok:
Those who long for the Lord, are said to be His servants.
Nanak knows this Truth, that the Lord is not different from His Saint. ||1||
Chhant:
As water mixes and blends with water,
so does one's light mix and blend with the Lord's Light.
Merging with the perfect, all-powerful Creator, one comes to know his own self.
Then, he enters the celestial state of absolute Samaadhi, and speaks of the One and Only Lord.
He Himself is unmanifest, and He Himself is liberated; He Himself speaks of Himself.
O Nanak, doubt, fear and the limitations of the three qualities are dispelled, as one merges into the Lord, like water blending with water. ||4||2||
Wadahans, Fifth Mehl:
God is the all-powerful Creator, the Cause of causes.
He preserves the whole world, reaching out with His hand.
He is the all-powerful, safe Sanctuary, Lord and Master, Treasure of mercy, Giver of peace.
I am a sacrifice to Your slaves, who recognize only the One Lord.
His color and shape cannot be seen; His description is indescribable.
Prays Nanak, hear my prayer, O God, Almighty Creator, Cause of causes. ||1||
These beings are Yours; You are their Creator.
God is the Destroyer of pain, suffering and doubt.
Eliminate my doubt, pain and suffering in an instant, and preserve me, O Lord, Merciful to the meek.
You are mother, father and friend, O Lord and Master; the whole world is Your child, O Lord of the World.
One who comes seeking Your Sanctuary, obtains the treasure of virtue, and does not have to enter the cycle of birth and death again.
Prays Nanak, I am Your slave. All beings are Yours; You are their Creator. ||2||
Meditating on the Lord, twenty-four hours a day,
the fruits of the heart's desires are obtained.
Your heart's desires are obtained, meditating on God, and the fear of death is dispelled.
I sing of the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and my hopes are fulfilled.
Renouncing egotism, emotional attachment and all corruption, we become pleasing to the Mind of God.
Prays Nanak, day and night, meditate forever on the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||
At the Lord's Door, the unstruck melody resounds.
In each and every heart, the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, sings.
The Lord of the Universe sings, and abides forever; He is unfathomable, profoundly deep, lofty and exalted.
His virtues are infinite - none of them can be described. No one can reach Him.
He Himself creates, and He Himself sustains; all beings and creatures are fashioned by Him.
Prays Nanak, happiness comes from devotional worship of the Naam; at His Door, the unstruck melody resounds. ||4||3||
Raag Wadahans, First Mehl, Fifth House, Alaahanees ~ Songs Of Mourning:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Blessed is the Creator, the True King, who has linked the whole world to its tasks.
When one's time is up, and the measure is full, this dear soul is caught, and driven off.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 023

This dear soul is driven off, when the pre-ordained Order is received, and all the relatives cry out in mourning.
The body and the swan-soul are separated, when one's days are past and done, O my mother.
As is one's pre-ordained Destiny, so does one receive, according to one's past actions.
Blessed is the Creator, the True King, who has linked the whole world to its tasks. ||1||
Meditate in remembrance on the Lord and Master, O my Siblings of Destiny; everyone has to pass this way.
These false entanglements last for only a few days; then, one must surely move on to the world hereafter.
He must surely move on to the world hereafter, like a guest; so why does he indulge in ego?
Chant the Name of the Lord; serving Him, you shall obtain peace in His Court.
In the world hereafter, no one's commands will be obeyed. According to their actions, each and every person proceeds.
Meditate in remembrance on the Lord and Master, O my Siblings of Destiny; everyone has to pass this way. ||2||
Whatever pleases the Almighty Lord, that alone comes to pass; this world is an opportunity to please Him.
The True Creator Lord is pervading and permeating the water, the land and the air.
The True Creator Lord is invisible and infinite; His limits cannot be found.
Fruitful is the coming of those, who meditate single-mindedly on Him.
He destroys, and having destroyed, He creates; by His Order, He adorns us.
Whatever pleases the Almighty Lord, that alone comes to pass; this world is an opportunity to please Him. ||3||
Nanak: he alone truly weeps, O Baba, who weeps in the Lord's Love.
One who weeps for the sake of worldly objects, O Baba, weeps totally in vain.
This weeping is all in vain; the world forgets the Lord, and weeps for the sake of Maya.
He does not distinguish between good and evil, and wastes away this life in vain.
Everyone who comes here, shall have to leave; to act in ego is false.
Nanak: he alone truly weeps, O Baba, who weeps in the Lord's Love. ||4||1||
Wadahans, First Mehl:
Come, O my companions - let us meet together and dwell upon the True Name.
Let us weep over the body's separation from the Lord and Master; let us remember Him in contemplation.
Let us remember the Lord and Master in contemplation, and keep a watchful eye on the Path. We shall have to go there as well.
He who has created, also destroys; whatever happens is by His Will.
Whatever He has done, has come to pass; how can we command Him?
Come, O my companions - let us meet together and dwell upon the True Name. ||1||
Death would not be called bad, O people, if one knew how to truly die.
Serve your Almighty Lord and Master, and your path in the world hereafter will be easy.
Take this easy path, and you shall obtain the fruits of your rewards, and receive honor in the world hereafter.
Go there with your offering, and you shall merge in the True Lord; your honor shall be confirmed.
You shall obtain a place in the Mansion of the Lord Master's Presence; being pleasing to Him, you shall enjoy the pleasures of His Love.
Death would not be called bad, O people, if one knew how to truly die. ||2||
The death of brave heroes is blessed, if it is approved by God.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 024

They alone are acclaimed as brave warriors in the world hereafter, who receive true honor in the Court of the Lord.
They are honored in the Court of the Lord; they depart with honor, and they do not suffer pain in the world hereafter.
They meditate on the One Lord, and obtain the fruits of their rewards. Serving the Lord, their fear is dispelled.
Do not indulge in egotism, and dwell within your own mind; the Knower Himself knows everything.
The death of brave heroes is blessed, if it is approved by God. ||3||
Nanak: for whom should we mourn, O Baba? This world is merely a play.
The Lord Master beholds His work, and contemplates His creative potency.
He contemplates His creative potency, having established the Universe. He who created it, He alone knows.
He Himself beholds it, and He Himself understands it. He Himself realizes the Hukam of His Command.
He who created these things, He alone knows. His subtle form is infinite.
Nanak: for whom should we mourn, O Baba? This world is merely a play. ||4||2||
Wadahans, First Mehl, Dakhanee:
The True Creator Lord is True - know this well; He is the True Sustainer.
He Himself fashioned His Own Self; the True Lord is invisible and infinite.
He brought together, and then separated, the two grinding stones of the earth and the sky; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
He created the sun and the moon; night and day, they move according to His Thought. ||1||
O True Lord and Master, You are True. O True Lord, bless me with Your Love. ||Pause||
You created the Universe; You are the Giver of pain and pleasure.
You created woman and man, the love of poison, and emotional attachment to Maya.
The four sources of creation, and the power of the Word, are also of Your making. You give Support to all beings.
You have made the Creation as Your Throne; You are the True Judge. ||2||
You created comings and goings, but You are ever-stable, O Creator Lord.
In birth and death, in coming and going, this soul is held in bondage by corruption.
The evil person has forgotten the Naam; he has drowned - what can he do now?
Forsaking merit, he has loaded the poisonous cargo of demerits; he is a trader of sins. ||3||
The beloved soul has received the Call, the Command of the True Creator Lord.
The soul, the husband, has become separated from the body, the bride. The Lord is the Re-uniter of the separated ones.
No one cares for your beauty, O beautiful bride.; the Messenger of Death is bound only by the Lord Commander's Command.
He does not distinguish between young children and old people; he tears apart love and affection. ||4||
The nine doors are closed by the True Lord's Command, and the swan-soul takes flight into the skies.
The body-bride is separated, and defrauded by falsehood; she is now a widow - her husband's body lies dead in the courtyard.
The widow cries out at the door, “The light of my mind has gone out, O my mother, with his death.”
So cry out, O soul-brides of the Husband Lord, and dwell on the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. ||5||
Her loved one is cleansed, bathed in water, and dressed in silken robes.
The musicians play, and the Bani of the True Lord's Words are sung; the five relatives feel as if they too are dead, so deadened are their minds.
“Separation from my beloved is like death to me!” cries the widow. “My life in this world is cursed and worthless!”
But she alone is approved, who dies, while yet still alive; she lives for the sake of the Love of her Beloved. ||6||
So cry out in mourning, you who have come to mourn; this world is false and fraudulent.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 025

I too have been defrauded, chasing after worldly entanglements; my Husband Lord has forsaken me - I practice the evil deeds of a wife without a spouse.
In each and every home, are the brides of the Husband Lord; they gaze upon their Handsome Lord with love and affection.
I sing the Praises of my True Husband Lord, and through the Naam, the Name of my Husband Lord, I blossom forth. ||7||
Meeting with the Guru, the soul-bride's dress is transformed, and she is adorned with Truth.
Come and meet with me, O brides of the Lord; let's meditate in remembrance on the Creator Lord.
Through the Naam, the soul-bride becomes the Lord's favorite; she is adorned with Truth.
Do not sing the songs of separation, O Nanak; reflect upon God. ||8||3||
Wadahans, First Mehl:
The One who creates and dissolves the world - that Lord and Master alone knows His creative power.
Do not search for the True Lord far away; recognize the Word of the Shabad in each and every heart.
Recognize the Shabad, and do not think that the Lord is far away; He created this creation.
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one obtains peace; without the Naam, he plays a losing game.
The One who established the Universe, He alone knows the Way; what can anyone say?
The One who established the world cast the net of Maya over it; accept Him as your Lord and Master. ||1||
O Baba, he has come, and now he must get up and depart; this world is only a way-station.
Upon each and every head, the True Lord writes their destiny of pain and pleasure, according to their past actions.
He bestows pain and pleasure, according to the deeds done; the record of these deeds stays with the soul.
He does those deeds which the Creator Lord causes him to do; he attempts no other actions.
The Lord Himself is detached, while the world is entangled in conflict; by His Command, He emancipates it.
He may put this off today, but tomorrow he is seized by death; in love with duality, he practices corruption. ||2||
The path of death is dark and dismal; the way cannot be seen.
There is no water, no quilt or mattress, and no food there.
He receives no food there, no honor or water, no clothes or decorations.
The chain is put around his neck, and the Messenger of Death standing over his head strikes him; he cannot see the door of his home.
The seeds planted on this path do not sprout; bearing the weight of his sins upon his head, he regrets and repents.
Without the True Lord, no one is his friend; reflect upon this as true. ||3||
O Baba, they alone are known to truly weep and wail, who meet together and weep, chanting the Praises of the Lord.
Defrauded by Maya and worldly affairs, the weepers weep.
They weep for the sake of worldly affairs, and they do not wash off their own filth; the world is merely a dream.
Like the juggler, deceiving by his tricks, one is deluded by egotism, falsehood and illusion.
The Lord Himself reveals the Path; He Himself is the Doer of deeds.
Those who are imbued with the Naam, are protected by the Perfect Guru, O Nanak; they merge in celestial bliss. ||4||4||
Wadahans, First Mehl:
O Baba, whoever has come, will rise up and leave; this world is merely a false show.
One's true home is obtained by serving the True Lord; real Truth is obtained by being truthful.
By falsehood and greed, no place of rest is found, and no place in the world hereafter is obtained.
No one invites him to come in and sit down. He is like a crow in a deserted home.
Trapped by birth and death, he is separated from the Lord for such a long time; the whole world is wasting away.
Greed, worldly entanglements and Maya deceive the world. Death hovers over its head, and causes it to weep. ||1||

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 026

Come, O Baba, and Siblings of Destiny - let's join together; take me in your arms, and bless me with your prayers.
O Baba, union with the True Lord cannot be broken; bless me with your prayers for union with my Beloved.
Bless me with your prayers, that I may perform devotional worship service to my Lord; for those already united with Him, what is there to unite?
Some have wandered away from the Name of the Lord, and lost the Path. The Word of the Guru's Shabad is the true game.
Do not go on Death's path; remain merged in the Word of the Shabad, the true form throughout the ages.
Through good fortune, we meet such friends and relatives, who meet with the Guru, and escape the noose of Death. ||2||
O Baba, we come into the world naked, into pain and pleasure, according to the record of our account.
The call of our pre-ordained destiny cannot be altered; it follows from our past actions.
The True Lord sits and writes of ambrosial nectar, and bitter poison; as the Lord attaches us, so are we attached.
The Charmer, Maya, has worked her charms, and the multi-colored thread is around everyone's neck.
Through shallow intellect, the mind becomes shallow, and one eats the fly, along with the sweets.
Contrary to custom, he comes into the Dark Age of Kali Yuga naked, and naked he is bound down and sent away again. ||3||
O Baba, weep and mourn if you must; the beloved soul is bound and driven off.
The pre-ordained record of destiny cannot be erased; the summons has come from the Lord's Court.
The messenger comes, when it pleases the Lord, and the mourners begin to mourn.
Sons, brothers, nephews and very dear friends weep and wail.
Let him weep, who weeps in the Fear of God, cherishing the virtues of God. No one dies with the dead.
O Nanak, throughout the ages, they are known as wise, who weep, remembering the True Lord. ||4||5||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Praise God, the True Lord; He is all-powerful to do all things.
The soul-bride shall never be a widow, and she shall never have to endure suffering.
She shall never suffer - night and day, she enjoys pleasures; that soul-bride merges in the Mansion of her Lord's Presence.
She knows her Beloved, the Architect of karma, and she speaks words of ambrosial sweetness.
The virtuous soul-brides dwell on the Lord's virtues; they keep their Husband Lord in their remembrance, and so they never suffer separation from Him.
So praise your True Husband Lord, who is all-powerful to do all things. ||1||
The True Lord and Master is realized through the Word of His Shabad; He blends all with Himself.
That soul-bride is imbued with the Love of her Husband Lord, who banishes her self-conceit from within.
Eradicating her ego from within herself, death shall not consume her again; as Gurmukh, she knows the One Lord God.
The desire of the soul-bride is fulfilled; deep within herself, she is drenched in His Love. She meets the Great Giver, the Life of the World.
Imbued with love for the Shabad, she is like a youth intoxicated; she merges into the very being of her Husband Lord.
The True Lord Master is realized through the Word of His Shabad. He blends all with Himself. ||2||
Those who have realized their Husband Lord - I go and ask those Saints about Him.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 027

Renouncing ego, I serve them; thus I meet my True Husband Lord, with intuitive ease.
The True Husband Lord comes to meet the soul-bride who practices Truth, and is imbued with the True Word of the Shabad.
She shall never become a widow; she shall always be a happy bride. Deep within herself, she dwells in the celestial bliss of Samaadhi.
Her Husband Lord is fully pervading everywhere; beholding Him ever-present, she enjoys His Love, with intuitive ease.
Those who have realized their Husband Lord - I go and ask those Saints about Him. ||3||
The separated ones also meet with their Husband Lord, if they fall at the Feet of the True Guru.
The True Guru is forever merciful; through the Word of His Shabad, demerits are burnt away.
Burning away her demerits through the Shabad, the soul-bride eradicates her love of duality, and remains absorbed in the True, True Lord.
Through the True Shabad, everlasting peace is obtained, and egotism and doubt are dispelled.
The Immaculate Husband Lord is forever the Giver of peace; O Nanak, through the Word of His Shabad, He is met.
The separated ones also meet with their Husband Lord, if they fall at the feet of the True Guru. ||4||1||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Listen, O brides of the Lord: serve your Beloved Husband Lord, and contemplate the Word of His Shabad.
The worthless bride does not know her Husband Lord - she is deluded; forgetting her Husband Lord, she weeps and wails.
She weeps, thinking of her Husband Lord, and she cherishes His virtues; her Husband Lord does not die, and does not leave.
As Gurmukh, she knows the Lord; through the Word of His Shabad, He is realized; through True Love, she merges with Him.
She who does not know her Husband Lord, the Architect of karma, is deluded by falsehood - she herself is false.
Listen, O brides of the Lord: serve your Beloved Husband Lord, and contemplate the Word of His Shabad. ||1||
He Himself created the whole world; the world comes and goes.
The love of Maya has ruined the world; people die, to be re-born, over and over again.
People die to be re-born, over and over again, while their sins increase; without spiritual wisdom, they are deluded.
Without the Word of the Shabad, the Husband Lord is not found; the worthless, false bride wastes her life away, weeping and wailing.
He is my Beloved Husband Lord, the Life of the World - for whom should I weep? They alone weep, who forget their Husband Lord.
He Himself created the whole world; the world comes and goes. ||2||
That Husband Lord is True, forever True; He does not die, and He does not leave.
The ignorant soul-bride wanders in delusion; in the love of duality, she sits like a widow.
She sits like a widow, in the love of duality; through emotional attachment to Maya, she suffers in pain. She is growing old, and her body is withering away.
Whatever has come, all that shall pass away; through the love of duality, they suffer in pain.
They do not see the Messenger of Death; they long for Maya, and their consciousness is attached to greed.
That Husband Lord is True, forever True; He does not die, and He does not leave. ||3||
Some weep and wail, separated from their Husband Lord; the blind ones do not know that their Husband is with them.
By Guru's Grace, they may meet with their True Husband, and cherish Him always deep within.
She cherishes her Husband deep within herself - He is always with her; the self-willed manmukhs think that He is far away.
This body rolls in the dust, and is totally useless; it does not realize the Presence of the Lord and Master.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 028

O Nanak, that soul-bride is united in Union; she cherishes her Beloved Husband forever, deep within herself.
Some weep and wail, separated from their Husband Lord; the blind ones do not know that their Husband is with them. ||4||2||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
Those who are separated from their Beloved Husband Lord weep and wail, but my True Husband Lord is always with me.
Those who know that they must depart, serve the True Guru, and dwell upon the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
They dwell constantly upon the Naam, and the True Guru is with them; they serve the True Guru, and so obtain peace.
Through the Shabad, they kill death, and enshrine the True Lord within their hearts; they shall not have to come and go again.
True is the Lord and Master, and True is His Name; bestowing His Gracious Glance, one is enraptured.
Those who are separated from their Beloved Husband Lord weep and wail, but my True Husband Lord is always with me. ||1||
God, my Lord and Master, is the highest of all; how can I meet my Dear Beloved?
When the True Guru united me, then I was naturally united with my Husband Lord, and now, I keep Him clasped to my heart.
I constantly, lovingly cherish my Beloved within my heart; through the True Guru, I see my Beloved.
The cloak of Maya's love is false; wearing it, one slips and loses his footing.
That cloak is true, which is dyed in the color of the Love of my Beloved; wearing it, my inner thirst is quenched.
God, my Lord and Master, is the highest of all; how can I meet my Dear Beloved? ||2||
I have realized my True Lord God, while the other worthless ones have gone astray.
I dwell constantly upon my Beloved Husband Lord, and reflect upon the True Word of the Shabad.
The bride reflects upon the True Shabad, and is imbued with His Love; she meets with the True Guru, and finds her Beloved.
Deep within, she is imbued with His Love, and intoxicated with delight; her enemies and sufferings are all taken away.
Surrender body and soul to your Guru, and then you shall become happy; your thirst and pain shall be taken away.
I have realized my True Lord God, while the other worthless ones have gone astray. ||3||
The True Lord Himself created the world; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
He Himself unites, and causes us to unite with Him; He Himself blesses us with His Love.
He Himself blesses us with His Love, and deals in celestial peace; the life of the Gurmukh is reformed.
Blessed is his coming into the world; he banishes his self-conceit, and is acclaimed as true in the Court of the True Lord.
The light of the jewel of spiritual wisdom shines within his heart, O Nanak, and he loves the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
The True Lord Himself created the world; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness. ||4||3||
Wadahans, Third Mehl:
This body is frail; old age is overtaking it.
Those who are protected by the Guru are saved, while others die, to be reincarnated; they continue coming and going.
Others die, to be reincarnated; they continue coming and going, and in the end, they depart regretfully. Without the Name, there is no peace.
As one acts here, so does he obtain his rewards; the self-willed manmukh loses his honor.
In the City of Death, there is pitch darkness, and huge clouds of dust; neither sister nor brother is there.
This body is frail; old age is overtaking it. ||1||
The body becomes like gold, when the True Guru unites one with Himself.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 029

Doubt and Maya have been removed from within me, and I am merged in the Naam, the True Name of the Lord.
Merged in the True Name of the Lord, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; meeting my Beloved, I have found peace.
I am in constant bliss, day and night; egotism has been dispelled from within me.
I fall at the feet of those who enshrine the Naam within their consciousness.
The body becomes like gold, when the True Guru unites one with Himself. ||2||
We truly praise the True Lord, when the True Guru imparts understanding.
Without the True Guru, they are deluded by doubt; going to the world hereafter, what face will they display?
What face will they show, when they go there? They will regret and repent for their sins; their actions will bring them only pain and suffering.
Those who are imbued with the Naam are dyed in the deep crimson color of the Lord's Love; they merge into the Being of their Husband Lord.
I can conceive of no other as great as the Lord; unto whom should I go and speak?
We truly praise the True Lord, when the True Guru imparts understanding. ||3||
I fall at the feet of those who praise the Truest of the True.
Those humble beings are true, and immaculately pure; meeting them, all filth is washed off.
Meeting them, all filth is washed off; bathing in the Pool of Truth, one becomes truthful, with intuitive ease.
The True Guru has given me the realization of the Naam, the Immaculate Name of the Lord, the unfathomable, the imperceptible.
Those who perform devotional worship to the Lord night and day, are imbued with His Love; O Nanak, they are absorbed in the True Lord.
I fall at the feet of those who meditate on the Truest of the True. ||4||4||
Vaar Of Wadahans, Fourth Mehl: To Be Sung In The Tune Of Lalaa-Behleemaa:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Shalok, Third Mehl:
The great swans are imbued with the Word of the Shabad; they enshrine the True Name within their hearts.
They gather Truth, remain always in Truth, and love the True Name.
They are always pure and immaculate - filth does not touch them; they are blessed with the Grace of the Creator Lord.
O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to those who, night and day, meditate on the Lord. ||1||
Third Mehl:
I thought that he was a great swan, so I associated with him.
If I had known that he was only a wretched heron from birth, I would not have touched him. ||2||
Third Mehl:
Seeing the swans swimming, the herons became envious.
But the poor herons drowned and died, and floated with their heads down, and their feet above. ||3||
Pauree:
You Yourself are Yourself, all by Yourself; You Yourself created the creation.
You Yourself are Yourself the Formless Lord; there is no other than You.
You are the all-powerful Cause of causes; what You do, comes to be.
You give gifts to all beings, without their asking.
Everyone proclaims, "Waaho! Waaho! Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, who has given the supreme gift of the Name of the Lord. ||1||

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 030

Shalok, Third Mehl:
The entire universe is in fear; only the Dear Lord is fearless.
Serving the True Guru, the Lord comes to dwell in the mind, and then, fear cannot stay there.
Enemies and pain cannot come close, and no one can touch him.
The Gurmukh reflects upon the Lord in his mind; whatever pleases the Lord - that alone comes to pass.
O Nanak, He Himself preserves one's honor; He alone resolves our affairs. ||1||-
Third Mehl:
Some friends are leaving, some have already left, and those remaining will eventually leave.
Those who do not serve the True Guru, come and go regretting.
O Nanak, those who are attuned to Truth are not separated; serving the True Guru, they merge into the Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
Meet with that True Guru, the True Friend, within whose mind the Lord, the virtuous One, abides.
Meet with that Beloved True Guru, who has subdued ego from within himself.
Blessed, blessed is the Perfect True Guru, who has given the Lord's Teachings to reform the whole world.
O Saints, meditate constantly on the Lord's Name, and cross over the terrifying, poisonous world-ocean.
The Perfect Guru has taught me about the Lord; I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru. ||2||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Service to, and obedience to the True Guru, is the essence of comfort and peace.
Doing so, one obtains honor here, and the door of salvation in the Court of the Lord.
In this way, perform the tasks of Truth, wear Truth, and take the Support of the True Name.
Associating with Truth, obtain Truth, and love the True Name.
Through the True Word of the Shabad, be always happy, and you shall be acclaimed as True in the True Court.
O Nanak, he alone serves the True Guru, whom the Creator has blessed with His Glance of Grace. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Cursed is the life, and cursed is the dwelling, of those who serve another.
Abandoning the Ambrosial Nectar, they turn to poison; they earn poison, and poison is their only wealth.
Poison is their food, and poison is their dress; they fill their mouths with morsels of poison.
In this world, they earn only pain and suffering, and dying, they go to abide in hell.
The self-willed manmukhs have filthy faces; they do not know the Word of the Shabad; in sexual desire and anger they waste away.
They forsake the Fear of the True Guru, and because of their stubborn ego, their efforts do not come to fruition.
In the City of Death, they are bound and beaten, and no one hears their prayers.
O Nanak, they act according to their pre-ordained destiny; the Gurmukh abides in the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
Serve the True Guru, O Holy people; He implants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in our minds.
Worship the True Guru day and night; He leads us the meditate on the Lord of the Universe, the Master of the Universe.
Behold the True Guru, each and every moment; He shows us the Divine Path of the Lord.
Let everyone fall at the feet of the True Guru; He has dispelled the darkness of emotional attachment.
Let everyone hail and praise the True Guru, who has led us to find the treasure of the Lord's devotional worship. ||3||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Meeting with the True Guru, hunger departs; by wearing the robes of a beggar, hunger does not depart.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 031

Afflicted with pain, he wanders from house to house, and in the world hereafter, he receives double punishment.
Peace does not come to his heart - he is not content to eat what comes his way.
With his stubborn mind, he begs, and grabs, and annoys those who give.
Instead of wearing these beggar's robes, it is better to be a householder, and give to others.
Those who are attuned to the Word of the Shabad, acquire understanding; the others wander, deluded by doubt.
They act according to their past actions; it is useless to talk to them.
O Nanak, those who are pleasing unto the Lord are good; He upholds their honor. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Serving the True Guru, one finds a lasting peace; the pains of birth and death are removed.
He is not troubled by anxiety, and the carefree Lord comes to dwell in the mind.
Deep within himself, is the sacred shrine of spiritual wisdom, revealed by the True Guru.
His filth is removed, and his soul becomes immaculately pure, bathing in the sacred shrine, the pool of Ambrosial Nectar.
The friend meets with the True Friend, the Lord, through the love of the Shabad.
Within the home of his own being, he finds the Divine Self, and his light blends with the Light.
The Messenger of Death does not leave the hypocrite; he is led away in dishonor.
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam are saved; they are in love with the True Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
Go, and sit in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, where the Name of the Lord is churned.
In peace and poise, contemplate the Lord's Name - don't lose the essence of the Lord.
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, constantly, day and night, and you shall be accepted in the Court of the Lord.
He alone finds the Perfect True Guru, on whose forehead such a pre-ordained destiny is written.
Let everyone bow in worship to the Guru, who utters the sermon of the Lord. ||4||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
The friends who love the True Guru, meet with the Lord, the True Friend.
Meeting their Beloved, they meditate on the True Lord with love and affection.
Their minds are appeased by their own minds, through the incomparable Word of the Guru's Shabad.
These friends are united, and will not be separated again; they have been united by the Creator Lord Himself.
Some do not believe in the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan; they do not contemplate the Shabad.
The separated ones are in love with duality - what more separation can they suffer?
Friendship with the self-willed manmukhs lasts for only a few short days.
This friendship is broken in an instant; this friendship leads to corruption.
They do not fear the True Lord within their hearts, and they do not love the Naam.
O Nanak, why become friends with those whom the Creator Lord Himself has misled? ||1||
Third Mehl:
Some remain constantly imbued with the Lord's Love; I am forever a sacrifice to them.
I dedicate my mind, soul and wealth to them; bowing low, I fall at their feet.
Meeting them, the soul is satisfied, and one's hunger and thirst all depart.
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam are happy forever; they lovingly focus their minds on the True Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
I am a sacrifice to the Guru, who recites the sermon of the Lord's Teachings.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 032

I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru, who has led me to serve the Lord.
That Beloved True Guru is always with me; wherever I may be, He will save me.
Most blessed is that Guru, who imparts understanding of the Lord.
O Nanak, I am a sacrifice to the Guru, who has given me the Lord's Name, and fulfilled the desires of my mind. ||5||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Consumed by desires, the world is burning and dying; burning and burning, it cries out.
But if it meets with the cooling and soothing True Guru, it does not burn any longer.
O Nanak, without the Name, and without contemplating the Word of the Shabad, no one becomes fearless. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Wearing ceremonial robes, the fire is not quenched, and the mind is filled with anxiety.
Destroying the snake's hole, the snake is not killed; it is just like doing deeds without a Guru.
Serving the Giver, the True Guru, the Shabad comes to abide in the mind.
The mind and body are cooled and soothed; peace ensues, and the fire of desire is quenched.
The supreme comforts and lasting peace are obtained, when one eradicates ego from within.
He alone becomes a detached Gurmukh, who lovingly focuses his consciousness on the True Lord.
Anxiety does not affect him at all; he is satisfied and satiated with the Name of the Lord.
O Nanak, without the Naam, no one is saved; they are utterly ruined by egotism. ||2||
Pauree:
Those who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, obtain all peace and comforts.
Fruitful is the entire life of those, who hunger for the Name of the Lord in their minds.
Those who worship the Lord in adoration, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, forget all their pains and suffering.
Those Gursikhs are good Saints, who care for nothing other than the Lord.
Blessed, blessed is their Guru, whose mouth tastes the Ambrosial Fruit of the Lord's Name. ||6||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
In the Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Messenger of Death is the enemy of life, but he acts according to the Lord's Command.
Those who are protected by the Guru are saved, while the self-willed manmukhs receive their punishment.
The world is under the control, and in the bondage of the Messenger of Death; no one can hold him back.
So serve the One who created Death; as Gurmukh, no pain shall touch you.
O Nanak, Death serves the Gurmukhs; the True Lord abides in their minds. ||1||
Third Mehl:
This body is filled with disease; without the Word of the Shabad, the pain of the disease of ego does not depart.
When one meets the True Guru, then he becomes immaculately pure, and he enshrines the Lord's Name within his mind.
O Nanak, meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Peace-Giving Lord, his pains are automatically forgotten. ||2||
Pauree:
I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru, who has taught me about the Lord, the Life of the World.
I am every bit a sacrifice to the Guru, the Lover of Nectar, who has revealed the Name of the Lord.
I am a sacrifice to the Guru, who has totally cured me of the fatal disease of egotism.
Glorious and great are the virtues of the Guru, who has eradicated evil, and instructed me in virtue.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 033

The True Guru meets with those upon whose foreheads such blessed destiny is recorded. ||7||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
They alone worship the Lord, who remain dead while yet alive; the Gurmukhs worship the Lord continually.
The Lord blesses them with the treasure of devotional worship, which no one can destroy.
They obtain the treasure of virtue, the One True Lord, within their minds.
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs remain united with the Lord; they shall never be separated again. ||1||
Third Mehl:
He does not serve the True Guru; how can he reflect upon the Lord?
He does not appreciate the value of the Shabad; the fool wanders in corruption and sin.
The blind and ignorant perform all sorts of ritualistic actions; they are in love with duality.
Those who take unjustified pride in themselves, are punished and humiliated by the Messenger of Death.
O Nanak, who else is there to ask? The Lord Himself is the Forgiver. ||2||
Pauree:
You, O Creator, know all things; all beings belong to You.
Those who are pleasing to You, You unite with Yourself; what can the poor creatures do?
You are all-powerful, the Cause of causes, the True Creator Lord.
Only those unite with you, Beloved Lord, whom you approve and who meditate on Guru's Word.
I am a sacrifice to my True Guru, who has allowed me to see my unseen Lord. ||8||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
He is the Assayer of jewels; He contemplates the jewel.
He is ignorant and totally blind - he does not appreciate the value of the jewel.
The Jewel is the Word of the Guru's Shabad; the Knower alone knows it.
The fools take pride in themselves, and are ruined in birth and death.
O Nanak, he alone obtains the jewel, who, as Gurmukh, enshrines love for it.
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, forever and ever, make the Name of the Lord your daily occupation.
If the Lord shows His Mercy, then I keep Him enshrined within my heart. ||1||
Third Mehl:
They do not serve the True Guru, and they do not embrace love for the Lord's Name.
Do not even think that they are alive - the Creator Lord Himself has killed them.
Egotism is such a terrible disease; in the love of duality, they do their deeds.
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs are in a living death; forgetting the Lord, they suffer in pain. ||2||
Pauree:
Let all bow in reverence, to that humble being whose heart is pure within.
I am a sacrifice to that humble being whose mind is filled with the treasure of the Naam.
He has a discriminating intellect; he meditates on the Name of the Lord.
That True Guru is a friend to all; everyone is dear to Him.
The Lord, the Supreme Soul, is pervading everywhere; reflect upon the wisdom of the Guru's Teachings. ||9||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Without serving the True Guru, the soul is in the bondage of deeds done in ego.
Without serving the True Guru, one finds no place of rest; he dies, and is reincarnated, and continues coming and going.
Without serving the True Guru, one's speech is vapid and insipid; the Naam, the Name of the Lord, does not abide in his mind.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 034

O Nanak, without serving the True Guru, they are bound and beaten in the City of Death; they arise and depart with blackened faces. ||1||
First Mehl:
Burn away those rituals which lead you to forget the Beloved Lord.
O Nanak, sublime is that love, which preserves my honor with my Lord Master. ||2||
Pauree:
Serve the One Lord, the Great Giver; meditate on the One Lord.
Beg from the One Lord, the Great Giver, and you shall obtain your heart's desires.
But if you beg from another, then you shall be shamed and destroyed.
One who serves the Lord obtains the fruits of his rewards; all of his hunger is satisfied.
Nanak is a sacrifice to those, who night and day, meditate within their hearts on the Name of the Lord. ||10||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
He Himself is pleased with His humble devotees; my Beloved Lord attaches them to Himself.
The Lord blesses His humble devotees with royalty; He fashions the true crown upon their heads.
They are always at peace, and immaculately pure; they perform service for the True Guru.
They are not said to be kings, who die in conflict, and then enter again the cycle of reincarnation.
O Nanak, without the Name of the Lord, they wander about with their noses cut off in disgrace; they get no respect at all. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Hearing the teachings, he does not appreciate them, as long as he is not Gurmukh, attached to the Word of the Shabad.
Serving the True Guru, the Naam comes to abide in the mind, and doubts and fears run away.
As he knows the True Guru, so he is transformed, and then, he lovingly focuses his consciousness on the Naam.
O Nanak, through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, greatness is obtained; he shall be resplendent in the Court of the Lord hereafter. ||2||
Pauree:
The minds of the Gursikhs are filled with the love of the Lord; they come and worship the Guru.
They trade lovingly in the Lord's Name, and depart after earning the profit of the Lord's Name.
The faces of the Gursikhs are radiant; in the Court of the Lord, they are approved.
The Guru, the True Guru, is the treasure of the Lord's Name; how very fortunate are the Sikhs who share in this treasure of virtue.
I am a sacrifice to those Gursikhs who, sitting and standing, meditate on the Lord's Name. ||11||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the treasure, which the Gurmukhs obtain.
The self-willed manmukhs are blind; they do not realize that it is within their own home. They die barking and crying. ||1||
Third Mehl:
That body is golden and immaculate, which is attached to the True Name of the True Lord.
The Gurmukh obtains the Pure Light of the Luminous Lord, and his doubts and fears run away.
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs find lasting peace; night and day, they remain detached, while in the Love of the Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
Blessed, blessed are those Gursikhs, who, with their ears, listen to the Guru's Teachings about the Lord.
The Guru, the True Guru, implants the Naam within them, and their egotism and duality are silenced.
There is no friend, other than the Name of the Lord; the Lord's humble servants reflect upon this and see.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 035

Those Gursikhs, with whom the Lord is pleased, accept the Word of the True Guru.
Those Gurmukhs who meditate on the Naam are imbued with the four-fold color of the Lord's Love. ||12||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
The self-willed manmukh is cowardly and ugly; lacking the Name of the Lord, his nose is cut off in disgrace.
Night and day, he is engrossed in worldly affairs, and even in his dreams, he finds no peace.
O Nanak, if he becomes Gurmukh, then he shall be saved; otherwise, he is held in bondage, and suffers in pain. ||1||
Third Mehl:
The Gurmukhs always look beautiful in the Court of the Lord; they practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
There is a lasting peace and happiness deep within them; at the Court of the True Lord, they receive honor.
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs are blessed with the Name of the Lord; they merge imperceptibly into the True Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
As Gurmukh, Prahlaad meditated on the Lord, and was saved.
As Gurmukh, Janak lovingly centered his consciousness on the Lord's Name.
As Gurmukh, Vashisht taught the Teachings of the Lord.
Without the Guru, no one has found the Lord's Name, O my Siblings of Destiny.
The Lord blesses the Gurmukh with devotion. ||13||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
One who has no faith in the True Guru, and who does not love the Word of the Shabad,
shall find no peace, even though he may come and go hundreds of times.
O Nanak, the Gurmukh meets the True Lord with natural ease; he is in love with the Lord. ||1||
Third Mehl:
O mind, search for such a True Guru, by serving whom the pains of birth and death are dispelled.
Doubt shall never afflict you, and your ego shall be burnt away through the Word of the Shabad.
The veil of falsehood shall be torn down from within you, and Truth shall come to dwell in the mind.
Peace and happiness shall fill your mind deep within, if you act according to truth and self-discipline.
O Nanak, by perfect good karma, you shall meet the True Guru, and then the Dear Lord, by His Sweet Will, shall bless you with His Mercy. ||2||
Pauree:
The whole world comes under the control of one whose home is filled with the Lord, the King.
He is subject to no one else's rule, and the Lord, the King, causes everyone to fall at his feet.
One may run away from the courts of other men, but where can one go to escape the Lord's Kingdom?
The Lord is such a King, who abides in the hearts of His devotees; He brings the others, and makes them stand before His devotees.
The glorious greatness of the Lord's Name is obtained only by His Grace; how few are the Gurmukhs who meditate on Him. ||14||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Without serving the True Guru, the people of the world are dead; they waste their lives away in vain.
In love with duality, they suffer terrible pain; they die, and are reincarnated, and continue coming and going.
They live in manure, and are reincarnated again and again.
O Nanak, without the Name, the Messenger of Death punishes them; in the end, they depart regretting and repenting. ||1||
Third Mehl:
In this world, there is one Husband Lord; all other beings are His brides.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 036

He enjoys the hearts of all, and yet He remains detached; He is unseen; He cannot be described.
The Perfect Guru reveals Him, and through the Word of His Shabad, we come to understand Him.
Those who serve their Husband Lord, become like Him; their egos are burnt away by His Shabad.
He has no rival, no attacker, no enemy.
His rule is unchanging and eternal; He does not come or go.
Night and day, His servant serves Him, singing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
Beholding the Glorious Greatness of the True Lord, Nanak blossoms forth. ||2||
Pauree:
Those whose hearts are forever filled with the Name of the Lord, have the Name of the Lord as their Protector.
The Lord's Name is my father, the Lord's Name is my mother; the Lord's Name is my helper and friend.
My conversation is with the Lord's Name, and my counseling is with the Lord's Name; the Lord's Name always takes care of me.
The Lord's Name is my most beloved society, the Lord's Name is my ancestry, and the Lord's Name is my family.
The Guru, the Lord Incarnate, has bestowed upon servant Nanak the Name of the Lord; in this world, and in the next, the Lord ever saves me. ||15||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Those who meet the True Guru, ever sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises.
The Lord's Name naturally fills their minds, and they are absorbed in the Shabad, the Word of the True Lord.
They redeem their generations, and they themselves obtain the state of liberation.
The Supreme Lord God is pleased with those who fall at the Guru's Feet.
Servant Nanak is the Lord's slave; by His Grace, the Lord preserves his honor. ||1||
Third Mehl:
In egotism, one is assailed by fear; he passes his life totally troubled by fear.
Egotism is such a terrible disease; he dies, to be reincarnated - he continues coming and going.
Those who have such pre-ordained destiny meet with the True Guru, God Incarnate.
O Nanak, by Guru's Grace, they are redeemed; their egos are burnt away through the Word of the Shabad. ||2||
Pauree:
The Lord's Name is my immortal, unfathomable, imperishable Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny.
I serve the Lord's Name, I worship the Lord's Name, and my soul is imbued with the Lord's Name.
I know of no other as great as the Lord's Name; the Lord's Name shall deliver me in the end.
The Generous Guru has given me the Lord's Name; blessed, blessed are the Guru's mother and father.
I ever bow in humble reverence to my True Guru; meeting Him, I have come to know the Lord's Name. ||16||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
One who does not serve the Guru as Gurmukh, who does not love the Lord's Name,
and who does not savor the taste of the Shabad, shall die, and be reborn, over and over again.
The blind, self-willed manmukh does not think of the Lord; why did he even come into the world?
O Nanak, that Gurmukh, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, crosses over the world-ocean. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Only the Guru is awake; the rest of the world is asleep in emotional attachment and desire.
Those who serve the True Guru and remain wakeful, are imbued with the True Name, the treasure of virtue.

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 037

The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not think of the Lord; they are ruined through birth and death.
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord; this is their destiny, pre-ordained by the Primal Lord God. ||2||
Pauree:
The Lord's Name is my food; eating the thirty-six varieties of it, I am satisfied and satiated.
The Lord's Name is my clothing; wearing it, I shall never be naked again, and my desire to wear other clothing is gone.
The Lord's Name is my business, the Lord's Name is my commerce; the True Guru has blessed me with its use.
I record the account of the Lord's Name, and I shall not be subject to death again.
Only a few, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Lord's Name; they are blessed by the Lord, and receive their pre-ordained destiny. ||17||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
The world is blind and ignorant; in the love of duality, it engages in actions.
But those actions which are performed in the love of duality, cause only pain to the body.
By Guru's Grace, peace wells up, when one acts according to the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
He acts according to the True Word of the Guru's Bani; night and day, he meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
O Nanak, as the Lord Himself engages him, so is he engaged; no one has any say in this matter. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Within the home of my own being, is the everlasting treasure of the Naam; it is a treasure house, overflowing with devotion.
The True Guru is the Giver of the life of the soul; the Great Giver lives forever.
Night and day, I continually sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise, through the Infinite Word of the Guru's Shabad.
I recite continually the Guru's Shabads, which have been effective throughout the ages.
This mind ever abides in peace, dealing in peace and poise.
Deep within me is the Guru's Wisdom, the Lord's jewel, the Bringer of liberation.
O Nanak, one who is blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace obtains this, and is judged to be True in the Court of the Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, who goes and falls at the Feet of the True Guru.
Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, who with his mouth, utters the Name of the Lord.
Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, whose mind, upon hearing the Lord's Name, becomes blissful.
Blessed, blessed is that Sikh of the Guru, who serves the True Guru, and so obtains the Lord's Name.
I bow forever in deepest respect to that Sikh of the Guru, who walks in the Way of the Guru. ||18||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
No one has ever found the Lord through stubborn-mindedness. All have grown weary of performing such actions.
Through their stubborn-mindedness, and by wearing their disguises, they are deluded; they suffer in pain from the love of duality.
Riches and the supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas are all emotional attachments; through them, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, does not come to dwell in the mind.
Serving the Guru, the mind becomes immaculately pure, and the darkness of spiritual ignorance is dispelled.
The jewel of the Naam is revealed in the home of one's own being; O Nanak, one merges in celestial bliss. ||1||
Third Mehl:

## Section 12 - Raag Wadahans - Part 038

One who does not savor the taste of the Shabad, who does not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord,
and who speaks insipid words with his tongue, is ruined, again and again.
O Nanak, he acts according to the karma of his past actions, which no one can erase. ||2||
Pauree:
Blessed, blessed is the True Being, my True Guru; meeting Him, I have found peace.
Blessed, blessed is the True Being, my True Guru; meeting Him, I have attained the Lord's devotional worship.
Blessed, blessed is the Lord's devotee, my True Guru; serving Him, I have come to enshrine love for the Name of the Lord.
Blessed, blessed is the Knower of the Lord, my True Guru; He has taught me to look upon friend and foe alike.
Blessed, blessed is the True Guru, my best friend; He has led me to embrace love for the Name of the Lord. ||19||
Shalok, First Mehl:
The soul-bride is at home, while the Husband Lord is away; she cherishes His memory, and mourns His absence.
She shall meet Him without delay, if she rids herself of duality. ||1||
First Mehl:
O Nanak, false is the speech of one who acts without loving the Lord.
He judges things to be good, only as long as the Lord gives and he receives. ||2||
Pauree:
The Lord, who created the creatures, also protects them.
I have tasted the food of Ambrosial Nectar, the True Name.
I am satisfied and satiated, and my hunger is appeased.
The One Lord is pervading in all, but rare are those who realize this.
Servant Nanak is enraptured, in the Protection of God. ||20||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
All the living beings of the world behold the True Guru.
One is not liberated by merely seeing Him, unless one contemplates the Word of His Shabad.
The filth of ego is not removed, and he does not enshrine love for the Naam.
The Lord forgives some, and unites them with Himself; they forsake their duality and sinful ways.
O Nanak, some behold the Blessed Vision of the True Guru's Darshan, with love and affection; conquering their ego, they meet with the Lord. ||1||
Third Mehl:
The foolish, blind clown does not serve the True Guru.
In love with duality, he endures terrible suffering, and burning, he cries out in pain.
He forgets the Guru, for the sake of mere objects, but they will not come to his rescue in the end.
Through the Guru's Instructions, Nanak has found peace; the Forgiving Lord has forgiven him. ||2||
Pauree:
You Yourself, all by Yourself, are the Creator of all. If there were any other, then I would speak of another.
The Lord Himself speaks, and causes us to speak; He Himself is pervading the water and the land.
The Lord Himself destroys, and the Lord Himself saves. O mind, seek and remain in the Lord's Sanctuary.
Other than the Lord, no one can kill or rejuvenate. O mind, do not be anxious - remain fearless.
While standing, sitting, and sleeping, forever and ever, meditate on the Lord's Name; O servant Nanak, as Gurmukh, you shall attain the Lord. ||21||1||SUDH||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/11">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">11. Raag Bihaagra</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/13">
          <span class="pr-2">13. Raag Sorat'h</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
