---
title: "17. Raag Bairaaree"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/16">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">16. Raag Todee</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/18">
          <span class="pr-2">18. Raag Tilang</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 17 - Raag Bairaaree - Part 001

Raag Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl, First House, Du-Padas:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Listen, O mind, to the Unspoken Speech of the Lord's Name.
Riches, wisdom, supernatural spiritual powers and peace are obtained, by vibrating, meditating on the Lord God, under Guru's Instruction. ||1||Pause||
Numerous legends, the Puraanas, and the six Shaastras, sing the sublime Praises of the Lord.
Shiva and the three hundred thirty million gods meditate on the Lord, but they do not know the secret of His mystery. ||1||
The angelic and divine beings, and the celestial singers sing His Praises; all Creation sings of Him.
O Nanak, those whom the Lord blesses with His Kind Mercy, become the good Saints of the Lord God. ||2||1||
Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:
O mind, those who meet the Lord's humble servants, sing His Praises.
They are blessed with the gift of the jewel of the Lord, Har, Har, the sublime jewel of the Lord, by the Guru, the True Guru. ||1||Pause||
I offer my mind, body and everything to that humble being who recites the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
I offer my wealth, the riches of Maya and my property to that one who leads me to meet the Lord, my friend. ||1||
When the Lord of the world bestowed just a tiny bit of His Mercy, for just an instant, then I meditated on the Praise of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
The Lord and Master has met servant Nanak, and the pain of the sickness of egotism has been eliminated. ||2||2||
Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:
The Lord's humble servant sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name.
Even if someone slanders the Lord's humble servant, he does not give up his own goodness. ||1||Pause||
Whatever the Lord and Master does, He does by Himself; the Lord Himself does the deeds.
The Lord and Master Himself imparts understanding; the Lord Himself inspires us to speak. ||1||

## Section 17 - Raag Bairaaree - Part 002

The Lord Himself directs the evolution of the world of the five elements; He Himself infuses the five senses into it.
O servant Nanak, the Lord Himself unites us with the True Guru; He Himself resolves the conflicts. ||2||3||
Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:
Chant the Name of the Lord, O mind, and you shall be emancipated.
The Lord shall destroy all the sins of millions upon millions of incarnations, and carry you across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||
In the body-village, the Lord Master abides; the Lord is without fear, without vengeance, and without form.
The Lord is dwelling near at hand, but He cannot be seen. By the Guru's Teachings, the Lord is obtained. ||1||
The Lord Himself is the banker, the jeweller, the jewel, the gem; the Lord Himself created the entire expanse of the creation.
O Nanak, one who is blessed by the Lord's Kind Mercy, trades in the Lord's Name; He alone is the true banker, the true trader. ||2||4||
Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:
Meditate, O mind, on the immaculate, formless Lord.
Forever and ever, meditate on the Lord, the Giver of peace; He has no end or limitation. ||1||Pause||
In the fiery pit of the womb, when you were hanging upside-down, the Lord absorbed You in His Love, and preserved You.
So serve such a Lord, O my mind; the Lord shall deliver you in the end. ||1||
Bow down in reverence to that humble being, within whose heart the Lord, Har, Har, abides.
By the Lord's Kind Mercy, O Nanak, one obtains the Lord's meditation, and the support of the Naam. ||2||5||
Bairaaree, Fourth Mehl:
O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; meditate on it continually.
You shall obtain the fruits of your heart's desires, and pain shall never touch you again. ||1||Pause||
That is chanting, that is deep meditation and austerity, that is fasting and worship, which inspires love for the Lord.
Without the Lord's Love, every other love is false; in an instant, it is all forgotten. ||1||
You are infinite, the Master of all power; Your value cannot be described at all.
Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary, O Dear Lord; as it pleases You, save him. ||2||6||
Raag Bairaaree, Fifth Mehl, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Meeting with the humble Saints, sing the Praises of the Lord.
The pains of millions of incarnations shall be eradicated. ||1||Pause||
Whatever your mind desires, that you shall obtain.
By His Kind Mercy, the Lord blesses us with His Name. ||1||
All happiness and greatness are in the Lord's Name.
By Guru's Grace, Nanak has gained this understanding. ||2||1||7||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/16">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">16. Raag Todee</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/18">
          <span class="pr-2">18. Raag Tilang</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
