---
title: "23. Raag Nat Naaraayan"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/22">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">22. Raag Raamkalee</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/24">
          <span class="pr-2">24. Raag Maale Gaaura</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 23 - Raag Nat Naaraayan - Part 001

Raag Nat Naaraayan, Fourth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, day and night.
Millions and millions of sins and mistakes, committed through countless lifetimes, shall all be put aside and sent away. ||1||Pause||
Those who chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and worship Him in adoration, and serve Him with love, are genuine.
All their sins are erased, just as water washes off the dirt. ||1||
That being, who sings the Lord's Praises each and every instant, chants with his mouth the Name of the Lord.
In a moment, in an instant, the Lord rids him of the five incurable diseases of the body-village. ||2||
Very fortunate are those who meditate on the Lord's Name; they alone are the Lord's devotees.
I beg for the Sangat, the Congregation; O God, please bless me with them. I am a fool, and an idiot - please save me! ||3||
Shower me with Your Mercy and Grace, O Life of the World; save me, I seek Your Sanctuary.
Servant Nanak has entered Your Sanctuary; O Lord, please preserve my honor! ||4||1||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
Meditating on the Lord, His humble servants are blended with the Lord's Name.
Chanting the Lord's Name, following the Guru's Teachings, the Lord showers His Mercy upon them. ||1||Pause||
Our Lord and Master, Har, Har, is inaccessible and unfathomable. Meditating on Him, His humble servant merges with Him, like water with water.
Meeting with the Lord's Saints, I have obtained the sublime essence of the Lord. I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to His humble servants. ||1||
The Lord's humble servant sings the Praises of the Name of the Supreme, Primal Soul, and all poverty and pain are destroyed.
Within the body are the five evil and uncontrollable passions. The Lord destroys them in an instant. ||2||
The Lord's Saint loves the Lord in his mind, like the lotus flower gazing at the moon.
The clouds hang low, the clouds tremble with thunder, and the mind dances joyfully like the peacock. ||3||
My Lord and Master has placed this yearning within me; I live by seeing and meeting my Lord.
Servant Nanak is addicted to the intoxication of the Lord; meeting with the Lord, he finds sublime bliss. ||4||2||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, your only Friend.

## Section 23 - Raag Nat Naaraayan - Part 002

By Guru's Grace, I meditate on the Name of the Lord; I wash the Feet of the True Guru. ||1||Pause||
The Exalted Lord of the World, the Master of the Universe, keeps a sinner like me in His Sanctuary
You are the Greatest Being, Lord, Destroyer of the pains of the meek; You have placed Your Name in my mouth, Lord. ||1||
I am lowly, but I sing the Lofty Praises of the Lord, meeting with the Guru, the True Guru, my Friend.
Like the bitter nimm tree, growing near the sandalwood tree, I am permeated with the fragrance of sandalwood. ||2||
My faults and sins of corruption are countless; over and over again, I commit them.
I am unworthy, I am a heavy stone sinking down; but the Lord has carried me across, in association with His humble servants. ||3||
Those whom You save, Lord - all their sins are destroyed.
O Merciful God, Lord and Master of servant Nanak, You have carried across even evil villains like Harnaakhash. ||4||3||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
O my mind, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, with love.
When the Lord of the Universe, Har, Har, granted His Grace, then I fell at the feet of the humble, and I meditate on the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Mistaken and confused for so many past lives, I have now come and entered the Sanctuary of God.
O my Lord and Master, You are the Cherisher of those who come to Your Sanctuary. I am such a great sinner - please save me! ||1||
Associating with You, Lord, who would not be saved? Only God sanctifies the sinners.
Naam Dayv, the calico printer, was driven out by the evil villains, as he sang Your Glorious Praises; O God, You protected the honor of Your humble servant. ||2||
Those who sing Your Glorious Praises, O my Lord and Master - I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to them.
Those houses and homes are sanctified, upon which the dust of the feet of the humble settles. ||3||
I cannot describe Your Glorious Virtues, God; You are the greatest of the great, O Great Primal Lord God.
Please shower Your Mercy upon servant Nanak, God; I serve at the feet of Yor humble servants. ||4||4||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
O my mind, believe in and chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
God, the Master of the Universe, has showered His Mercy upon me, and through the Guru's Teachings, my intellect has been molded by the Naam. ||1||Pause||
The Lord's humble servant sings the Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, listening to the Guru's Teachings.
The Lord's Name cuts down all sins, like the farmer cutting down his crops. ||1||
You alone know Your Praises, God; I cannot even describe Your Glorious Virtues, Lord.
You are what You are, God; You alone know Your Glorious Virtues, God. ||2||
The mortals are bound by the many bonds of Maya's noose. Meditating on the Lord, the knot is untied,
like the elephant, which was caught in the water by the crococile; it remembered the Lord, and chanted the Lord's Name, and was released. ||3||
O my Lord and Master, Supreme Lord God, Transcendent Lord, throughout the ages, mortals search for You.
Your extent cannot be estimated or known, O Great God of servant Nanak. ||4||5||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
O my mind, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is worthy and commendable.
When the Merciful Lord God shows kindness and compassion, then one falls at the feet of the True Guru, and meditates on the Lord. ||1||Pause||

## Section 23 - Raag Nat Naaraayan - Part 003

O my Lord and Master, You are great, inaccessible and unfathomable; all meditate on You, O Beautiful Lord.
Those whom You view with Your Great Eye of Grace, meditate on You, Lord, and become Gurmukh. ||1||
The expanse of this creation is Your work, O God, my Lord and Master, Life of the entire universe, united with all.
Countless waves rise up from the water, and then they merge into the water again. ||2||
You alone, God, know whatever You do. O Lord, I do not know.
I am Your child; please enshrine Your Praises within my heart, God, so that I may remember You in meditation. ||3||
You are the treasure of water, O Lord, the Maansarovar Lake. Whoever serves You receives all fruitful rewards.
Servant Nanak longs for the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har; bless him, Lord, with Your Mercy. ||4||6||
Nat Naaraayan, Fourth Mehl, Partaal:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O my mind, serve the Lord, and receive the fruits of your rewards.
Receive the dust of the Guru's feet.
All poverty will be eliminated, and your pains will disappear.
The Lord shall bless you with His Glance of Grace, and you shall be enraptured. ||1||Pause||
The Lord Himself embellishes His household. The Lord's Mansion of Love is studded with countless jewels, the jewels of the Beloved Lord.
The Lord Himself has granted His Grace, and He has come into my home.The Guru is my advocate before the Lord. Gazing upon the Lord, I have become blissful, blissful, blissful. ||1||
From the Guru, I received news of the Lord's arrival. My mind and body became ecstatic and blissful, hearing of the arrival of the Lord, my Beloved Love, my Lord.
Servant Nanak has met with the Lord, Har, Har; he is intoxicated, enraptured, enraptured. ||2||1||7||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
O mind, join the Society of the Saints, and become noble and exalted.
Listen to the Unspoken Speech of the peace-giving Lord.
All sins will be washed away.
Meet with the Lord, according to your pre-ordained destiny. ||1||Pause||
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise is lofty and exalted. Following the Guru's Teachings, the intellect dwells on the sermon of the Lord.
I am a sacrifice to that person who listens and believes. ||1||
One who tastes the sublime essence of the Unspoken Speech of the Lord - all his hunger is satisfied.
Servant Nanak listens to the sermon of the Lord, and is satisfied; chanting the Lord's Name, Har, Har, Har, he has become like the Lord. ||2||2||8||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
If only someone would come and tell me the Lord's sermon.
I would be a sacrifice, a sacrifice, a sacrifice to him.
That humble servant of the Lord is the best of the best.

## Section 23 - Raag Nat Naaraayan - Part 004

Meeting with the Lord, you be enraptured. ||1||Pause||
The Guru, the Saint, has shown me the Lord's Path. The Guru has shown me the way to walk on the Lord's Path.
Cast out deception from within yourself, O my Gursikhs, and without deception, serve the Lord. You shall be enraptured, enraptured, enraptured. ||1||
Those Sikhs of the Guru, who realize that my Lord God is with them, are pleasing to my Lord God.
The Lord God has blessed servant Nanak with understanding; seeing his Lord hear at hand, his is enraptured, enraptured, enraptured, enraptured. ||2||3||9||
Raag Nat Naaraayan, Fifth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O Lord, how can I know what pleases You?
Within my mind is such a great thirst for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||1||Pause||
He alone is a spiritual teacher, and he alone is Your humble servant, to whom You have given Your approval.
He alone meditates on You forever and ever, O Primal Lord, O Architect of Destiny, unto whom You grant Your Grace. ||1||
What sort of Yoga, what spiritual wisdom and meditation, and what virtues please You?
He alone is a humble servant, and he alone is God's own devotee, with whom You are in love. ||2||
That alone is intelligence, that alone is wisdom and cleverness, which inspires one to never forget God, even for an instant.
Joining the Society of the Saints, I have found this peace, singing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3||
I have seen the Wondrous Lord, the embodiment of supreme bliss, and now, I see nothing else at all.
Says Nanak, the Guru has rubbed sway the rust; now how could I ever enter the womb of reincarnation again? ||4||1||
Raag Nat Naaraayan, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
I don't blame anyone else.
Whatever You do is sweet to my mind. ||1||Pause||
Understanding and obeying Your Order, I have found peace; hearing, listening to Your Name, I live.
Here and hereafter, O Lord, You, only You. The Guru has implanted this Mantra within me. ||1||
Since I came to realize this, I have been blessed with total peace and pleasure.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, this has been revealed to Nanak, and now, there is no other for him at all. ||2||1||2||
Nat, Fifth Mehl:
Whoever has You for support,
has the fear of death removed; peace is found, and the disease of egotism is taken away. ||1||Pause||
The fire within is quenched, and one is satisfied through the Ambrosial Word of the Guru's Bani, as the baby is satisfied by milk.
The Saints are my mother, father and friends. The Saints are my help and support, and my brothers. ||1||

## Section 23 - Raag Nat Naaraayan - Part 005

The doors of doubt are thrown open, and I have met the Lord of the World; God's diamond has pierced the diamond of my mind.
Nanak blossoms forth in ecstasy, singing the Lord's Praises; my Lord and Master is the ocean of virtue. ||2||2||3||
Nat, Fifth Mehl:
He Himself saves His humble servant.
Twenty-four hours a day, He dwells with His humble servant; He never forgets him from His Mind. ||1||Pause||
The Lord does not look at his color or form; He does not consider the ancestry of His slave.
Granting His Grace, the Lord blesses him with His Name, and embellishes him with intuitive ease. ||1||
The ocean of fire is treacherous and difficult, but he is carried across.
Seeing, seeing Him, Nanak blossoms forth, over and over again, a sacrifice to Him. ||2||3||4||
Nat, Fifth Mehl:
One who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within his mind
\- millions of sins are erased in an instant, and pain is relieved. ||1||Pause||
Seeking and searching, I have become detached; I have found the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Renouncing everything, I am lovingly focused on the One Lord. I grab hold of the feet of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||
Whoever chants His Name is liberated; whoever listens to it is saved, as is anyone who seeks His Sanctuary.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God the Lord and Master, says Nanak, I am in ecstasy! ||2||4||5||
Nat, Fifth Mehl:
I am in love with Your Lotus Feet.
O Lord, ocean of peace, please bless me with the supreme status. ||1||Pause||
He has inspired His humble servant to grasp the hem of His robe; his mind is pierced through with the intoxication of divine love.
Singing His Praises, love wells up within the devotee, and the trap of Maya is broken. ||1||
The Lord, the ocean of mercy, is all-pervading, permeating everywhere; I do not see any other at all.
He has united slave Nanak with Himself; His Love never diminishes. ||2||5||6||
Nat, Fifth Mehl:
O my mind, chant, and meditate on the Lord.
I shall never forget Him from my mind; twenty-four hours a day, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1||Pause||
I take my daily cleansing bath in the dust of the feet of the Holy, and I am rid of all my sins.
The Lord, the ocean of mercy, is all-pervading, permeating everywhere; He is seen to be contained in each and every heart. ||1||
Hundreds of thousands and millions of meditations, austerities and worships are not equal to remembering the Lord in meditation.
With his palms pressed together, Nanak begs for this blessing, that he may become the slave of the slaves of Your slaves. ||2||6||7||
Nat, Fifth Mehl:
The treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is everything for me.
Granting His Grace, He has led me to join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; the True Guru has granted this gift. ||1||Pause||
Sing the Kirtan, the Praises of the Lord, the Giver of peace, the Destroyer of pain; He shall bless you with perfect spiritual wisdom.
Sexual desire, anger and greed shall be shattered and destroyed, and your foolish ego will be dispelled. ||1||
What Glorious Virtues of Yours should I chant? O God, You are the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
I seek the Sanctuary of Your Lotus Feet, O Lord, ocean of peace; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to You. ||2||7||8||

## Section 23 - Raag Nat Naaraayan - Part 006

Nat, Fifth Mehl:
I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Guru, the Lord of the World. ||1||Pause||
I am unworthy; You are the Perfect Giver. You are the Merciful Master of the meek. ||1||
While standing up and sitting down, while sleeping and awake, You are my soul, my breath of life, my wealth and property. ||2||
Within my mind there is such a great thirst for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. Nanak is enraptured with Your Glance of Grace. ||3||8||9||
Nat Partaal, Fifth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Is there any friend or companion of mine,
who will constantly share the Lord's Name with me?
Will he rid me of my pains and evil tendencies?
I would surrender my mind, body, consciousness and everything. ||1||Pause||
How rare is that one whom the Lord makes His own,
and whose mind is sewn into the Lord's Lotus Feet.
Granting His Grace, the Lord blesses him with His Praise. ||1||
Vibrating, meditating on the Lord, he is victorious in this precious human life,
and millions of sinners are sanctified.
Slave Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to Him. ||2||1||10||19||
Nat Ashtapadees, Fourth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O Lord, Your Name is the support of my mind and body.
I cannot survive for a moment, even for an instant, without serving You. Following the Guru's Teachings, I dwell upon the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Within my mind, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har. The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is so dear to me.
When God, my Lord and Master, became merciful to me the meek one, I was exalted by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||
Almighty Lord, Slayer of demons, Life of the World, my Lord and Master, inaccessible and infinite:
I offer this one prayer to the Guru, to bless me, that I may wash the feet of the Holy. ||2||
The thousands of eyes are the eyes of God; the One God, the Primal Being, remains unattached.
The One God, our Lord and Master, has thousands of forms; God alone, through the Guru's Teachings, saves us. ||3||
Following the Guru's Teachings, I have been blessed with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I have enshrined within my heart the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
The sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, is so very sweet; like the mute, I taste its sweetness, but I cannot describe it at all. ||4||
The tongue savors the bland, insipid taste of the love of duality, greed and corruption.
The Gurmukh tastes the flavor of the Lord's Name, and all other tastes and flavors are forgotten. ||5||
Following the Guru's Teachings, I have obtained the wealth of the Lord's Name; hearing it, and chanting it, sins are eradicated.
The Messenger of Death and the Righteous Judge of Dharma do not even approach the beloved servant of my Lord and Master. ||6||
With as many breaths as I have, I chant the Naam, under Guru's Instructions.
Each and every breath which escapes me without the Naam - that breath is useless and corrupt. ||7||
Please grant Your Grace; I am meek; I seek Your Sanctuary, God. Unite me with Your beloved, humble servants.

## Section 23 - Raag Nat Naaraayan - Part 007

Nanak, the slave of Your slaves, says, I am the water-carrier of Your slaves. ||8||1||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
O Lord, I am an unworthy stone.
The Merciful Lord, in His Mercy, has led me to meet the Guru; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, this stone is carried across. ||1||Pause||
The True Guru has implanted within me the exceedingly sweet Naam, the Name of the Lord; it is like the most fragrant sandalwood.
Through the Name, my awareness extends in the ten directions; the fragrance of the fragrant Lord permeates the air. ||1||
Your unlimited sermon is the most sweet sermon; I contemplate the most Sublime Word of the Guru.
Singing, singing, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; singing His Glorious Praises, the Guru saves me. ||2||
The Guru is wise and clear; the Guru looks upon all alike. Meeting with Him, doubt and skepticism are removed.
Meeting with the True Guru, I have obtained the supreme status. I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||3||
Practicing hypocrisy and deception, people wander around in confusion. Greed and hypocrisy are evils in this world.
In this world and the next, they are miserable; the Messenger of Death hovers over their heads, and strikes them down. ||4||
At the break of day, they take care of their affairs, and the poisonous entanglements of Maya.
When night falls, they enter the land of dreams, and even in dreams, they take care of their corruptions and pains. ||5||
Taking a barren field, they plant falsehood; they shall harvest only falsehood.
The materialistic people shall all remain hungry; the brutal Messenger of Death stands waiting at their door. ||6||
The self-willed manmukh has accumulated a tremendous load of debt in sin; only by contemplating the Word of the Shabad, can this debt be paid off.
As much debt and as many creditors as there are, the Lord makes them into servants, who fall at his feet. ||7||
All the beings which the Lord of the Universe created - He puts the rings through their noses, and leads them all along.
O Nanak, as God drives us on, so do we follow; it is all the Will of the Beloved Lord. ||8||2||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
The Lord has bathed me in the pool of Ambrosial Nectar.
The spiritual wisdom of the True Guru is the most excellent cleansing bath; bathing in it, all the filthy sins are washed away. ||1||Pause||
The virtues of the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, are so very great. Even the prostitute was saved, by teaching the parrot to speak the Lord's Name.
Krishna was pleased, and so he touched the hunch-back Kubija, and she was transported to the heavens. ||1||
Ajaamal loved his son Naaraayan, and called out his name.
His loving devotion pleased my Lord and Master, who struck down and drove off the Messengers of Death. ||2||
The mortal speaks and by speaking, makes the people listen; but he does not reflect upon what he himself says.
But when he joins the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, he is confirmed in his faith, and he is saved by the Name of the Lord. ||3||
As long as his soul and body are healthy and strong, he does not remember the Lord at all.
But when his home and mansion catch fire, then, he wants to dig the well to draw water. ||4||
O mind, do not join with the faithless cynic, who has forgotten the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
The word of the faithless cynic stings like a scorpion; leave the faithless cynic far, far behind. ||5||

## Section 23 - Raag Nat Naaraayan - Part 008

Fall in love, fall deeply in love with the Lord; clinging to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you will be exalted and embellished.
Those who accept the Word of the Guru as True, totally True, are very dear to my Lord and Master. ||6||
Because of actions committed in past lives, one comes to love the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
By Guru's Grace, you shall obtain the ambrosial essence; sing of this essence, and reflect upon this essence. ||7||
O Lord, Har, Har, all forms and colors are Yours; O my Beloved, my deep crimson ruby.
Only that color which You impart, Lord, exists; O Nanak, what can the poor wretched being do? ||8||3||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
In the Sanctuary of the Guru, the Lord God saves and protects us,
as He protected the elephant, when the crocodile seized it and pulled it into the water; He lifted him up and pulled him out. ||1||Pause||
God's servants are sublime and exalted; they enshrine faith for Him in their minds.
Faith and devotion are pleasing to my God's Mind; He saves the honor of His humble servants. ||1||
The servant of the Lord, Har, Har, is committed to His service; He sees God pervading the entire expanse of the universe.
He sees the One and only Primal Lord God, who blesses all with His Glance of Grace. ||2||
God, our Lord and Master, is permeating and pervading all places; He takes care of the whole world as His slave.
The Merciful Lord Himself mercifully gives His gifts, even to worms in stones. ||3||
Within the deer is the heavy fragrance of musk, but he is confused and deluded, and he shakes his horns looking for it.
Wandering, rambling and roaming through the forests and woods, I exhausted myself, and then in my own home, the Perfect Guru saved me. ||4||
The Word, the Bani is Guru, and Guru is the Bani. Within the Bani, the Ambrosial Nectar is contained.
If His humble servant believes, and acts according to the Words of the Guru's Bani, then the Guru, in person, emancipates him. ||5||
All is God, and God is the whole expanse; man eats what he has planted.
When Dhrishtabudhi tormented the humble devotee Chandrahaans, he only set his own house on fire. ||6||
God's humble servant longs for Him within his heart; God watches over each breath of His humble servant.
Mercifully, mercifully, He implants devotion within his humble servant; for his sake, God saves the whole world. ||7||
God, our Lord and Master, is Himself by Himself; God Himself embellishes the universe.
O servant Nanak, He Himself is all-pervading; in His Mercy, He Himself emancipates all. ||8||4||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
Grant Your Grace, Lord, and save me,
as You saved Dropadi from shame when she was seized and brought before the court by the evil villians. ||1||Pause||
Bless me with Your Grace - I am just a humble beggar of Yours; I beg for a single blessing, O my Beloved.
I long constantly for the True Guru. Lead me to meet the Guru, O Lord, that I may be exalted and embellished. ||1||
The actions of the faithless cynic are like the churning of water; he churns, constantly churning only water.
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, the supreme status is obtained; the butter is produced, and eaten with delight. ||2||
He may constantly and continually wash his body; he may constantly rub, clean and polish his body.

## Section 23 - Raag Nat Naaraayan - Part 009

But if the Word of my True Guru is not pleasing to his mind, then all his preparations and beautiful decorations are useless. ||3||
Walk playfully and carefree, O my friends and companions; cherish the Glorious Virtues of my Lord and Master.
To serve, as Gurmukh, is pleasing to my God. Through the True Guru, the unknown is known. ||4||
Women and men, all the men and women, all came from the One Primal Lord God.
My mind loves the dust of the feet of the humble; the Lord emancipates those who meet with the Lord's humble servants. ||5||
From village to village, throughout all the cities I wandered; and then, inspired by the Lord's humble servants, I found Him deep within the nucleus of my heart.
Faith and longing have welled up within me, and I have been blended with the Lord; the Guru, the Guru, has saved me. ||6||
The thread of my breath has been made totally sublime and pure; I contemplate the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru.
I came back to the home of my own inner self; drinking in the ambrosial essence, I see the world, without my eyes. ||7||
I cannot describe Your Glorious Virtues, Lord; You are the temple, and I am just a tiny worm.
Bless Nanak with Your Mercy, and unite him with the Guru; meditating on my Lord, my mind is comforted and consoled. ||8||5||
Nat, Fourth Mehl:
O my mind, vibrate, meditate on the inaccessible and infinite Lord and Master.
I am such a great sinner; I am so unworthy. And yet the Guru, in His Mercy, has saved me. ||1||Pause||
I have found the Holy Person, the Holy and humble servant of the Lord; I offer a prayer to Him, my Beloved Guru.
Please, bless me with the wealth, the capital of the Lord's Name, and take away all my hunger and thirst. ||1||
The moth, the deer, the bumble bee, the elephant and the fish are ruined, each by the one passion that controls them.
The five powerful demons are in the body; the Guru, the True Guru turns out these sins. ||2||
I searched and searched through the Shaastras and the Vedas; Naarad the silent sage proclaimed these words as well.
Chanting the Lord's Name, salvation is attained; the Guru saves those in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. ||3||
In love with the Beloved Lord God, one looks at Him as the lotus looks at the sun.
The peacock dances on the mountain, when the clouds hang low and heavy. ||4||
The faithless cyinc may be totally drenched with ambrosial nectar, but even so, all his branches and flowers are filled with venom.
The more one bows down in humility before the faithless cyinc, the more he provokes, and stabs, and spits out his poison. ||5||
Remain with the Holy man, the Saint of the Saints, who chants the Lord's Praises for the benefit of all.
Meeting the Saint of Saints, the mind blossoms forth, like the lotus, exalted by obtaining the water. ||6||
The waves of greed are like mad dogs with rabies. Their madness ruins everything.
When the news reached the Court of my Lord and Master, the Guru took up the sword of spiritual wisdom, and killed them. ||7||
Save me, save me, save me, O my God; shower me with Your Mercy, and save me!
O Nanak, I have no other support; the Guru, the True Guru, has saved me. ||8||6||
First Set of Six Hymns||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/22">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">22. Raag Raamkalee</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/24">
          <span class="pr-2">24. Raag Maale Gaaura</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
