---
title: "27. Raag Kaydaaraa"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/26">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">26. Raag Tukhaari</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/28">
          <span class="pr-2">28. Raag Bhairao</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 001

Kaydaaraa, Fourth Mehl, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O my mind, sing continually the Name of the Lord.
The Inaccessible, Unfathomable Lord cannot be seen; meeting with the Perfect Guru, He is seen. ||Pause||
That person, upon whom my Lord and Master showers His Mercy - the Lord attunes that one to Himself.
Everyone worships the Lord, but only that person who is pleasing to the Lord is accepted. ||1||
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is priceless. It rests with the Lord. If the Lord bestows it, then we meditate on the Naam.
That person, whom my Lord and Master blesses with His Name - his entire account is forgiven. ||2||
Those humble beings who worship and adore the Lord's Name, are said to be blessed. Such is the good destiny written on their foreheads.
Gazing upon them, my mind blossoms forth, like the mother who meets with her son and hugs him close. ||3||
I am a child, and You, O my Lord God, are my Father; please bless me with such understanding, that I may find the Lord.
Like the cow, which is happy upon seeing her calf, O Lord, please hug Nanak close in Your Embrace. ||4||1||
Kaydaaraa, Fourth Mehl, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O my mind, chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har.
Wash the Feet of the True Guru, and worship them. In this way, you shall find my Lord God. ||Pause||
Sexual desire, anger, greed, attachment, egotism and corrupt pleasures - stay away from these.
Join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and speak with the Holy People about the Lord. The Love of the Lord is the healing remedy; the Name of the Lord is the healing remedy. Chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam. ||1||

## Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 002

So you think that the egotistical pride in power which you harbor deep within is everything. Let it go, and restrain your self-conceit.
Please be kind to servant Nanak, O Lord, my Lord and Master; please make him the dust of the Feet of the Saints. ||2||1||2||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O mother, I have awakened in the Society of the Saints.
Seeing the Love of my Beloved, I chant His Name, the greatest treasure||Pause||
I am so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. my eyes are focused on Him;
I have forgotten other thirsts. ||1||
Now, I have found my Peace-giving Guru with ease; seeing His Darshan, my mind clings to Him.
Seeing my Lord, joy has welled up in my mind; O Nanak, the speech of my Beloved is so sweet! ||2||1||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Please listen to the prayers of the humble, O Merciful Lord.
The five thieves and the three dispositions torment my mind.
O Merciful Lord, Master of the masterless, please save me from them. ||Pause||
I make all sorts of efforts and go on pilgrimages;
I perform the six rituals, and meditate in the right way.
I am so tired of making all these efforts, but the horrible demons still do not leave me. ||1||
I seek Your Sanctuary, and bow to You, O Compassionate Lord.
You are the Destroyer of fear, O Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har.
You alone are Merciful to the meek.
Nanak takes the Support of God's Feet.
I have been rescued from the ocean of doubt,
holding tight to the feet and the robes of the Saints. ||2||1||2||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
I have come to Your Sanctuary, O Lord, O Supreme Treasure.
Love for the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is enshrined within my mind; I beg for the gift of Your Name. ||1||Pause||
O Pefect Transcendent Lord, Giver of Peace, please grant Your Grace and save my honor.
Please bless me with such love, O my Lord and Master, that in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I may chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord with my tongue. ||1||
O Lord of the World, Merciful Lord of the Universe, Your sermon and spiritual wisdom are immaculate and pure.
Please attune Nanak to Your Love, O Lord, and focus his meditation on Your Lotus Feet. ||2||1||3||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
My mind yearns for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
Please grant Your Grace, and unite me with the Society of the Saints; please bless me with Your Name. ||Pause||
I serve my True Beloved Lord. Wherever I hear His Praise, there my mind is in ecstasy.

## Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 003

I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice, forever devoted to You. Your place is incomparably beautiful! ||1||
You cherish and nurture all; You take care of all, and Your shade covers all.
You are the Primal Creator, the God of Nanak; I behold You in each and every heart. ||2||2||4||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
I love the Love of my Beloved.
My mind is intoxicated with delight, and my consciousness is filled with hope; my eyes are drenched with Your Love. ||Pause||
Blessed is that day, that hour, minute and second when the heavy, rigid shutters are opened, and desire is quenched.
Seeing the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, I live. ||1||
What is the method, what is the effort, and what is the service, which inspires me to contemplate You?
Abandon your egotistical pride and attachment; O Nanak, you shall be saved in the Society of the Saints. ||2||3||5||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har.
Have Mercy on me, O Life of the World, O Lord of the Universe, that I may chant Your Name. ||Pause||
Please lift me up, God, out of vice and corruption, and attach my mind to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Doubt, fear and attachment are eradicated from that person who follows the Guru's Teachings, and gazes on the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1||
Let my mind become the dust of all; may I abandon my egotistical intellect.
Please bless me with Your devotional worship, O Merciful Lord; by great good fortune, O Nanak, I have found the Lord. ||2||4||6||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
Without the Lord, life is useless.
Those who forsake the Lord, and become engrossed in other pleasures - false and useless are the clothes they wear, and the food they eat. ||Pause||
The pleasures of wealth, youth, property and comforts will not stay with you, O mother.
Seeing the mirage, the madman is entangled in it; he is imbued with pleasures that pass away, like the shade of a tree. ||1||
Totally intoxicated with the wine of pride and attachment, he has fallen into the pit of sexual desire and anger.
O Dear God, please be the Help and Support of servant Nanak; please take me by the hand, and uplift me. ||2||5||7||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
Nothing goes along with the mortal, except for the Lord.
He is the Master of the meek, the Lord of Mercy, my Lord and Master, the Master of the masterless. ||Pause||
Children, possessions and the enjoyment of corrupt pleasures do not go along with the mortal on the path of Death.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the treasure of the Naam, and the Lord of the Universe, the mortal is carried across the deep ocean. ||1||
In the Sanctuary of the All-powerful, Indescribable, Unfathomable Lord, meditate in remembrance on Him, and your pains shall vanish.
Nanak longs for the dust of the feet of the Lord's humble servant; he shall obtain it only if such pre-ordained destiny is written on his forehead. ||2||6||8||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl, Fifth House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
I do not forget the Lord in my mind.
This love has now become very strong; it has burnt away other corruption. ||Pause||
How can the rainbird forsake the rain-drop? The fish cannot survive without water, even for an instant.

## Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 004

My tongue chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World; this has become part of my very nature. ||1||
The deer is fascinated by the sound of the bell, and so it is shot with the sharp arrow.
God's Lotus Feet are the Source of Nectar; O Nanak, I am tied to them by a knot. ||2||1||9||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
My Beloved dwells in the cave of my heart.
Shatter the wall of doubt, O my Lord and Master; please grab hold of me, and lift me up towards Yourself. ||1||Pause||
The world-ocean is so vast and deep; please be kind, lift me up and place me on the shore.
In the Society of the Saints, the Lord's Feet are the boat to carry us across. ||1||
The One who placed you in the womb of your mother's belly - no one else shall save you in the wilderness of corruption.
The power of the Lord's Sanctuary is all-powerful; Nanak does not rely on any other. ||2||2||10||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
With your tongue, chant the Name of the Lord.
Chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, day and night, your sins shall be eradicated. ||Pause||
You shall have to leave behind all your riches when you depart. Death is hanging over your head - know this well!
Transitory attachments and evil hopes are false. Surely you must believe this! ||1||
Within your heart, focus your meditation on the True Primal Being, Akaal Moorat, the Undying Form.
Only this profitable merchandise, the treasure of the Naam, O Nanak, shall be accepted. ||2||3||11||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
I take only the Support of the Name of the Lord.
Suffering and conflict do not afflict me; I deal only with the Society of the Saints. ||Pause||
Showering His Mercy on me, the Lord Himself has saved me, and no evil thoughts arise within me.
Whoever receives this Grace, contemplates Him in meditation; he is not burned by the fire of the world. ||1||
Peace, joy and bliss come from the Lord, Har, Har. God's Feet are sublime and excellent.
Slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; he is the dust of the feet of Your Saints. ||2||4||12||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
Without the Name of the Lord, one's ears are cursed.
Those who forget the Embodiment of Life - what is the point of their lives? ||Pause||
One who eats and drinks countless delicacies is no more than a donkey, a beast of burden.
Twenty-four hours a day, he endures terrible suffering, like the bull, chained to the oil-press. ||1||
Forsaking the Life of the World, and attached to another, they weep and wail in so many ways.
With his palms pressed together, Nanak begs for this gift; O Lord, please keep me strung around Your Neck. ||2||5||13||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:
I take the dust of the feet of the Saints and apply it to my face.
Hearing of the Imperishable, Eternally Perfect Lord, pain does not afflict me, even in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||Pause||
Through the Guru's Word, all affairs are resolved, and the mind is not tossed about here and there.
Whoever sees the One God to be pervading in all the many beings, does not burn in the fire of corruption. ||1||
The Lord grasps His slave by the arm, and his light merges into the Light.
Nanak, the orphan, has come seeking the Sanctuary of God's Feet; O Lord, he walks with You. ||2||6||14||
Kaydaaraa, Fifth Mehl:

## Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 005

My mind is filled with yearning for the Name of the Lord.
I am totally filled with tranquility and bliss; the burning desire within has been quenched. ||Pause||
Walking on the path of the Saints, millions of mortal sinners have been saved.
One who applies the dust of the feet of the humble to his forehead, is purified, as if he has bathed at countless sacred shrines. ||1||
Meditating on His Lotus Feet deep within, one realizes the Lord and Master in each and every heart.
In the Sanctuary of the Divine, Infinite Lord, Nanak shall never again be tortured by the Messenger of Death. ||2||7||15||
Kaydaaraa Chhant, Fifth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Please meet me, O my Dear Beloved. ||Pause||
He is All-pervading amongst all, the Architect of Destiny.
The Lord God has created His Path, which is known in the Society of the Saints.
The Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny, is known in the Society of the Saints; You are seen in each and every heart.
One who comes to His Sanctuary, finds absolute peace; not even a bit of his work goes unnoticed.
One who sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue, is easily, naturally intoxicated with the supreme, sublime essence of divine love.
Slave Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary; You are the Perfect Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny. ||1||
The Lord's humble servant is pierced through with loving devotion to Him; where else can he go?
The fish cannot endure separation, and without water, it will die.
Without the Lord, how can I survive? How can I endure the pain? I am like the rainbird, thirsty for the rain-drop.
“When will the night pass?,” asks the chakvi bird. “I shall find peace only when the rays of the sun shine on me.”
My mind is attached to the Blessed Vision of the Lord. Blessed are the nights and days, when I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord,
Slave Nanak utters this prayer; without the Lord, how can the breath of life continue to flow through me? ||2||
Without the breath, how can the body obtain glory and fame?
Without the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, the humble, holy person does not find peace, even for an instant.
Those who are without the Lord suffer in hell; my mind is pierced through with the Lord's Feet.
The Lord is both sensual and unattached; lovingly attune yourself to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. No one can ever deny Him.
Go and meet with the Lord, and dwell in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; no one can contain that peace within his being.
Please be kind to me, O Lord and Master of Nanak, that I may merge in You. ||3||
Searching and searching, I have met with my Lord God, who has showered me with His Mercy.
I am unworthy, a lowly orphan, but He does not even consider my faults.
He does not consider my faults; He has blessed me with Perfect Peace. It is said that it is His Way to purify us.
Hearing that He is the Love of His devotees, I have grasped the hem of His robe. He is totally permeating each and every heart.
I have found the Lord, the Ocean of Peace, with intuitive ease; the pains of birth and death are gone.
Taking him by the hand, the Lord has saved Nanak, His slave; He has woven the garland of His Name into his heart. ||4||1||

## Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 006

Raag Kaydaaraa, The Word Of Kabeer Jee:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Those who ignore both praise and slander, who reject egotistical pride and conceit,
who look alike upon iron and gold - they are the very image of the Lord God. ||1||
Hardly anyone is a humble servant of Yours, O Lord.
Ignoring sexual desire, anger, greed and attachment, such a person becomes aware of the Lord's Feet. ||1||Pause||
Raajas, the quality of energy and activity; Taamas, the quality of darkness and inertia; and Satvas, the quality of purity and light, are all called the creations of Maya, Your illusion.
That man who realizes the fourth state - he alone obtains the supreme state. ||2||
Amidst pilgrimages, fasting, rituals, purification and self-discipline, he remains always without thought of reward.
Thirst and desire for Maya and doubt depart, remembering the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||3||
When the temple is illuminated by the lamp, its darkness is dispelled.
The Fearless Lord is All-pervading. Doubt has run away, says Kabeer, the Lord's humble slave. ||4||1||
Some deal in bronze and copper, some in cloves and betel nuts.
The Saints deal in the Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe. Such is my merchandise as well. ||1||
I am a trader in the Name of the Lord.
The priceless diamond has come into my hands. I have left the world behind. ||1||Pause||
When the True Lord attached me, then I was attached to Truth. I am a trader of the True Lord.
I have loaded the commodity of Truth; It has reached the Lord, the Treasurer. ||2||
He Himself is the pearl, the jewel, the ruby; He Himself is the jeweller.
He Himself spreads out in the ten directions. The Merchant is Eternal and Unchanging. ||3||
My mind is the bull, and meditation is the road; I have filled my packs with spiritual wisdom, and loaded them on the bull.
Says Kabeer, listen, O Saints: my merchandise has reached its destination! ||4||2||
You barbaric brute, with your primitive intellect - reverse your breath and turn it inward.
Let your mind be intoxicated with the stream of Ambrosial Nectar which trickles down from the furnace of the Tenth Gate. ||1||
O Siblings of Destiny, call on the Lord.
O Saints, drink in this wine forever; it is so difficult to obtain, and it quenches your thirst so easily. ||1||Pause||
In the Fear of God, is the Love of God. Only those few who understand His Love obtain the sublime essence of the Lord, O Siblings of Destiny.
As many hearts as there are - in all of them, is His Ambrosial Nectar; as He pleases, He causes them to drink it in. ||2||
There are nine gates to the one city of the body; restrain your mind from escaping through them.
When the knot of the three qualities is untied, then the Tenth Gate opens up, and the mind is intoxicated, O Siblings of Destiny. ||3||
When the mortal fully realizes the state of fearless dignity, then his sufferings vanish; so says Kabeer after careful deliberation.
Turning away from the world, I have obtained this wine, and I am intoxicated with it. ||4||3||
You are engrossed with unsatisfied sexual desire and unresolved anger; you do not know the State of the One Lord.
Your eyes are blinded, and you see nothing at all. You drown and die without water. ||1||

## Section 27 - Raag Kaydaaraa - Part 007

Why do you walk in that crooked, zig-zag way?
You are nothing more than a bundle of bones, wrapped in skin, filled with manure; you give off such a rotten smell! ||1||Pause||
You do not meditate on the Lord. What doubts have confused and deluded you? Death is not far away from you!
Making all sorts of efforts, you manage to preserve this body, but it shall only survive until its time is up. ||2||
By one's own efforts, nothing is done. What can the mere mortal accomplish?
When it pleases the Lord, the mortal meets the True Guru, and chants the Name of the One Lord. ||3||
You live in a house of sand, but you still puff up your body - you ignorant fool!
Says Kabeer, those who do not remember the Lord may be very clever, but they still drown. ||4||4||
Your turban is crooked, and you walk crooked; and now you have started chewing betel leaves.
You have no use at all for loving devotional worship; you say you have business in court. ||1||
In your egotistical pride, you have forgotten the Lord.
Gazing upon your gold, and your very beautiful wife, you believe that they are permanent. ||1||Pause||
You are engrossed in greed, falsehood, corruption and great arrogance. Your life is passing away.
Says Kabeer, at the very last moment, death will come and seize you, you fool! ||2||5||
The mortal beats the drum for a few days, and then he must depart.
With so much wealth and cash and buried treasure, still, he cannot take anything with him. ||1||Pause||
Sitting on the threshhold, his wife weeps and wails; his mother accompanies him to the outer gate.
All the people and relatives together go to the crematorium, but the swan-soul must go home all alone. ||1||
Those children, that wealth, that city and town - he shall not come to see them again.
Says Kabeer, why do you not meditate on the Lord? Your life is uselessly slipping away! ||2||6||
Raag Kaydaaraa, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
One who performs the six religious rituals and comes from a good family, but who does not have devotion to the Lord in his heart,
one who does not appreciate talk of the Lord's Lotus Feet, is just like an outcaste, a pariah. ||1||
Be conscious, be conscious, be conscious, O my unconscious mind.
Why do you not look at Baalmeek?
From such a low social status, what a high status he obtained! Devotional worship to the Lord is sublime! ||1||Pause||
The killer of dogs, the lowest of all, was lovingly embraced by Krishna.
See how the poor people praise him! His praise extends throughout the three worlds. ||2||
Ajaamal, Pingulaa, Lodhia and the elephant went to the Lord.
Even such evil-minded beings were emancipated. Why should you not also be saved, O Ravi Daas? ||3||1||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/26">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">26. Raag Tukhaari</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/28">
          <span class="pr-2">28. Raag Bhairao</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
