---
title: "28. Raag Bhairao"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/27">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">27. Raag Kaydaaraa</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/29">
          <span class="pr-2">29. Raag Basant</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 001

Raag Bhairao, First Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Without You, nothing happens.
You create the creatures, and gazing on them, you know them. ||1||
What can I say? I cannot say anything.
Whatever exists, is by Your Will. ||Pause||
Whatever is to be done, rests with You.
Unto whom should I offer my prayer? ||2||
I speak and hear the Bani of Your Word.
You Yourself know all Your Wondrous Play. ||3||
You Yourself act, and inspire all to act; only You Yourself know.
Says Nanak, You, Lord, see, establish and disestablish. ||4||1||
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Raag Bhairao, First Mehl, Second House:
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, so many silent sages have been saved; Indra and Brahma have also been saved.
Sanak, Sanandan and many humble men of austerity, by Guru's Grace, have been carried across to the other side. ||1||
Without the Word of the Shabad, how can anyone cross over the terrifying world-ocean?
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the world is entangled in the disease of duality, and is drowned, drowned, and dies. ||1||Pause||
The Guru is Divine; the Guru is Inscrutable and Mysterious. Serving the Guru, the three worlds are known and understood.
The Guru, the Giver, has Himself given me the Gift; I have obtained the Inscrutable, Mysterious Lord. ||2||
The mind is the king; the mind is appeased and satisfied through the mind itself, and desire is stilled in the mind.
The mind is the Yogi, the mind wastes away in separation from the Lord; singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, the mind is instructed and reformed. ||3||
How very rare are those in this world who, through the Guru, subdue their minds, and contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
O Nanak, our Lord and Master is All-pervading; through the True Word of the Shabad, we are emancipated. ||4||1||2||
Bhairao, First Mehl:
The eyes lose their sight, and the body withers away; old age overtakes the mortal, and death hangs over his head.
Beauty, loving attachment and the pleasures of life are not permanent. How can anyone escape from the noose of death? ||1||
O mortal, meditate on the Lord - your life is passing away!

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 002

Without the True Word of the Shabad, you shall never be released, and your life shall be totally useless. ||1||Pause||
Within the body are sexual desire, anger, egotism and attachment. This pain is so great, and so difficult to endure.
As Gurmukh, chant the Lord's Name, and savor it with your tongue; in this way, you shall cross over to the other side. ||2||
Your ears are deaf, and your intellect is worthless, and still, you do not intuitively understand the Word of the Shabad.
The self-willed manmukh wastes this priceless human life and loses it. Without the Guru, the blind person cannot see. ||3||
Whoever remains detached and free of desire in the midst of desire - and whoever, unattached, intuitively meditates on the Celestial Lord
\- prays Nanak, as Gurmukh, he is released. He is lovingly attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||||2||3||
Bhairao, First Mehl:
His walk becomes weak and clumsy, his feet and hands shake, and the skin of his body is withered and wrinkled.
His eyes are dim, his ears are deaf, and yet, the self-willed manmukh does not know the Naam. ||1||
O blind man, what have you obtained by coming into the world?
The Lord is not in your heart, and you do not serve the Guru. After wasting your capital, you shall have to depart. ||1||Pause||
Your tongue is not imbued with the Love of the Lord; whatever you say is tasteless and insipid.
You indulge in slander of the Saints; becoming a beast, you shall never be noble. ||2||
Only a few obtain the sublime essence of the Ambrosial Amrit, united in Union with the True Guru.
As long as the mortal does not come to understand the mystery of the Shabad, the Word of God, he shall continue to be tormented by death. ||3||
Whoever finds the door of the One True Lord, does not know any other house or door.
By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status; so says poor Nanak. ||4||3||4||
Bhairao, First Mehl:
He spends the entire night in sleep; the noose is tied around his neck. His day is wasted in worldly entanglements.
He does not know God, who created this world, for a moment, for even an instant. ||1||
O mortal, how will you escape this terrible disaster?
What did you bring with you, and what will you take away? Meditate on the Lord, the Most Worthy and Generous Lord. ||1||Pause||
The heart-lotus of the self-willed manmukh is upside-down; his intellect is shallow; his mind is blind, and his head is entangled in worldly affairs.
Death and re-birth constantly hang over your head; without the Name, your neck shall be caught in the noose. ||2||
Your steps are unsteady, and your eyes are blind; you are not aware of the Word of the Shabad, O Sibling of Destiny.
The Shaastras and the Vedas keep the mortal bound to the three modes of Maya, and so he performs his deeds blindly. ||3||
He loses his capital - how can he earn any profit? The evil-minded person has no spiritual wisdom at all.
Contemplating the Shabad, he drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord; O Nanak, his faith is confirmed in the Truth. ||4||4||5||
Bhairao, First Mehl:
He remains with the Guru, day and night, and his tongue savors the savory taste of the Lord's Love.
He does not know any other; he realizes the Word of the Shabad. He knows and realizes the Lord deep within his own being. ||1||
Such a humble person is pleasing to my mind.
He conquers his self-conceit, and is imbued with the Infinite Lord. He serves the Guru. ||1||Pause||
Deep within my being, and outside as well, is the Immaculate Lord God. I bow humbly before that Primal Lord God.
Deep within each and every heart, and amidst all, the Embodiment of Truth is permeating and pervading. ||2||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 003

Those who are imbued with Truth - their tongues are tinged with Truth; they do not have even an iota of the filth of falsehood.
They taste the sweet Ambrosial Nectar of the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord; imbued with the Shabad, they are blessed with honor. ||3||
The virtuous meet with the virtuous, and earn the profit; as Gurmukh, they obtain the glorious greatness of the Naam.
All sorrows are erased, by serving the Guru; O Nanak, the Naam is our only Friend and Companion. ||4||5||6||
Bhairao, First Mehl:
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the wealth and support of all; It is enshrined in the heart, by Guru's Grace.
One who gathers this imperishable wealth is fulfilled, and through intuitive meditation, is lovingly focused on the Lord. ||1||
O mortal, focus your consciousness on devotional worship of the Lord.
As Gurmukh, meditate on the Name of the Lord in your heart, and you shall return to your home with intuitive ease. ||1||Pause||
Doubt, separation and fear are never eradicated, and the mortal continues coming and going in reincarnation, as long as he does not know the Lord.
Without the Name of the Lord, no one is liberated; they drown and die without water. ||2||
Busy with his worldly affairs, all honor is lost; the ignorant one is not rid of his doubts.
Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mortal is never liberated; he remains blindly entangled in the expanse of worldly affairs. ||3||
My mind is pleased and appeased with the Immaculate Lord, who has no ancestry. Through the mind itself, the mind is subdued.
Deep within my being, and outside as well, I know only the One Lord. O Nanak, there is no other at all. ||4||6||7||
Bhairao, First Mehl:
You may give feasts, make burnt offerings, donate to charity, perform austere penance and worship, and endure pain and suffering in the body.
But without the Lord's Name, liberation is not obtained. As Gurmukh, obtain the Naam and liberation. ||1||
Without the Lord's Name, birth into the world is useless.
Without the Name, the mortal eats poison and speaks poisonous words; he dies fruitlessly, and wanders in reincarnation. ||1||Pause||
The mortal may read scriptures, study grammar and say his prayers three times a day.
Without the Word of the Guru's Shabad, where is liberation, O mortal? Without the Lord's Name, the mortal is entangled and dies. ||2||
Walking sticks, begging bowls, hair tufts, sacred threads, loin cloths, pilgrimages to sacred shrines and wandering all around
\- without the Lord's Name, peace and tranquility are not obtained. One who chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, crosses over to the other side. ||3||
The mortal's hair may be matted and tangled upon his head, and he may smear his body with ashes; he may take off his clothes and go naked.
But without the Lord's Name, he is not satisfied; he wears religious robes, but he is bound by the karma of the actions he committed in past lives. ||4||
As many beings and creatures as there are in the water, on the land and in the sky - wherever they are, You are with them all, O Lord.
By Guru's Grace, please preserve Your humble servant; O Lord, Nanak stirs up this juice, and drinks it in. ||5||7||8||
Raag Bhairao, Third Mehl, Chaupadas, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
No one should be proud of his social class and status.
He alone is a Brahmin, who knows God. ||1||
Do not be proud of your social class and status, you ignorant fool!

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 004

So much sin and corruption comes from this pride. ||1||Pause||
Everyone says that there are four castes, four social classes.
They all emanate from the drop of God's Seed. ||2||
The entire universe is made of the same clay.
The Potter has shaped it into all sorts of vessels. ||3||
The five elements join together, to make up the form of the human body.
Who can say which is less, and which is more? ||4||
Says Nanak, this soul is bound by its actions.
Without meeting the True Guru, it is not liberated. ||5||1||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
The Yogis, the householders, the Pandits, the religious scholars, and the beggars in religious robes
\- they are all asleep in egotism. ||1||
They are asleep, intoxicated with the wine of Maya.
Only those who remain awake and aware are not robbed. ||1||Pause||
One who has met the True Guru, remains awake and aware.
Such a person overpowers the five thieves. ||2||
One who contemplates the essence of reality remains awake and aware.
He kills his self-conceit, and does not kill anyone else. ||3||
One who knows the One Lord remains awake and aware.
He abandons the service of others, and realizes the essence of reality. ||4||
Of the four castes, whoever remains awake and aware
is released from birth and death. ||5||
Says Nanak, that humble being remains awake and aware,
who applies the ointment of spiritual wisdom to his eyes. ||6||2||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
Whoever the Lord keeps in His Sanctuary,
is attached to the Truth, and receives the fruit of Truth. ||1||
O mortal, unto whom will you complain?
The Hukam of the Lord's Command is pervasive; by the Hukam of His Command, all things happen. ||1||Pause||
This Creation was established by You.
In an instant You destroy it, and You create it again without a moment's delay. ||2||
By His Grace, He has staged this Play.
By the Guru's Merciful Grace, I have obtained the supreme status. ||3||
Says Nanak, He alone kills and revives.
Understand this well - do not be confused by doubt. ||4||3||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
I am the bride; the Creator is my Husband Lord.
As He inspires me, I adorn myself. ||1||
When it pleases Him, He enjoys me.
I am joined, body and mind, to my True Lord and Master. ||1||Pause||
How can anyone praise or slander anyone else?
The One Lord Himself is pervading and permeating all. ||2||
By Guru's Grace, I am attracted by His Love.
I shall meet with my Merciful Lord, and vibrate the Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds. ||3||
Prays Nanak, what can anyone do?
He alone meets with the Lord, whom the Lord Himself meets. ||4||4||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
He alone is a silent sage, who subdues his mind's duality.
Subduing his duality, he contemplates God. ||1||
Let each person examine his own mind, O Siblings of Destiny.
Examine your mind, and you shall obtain the nine treasures of the Naam. ||1||Pause||
The Creator created the world, upon the foundation of worldly love and attachment.
Attaching it to possessiveness, He has led it into confusion with doubt. ||2||
From this Mind come all bodies, and the breath of life.
By mental contemplation, the mortal realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command, and merges in Him. ||3||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 005

When the mortal has good karma, the Guru grants His Grace.
Then this mind is awakened, and the duality of this mind is subdued. ||4||
It is the innate nature of the mind to remain forever detached.
The Detached, Dispassionate Lord dwells within all. ||5||
Says Nanak, one who understands this mystery,
becomes the embodiment of the Primal, Immaculate, Divine Lord God. ||6||5||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
The world is saved through Name of the Lord.
It carries the mortal across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||
By Guru's Grace, dwell upon the Lord's Name.
It shall stand by you forever. ||1||Pause||
The foolish self-willed manmukhs do not remember the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Without the Name, how will they cross over? ||2||
The Lord, the Great Giver, Himself gives His Gifts.
Celebrate and praise the Great Giver! ||3||
Granting His Grace, the Lord unites the mortals with the True Guru.
O Nanak, the Naam is enshrined within the heart. ||4||6||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
All people are saved through the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Those who become Gurmukh are blessed to receive It. ||1||
When the Dear Lord showers His Mercy,
He blesses the Gurmukh with the glorious greatness of the Naam. ||1||Pause||
Those who love the Beloved Name of the Lord
save themselves, and save all their ancestors. ||2||
Without the Name, the self-willed manmukhs go to the City of Death.
They suffer in pain and endure beatings. ||3||
When the Creator Himself gives,
O Nanak, then the mortals receive the Naam. ||4||7||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
Love of the Lord of the Universe saved Sanak and his brother, the sons of Brahma.
They contemplated the Word of the Shabad, and the Name of the Lord. ||1||
O Dear Lord, please shower me with Your Mercy,
that as Gurmukh, I may embrace love for Your Name. ||1||Pause||
Whoever has true loving devotional worship deep within his being
meets the Lord, through the Perfect Guru. ||2||
He naturally, intuitively dwells within the home of his own inner being.
The Naam abides within the mind of the Gurmukh. ||3||
The Lord, the Seer, Himself sees.
O Nanak, enshrine the Naam within your heart. ||4||8||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, enshrine the Lord's Name within your heart.
Without the Name, ashes will be blown in your face. ||1||
The Lord's Name is so difficult to obtain, O Siblings of Destiny.
By Guru's Grace, it comes to dwell in the mind. ||1||Pause||
That humble being who seeks the Lord's Name,
receives it from the Perfect Guru. ||2||
Those humble beings who accept the Will of the Lord, are approved and accepted.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they bear the insignia of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3||
So serve the One, whose power supports the Universe.
O Nanak, the Gurmukh loves the Naam. ||4||9||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, many rituals are performed.
But it is not the time for them, and so they are of no use. ||1||
In Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the most sublime.
As Gurmukh, be lovingly attached to Truth. ||1||Pause||
Searching my body and mind, I found Him within the home of my own heart.
The Gurmukh centers his consciousness on the Lord's Name. ||2||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 006

The ointment of spiritual wisdom is obtained from the True Guru.
The Lord's Name is pervading the three worlds. ||3||
In Kali Yuga, it is the time for the One Dear Lord; it is not the time for anything else.
O Nanak, as Gurmukh, let the Lord's Name grow within your heart. ||4||10||
Bhairao, Third Mehl, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The self-willed manmukhs are afflicted with the disease of duality; they are burnt by the intense fire of desire.
They die and die again, and are reborn; they find no place of rest. They waste their lives uselessly. ||1||
O my Beloved, grant Your Grace, and give me understanding.
The world was created in the disease of egotism; without the Word of the Shabad, the disease is not cured. ||1||Pause||
There are so many silent sages, who read the Simritees and the Shaastras; without the Shabad, they have no clear awareness.
All those under the influence of the three qualities are afflicted with the disease; through possessiveness, they lose their awareness. ||2||
O God, you save some, and you enjoin others to serve the Guru.
They obtain the treasure of the Name of the Lord; peace comes to abide within their minds. ||3||
The Gurmukhs dwell in the fourth state; they obtain a dwelling in the home of their own inner being.
The Perfect True Guru shows His Mercy to them; they eradicate their self-conceit from within. ||4||
Everyone must serve the One Lord, who created Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.
O Nanak, the One True Lord is permanent and stable. He does not die, and He is not born. ||5||1||11||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
The self-willed manmukh is afflicted with the disease of duality forever; the entire universe is diseased.
The Gurmukh understands, and is cured of the disease, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||
O Dear Lord, please let me join the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation.
O Nanak, the Lord blesses with glorious greatness, those who focus their consciousness on the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause||
Death takes all those who are afflicted with the disease of possessiveness. They are subject to the Messenger of Death.
The Messenger of Death does not even approach that mortal who, as Gurmukh, enshrines the Lord within his heart. ||2||
One who does not know the Lord's Name, and who does not become Gurmukh - why did he even come into the world?
He never serves the Guru; he wastes his life uselessly. ||3||
O Nanak, those whom the True Guru enjoins to His service, have perfect good fortune.
They obtain the fruits of their desires, and find peace in the Word of the Guru's Bani. ||4||2||12||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
In pain he is born, in pain he dies, and in pain he does his deeds.
He is never released from the womb of reincarnation; he rots away in manure. ||1||
Cursed, cursed is the self-willed manmukh, who wastes his life away.
He does not serve the Perfect Guru; he does not love the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
The Word of the Guru's Shabad cures all diseases; he alone is attached to it, whom the Dear Lord attaches.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 007

Through the Naam, glorious greatness is obtained; he alone obtains it, whose mind is filled with the Lord. ||2||
Meeting the True Guru, the fruitful rewards are obtained. This true lifestyle beings sublime peace.
Those humble beings who are attached to the Lord are immaculate; they enshrine love for the Lord's Name. ||3||
If I obtain the dust of their feet, I apply it to my forehead. They meditate on the Perfect True Guru.
O Nanak, this dust is obtained only by perfect destiny. They focus their consciousness on the Lord's Name. ||4||3||13||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
That humble being who contemplates the Word of the Shabad is true; the True Lord is within his heart.
If someone performs true devotional worship day and night, then his body will not feel pain. ||1||
Everyone calls him, “Devotee, devotee.”
But without serving the True Guru, devotional worship is not obtained. Only through perfect destiny does one meet God. ||1||Pause||
The self-willed manmukhs lose their capital, and still, they demand profits. How can they earn any profit?
The Messenger of Death is always hovering above their heads. In the love of duality, they lose their honor. ||2||
Trying on all sorts of religious robes, they wander around day and night, but the disease of their egotism is not cured.
Reading and studying, they argue and debate; attached to Maya, they lose their awareness. ||3||
Those who serve the True Guru are blessed with the supreme status; through the Naam, they are blessed with glorious greatness.
O Nanak, those whose minds are filled with the Naam, are honored in the Court of the True Lord. ||4||4||14||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
The self-willed manmukh cannot escape false hope. In the love of duality, he is ruined.
His belly is like a river - it is never filled up. He is consumed by the fire of desire. ||1||
Eternally blissful are those who are imbued with the sublime essence of the Lord.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, fills their hearts, and duality runs away from their minds. Drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord, Har, Har, they are satisfied. ||1||Pause||
The Supreme Lord God Himself created the Universe; He links each and every person to their tasks.
He Himself created love and attachment to Maya; He Himself attaches the mortals to duality. ||2||
If there were any other, then I would speak to him; all will be merged in You.
The Gurmukh contemplates the essence of spiritual wisdom; his light merges into the Light. ||3||
God is True, Forever True, and all His Creation is True.
O Nanak, the True Guru has given me this understanding; the True Name brings emancipation. ||4||5||15||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, those who do not realize the Lord are goblins. In the Golden Age of Sat Yuga, the supreme soul-swans contemplated the Lord.
In the Silver Age of Dwaapur Yuga, and the Brass Age of Traytaa Yuga, mankind prevailed, but only a rare few subdued their egos. ||1||
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, glorious greatness is obtained through the Lord's Name.
In each and every age, the Gurmukhs know the One Lord; without the Name, liberation is not attained. ||1||Pause||
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is revealed in the heart of the True Lord's humble servant. It dwells in the mind of the Gurmukh.
Those who are lovingly focused on the Lord's Name save themselves; they save all their ancestors as well. ||2||
My Lord God is the Giver of virtue. The Word of the Shabad burns away all faults and demerits.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 008

Those whose minds are filled with the Naam are beautiful; they enshrine the Naam within their hearts. ||3||
The True Guru has revealed to me the Lord's Home and His Court, and the Mansion of His Presence. I joyfully enjoy His Love.
Whatever He says, I accept as good; Nanak chants the Naam. ||4||6||16||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
The desires of the mind are absorbed in the mind, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Understanding is obtained from the Perfect Guru, and then the mortal does not die over and over again. ||1||
My mind takes the Support of the Lord's Name.
By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status; the Lord is the Fulfiller of all desires. ||1||Pause||
The One Lord is permeating and pervading amongst all; without the Guru, this understanding is not obtained.
My Lord God has been revealed to me, and I have become Gurmukh. Night and day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
The One Lord is the Giver of peace; peace is not found anywhere else.
Those who do not serve the Giver, the True Guru, depart regretfully in the end. ||3||
Serving the True Guru, lasting peace is obtained, and the mortal does not suffer in pain any longer.
Nanak has been blessed with devotional worship of the Lord; his light has merged into the Light. ||4||7||17||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
Without the Guru, the world is insane; confused and deluded, it is beaten, and it suffers.
It dies and dies again, and is reborn, always in pain, but it is unaware of the Lord's Gate. ||1||
O my mind, remain always in the Protection of the True Guru's Sanctuary.
Those people, to whose hearts the Lord's Name seems sweet, are carried across the terrifying world-ocean by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||Pause||
The mortal wears various religious robes, but his consciousness is unsteady; deep within, he is filled with sexual desire, anger and egotism.
Deep within is the great thirst and immense hunger; he wanders from door to door. ||2||
Those who die in the Word of the Guru's Shabad are reborn; they find the door of liberation.
With constant peace and tranquility deep within, they enshrine the Lord within their hearts. ||3||
As it pleases Him, He inspires us to act. Nothing else can be done.
O Nanak, the Gurmukh contemplates the Word of the Shabad, and is blessed with the glorious greatness of the Lord's Name. ||4||8||18||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
Lost in egotism, Maya and attachment, the mortal earns pain, and eats pain.
The great disease, the rabid disease of greed, is deep within him; he wanders around indiscriminately. ||1||
The life of the self-willed manmukh in this world is cursed.
He does not remember the Lord's Name, even in his dreams. He is never in love with the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause||
He acts like a beast, and does not understand anything. Practicing falsehood, he becomes false.
But when the mortal meets the True Guru, his way of looking at the world changes. How rare are those humble beings who seek and find the Lord. ||2||
That person, whose heart is forever filled with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, obtains the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue.
By Guru's Grace, he finds the Perfect Lord; the egotistical pride of his mind is eradicated. ||3||
The Creator Himself acts, and causes all to act. He Himself places us on the path.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 009

He Himself blesses the Gurmukh with glorious greatness; O Nanak, he merges in the Naam. ||4||9||19||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
Upon my writing tablet, I write the Name of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe, the Lord of the World.
In the love of duality, the mortals are caught in the noose of the Messenger of Death.
The True Guru nurtures and sustains me.
The Lord, the Giver of peace, is always with me. ||1||
Following his Guru's instructions, Prahlaad chanted the Lord's Name;
he was a child, but he was not afraid when his teacher yelled at him. ||1||Pause||
Prahlaad's mother gave her beloved son some advice:
“My son, you must abandon the Lord's Name, and save your life!”
Prahlaad said: "Listen, O my mother;
I shall never give up the Lord's Name. My Guru has taught me this."||2||
Sandaa and Markaa, his teachers, went to his father the king, and complained:
“Prahlaad himself has gone astray, and he leads all the other pupils astray.”
In the court of the wicked king, a plan was hatched.
God is the Savior of Prahlaad. ||3||
With sword in hand, and with great egotistical pride, Prahlaad's father ran up to him.
“Where is your Lord, who will save you?”
In an instant, the Lord appeared in a dreadful form, and shattered the pillar.
Harnaakhash was torn apart by His claws, and Prahlaad was saved. ||4||
The Dear Lord completes the tasks of the Saints.
He saved twenty-one generations of Prahlaad's descendents.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the poison of egotism is neutralized.
O Nanak, through the Name of the Lord, the Saints are emancipated. ||5||10||20||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
The Lord Himself makes demons pursue the Saints, and He Himself saves them.
Those who remain forever in Your Sanctuary, O Lord - their minds are never touched by sorrow. ||1||
In each and every age, the Lord saves the honor of His devotees.
Prahlaad, the demon's son, knew nothing of the Hindu morning prayer, the Gayatri, and nothing about ceremonial water-offerings to his ancestors; but through the Word of the Shabad, he was united in the Lord's Union. ||1||Pause||
Night and day, he performed devotional worship service, day and night, and through the Shabad, his duality was eradicated.
Those who are imbued with Truth are immaculate and pure; the True Lord abides within their minds. ||2||
The fools in duality read, but they do not understand anything; they waste their lives uselessly.
The wicked demon slandered the Saint, and stirred up trouble. ||3||
Prahlaad did not read in duality, and he did not abandon the Lord's Name; he was not afraid of any fear.
The Dear Lord became the Savior of the Saint, and the demonic Death could not even approach him. ||4||
The Lord Himself saved his honor, and blessed his devotee with glorious greatness.
O Nanak, Harnaakhash was torn apart by the Lord with His claws; the blind demon knew nothing of the Lord's Court. ||5||11||21||
Raag Bhairao, Fourth Mehl, Chaupadas, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The Lord, in His Mercy, attaches mortals to the feet of the Saints.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 010

Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, vibrate and meditate on the Lord; let your awareness be absorbed in Him. ||1||
O my mind, vibrate and meditate on the Lord and the Name of the Lord.
The Lord, Har, Har, the Giver of Peace, grants His Grace; the Gurmukh crosses over the terrifying world-ocean through the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, sing of the Lord.
Follow the Guru's Teachings, and you shall obtain the Lord, the Source of Nectar. ||2||
Bathe in the pool of ambrosial nectar, the spiritual wisdom of the Holy Guru.
All sins will be eliminated and eradicated. ||3||
You Yourself are the Creator, the Support of the Universe.
Please unite servant Nanak with Yourself; he is the slave of Your slaves. ||4||1||
Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:
Fruitful is that moment when the Lord's Name is spoken.
Following the Guru's Teachings, all pains are taken away. ||1||
O my mind, vibrate the Name of the Lord.
O Lord, be merciful, and unite me with the Perfect Guru. Joining with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||
Meditate on the Life of the World; remember the Lord in your mind.
Millions upon millions of your sins shall be taken away. ||2||
In the Sat Sangat, apply the dust of the feet of the holy to your face;
this is how to bathe in the sixty-eight sacred shrines, and the Ganges. ||3||
I am a fool; the Lord has shown mercy to me.
The Savior Lord has saved servant Nanak. ||4||2||
Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:
To do good deeds is the best rosary.
Chant on the beads within your heart, and it shall go along with you. ||1||
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, the Lord of the forest.
Have mercy on me, Lord, and unite me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, so that I may be released from Maya's noose of death. ||1||Pause||
Whoever, as Gurmukh, serves and works hard,
is molded and shaped in the true mint of the Shabad, the Word of God. ||2||
The Guru has revealed to me the Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord.
Searching within the body-village, I have found the Lord. ||3||
I am just a child; the Lord is my Father, who nurtures and cherishes me.
Please save servant Nanak, Lord; bless him with Your Glance of Grace. ||4||3||
Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:
All hearts are Yours, Lord; You are in all.
There is nothing at all except You. ||1||
O my mind, meditate on the Lord, the Giver of peace.
I praise You, O Lord God, You are my Father. ||1||Pause||
Wherever I look, I see only the Lord God.
All are under Your control; there is no other at all. ||2||
O Lord, when it is Your Will to save someone,
then nothing can threaten him. ||3||
You are totally pervading and permeating the waters, the lands, the skies and all places.
Servant Nanak meditates on the Ever-present Lord. ||4||4||
Bhairao, Fourth Mehl, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The Lord's Saint is the embodiment of the Lord; within his heart is the Name of the Lord.
One who has such destiny inscribed on his forehead, follows the Guru's Teachings, and contemplates the Name of the Lord within his heart. ||1||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 011

Enshrine Him in your heart, and meditate on the Lord.
The five plundering thieves are in the body-village; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord has beaten them and driven them out. ||1||Pause||
Those whose minds are satisfied with the Lord - the Lord Himself resolves their affairs.
Their subservience and their dependence on other people is ended; the Creator Lord is on their side. ||2||
If something were beyond the realm of the Lord's Power, only then would we have recourse to consult someone else.
Whatever the Lord does is good. Meditate on the Name of the Lord, night and day. ||3||
Whatever the Lord does, He does by Himself. He does not ask or consult anyone else.
O Nanak, meditate forever on God; granting His Grace, He unites us with the True Guru. ||4||1||5||
Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:
O my Lord and Master, please unite me with the Holy people; meditating on You, I am saved.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of their Darshan, my mind blossoms forth. Each and every moment, I am a sacrifice to them. ||1||
Meditate within your heart on the Name of the Lord.
Show Mercy, Mercy to me, O Father of the World, O my Lord and Master; make me the water-carrier of the slave of Your slaves. ||1||Pause||
Their intellect is sublime and exalted, and so is their honor; the Lord, the Lord of the forest, abides within their hearts.
O my Lord and Master, please link me to the service of those who meditate in remembrance on You, and are saved. ||2||
Those who do not find such a Holy True Guru are beaten, and driven out of the Court of the Lord.
These slanderous people have no honor or reputation; their noses are cut by the Creator Lord. ||3||
The Lord Himself speaks, and the Lord Himself inspires all to speak; He is Immaculate and Formless, and needs no sustenance.
O Lord, he alone meets You, whom You cause to meet. Says servant Nanak, I am a wretched creature. What can I do? ||4||2||6||
Bhairao, Fourth Mehl:
That is Your True Congregation, Lord, where the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are heard.
The minds of those who listen to the Lord's Name are drenched with bliss; I worship their feet continually. ||1||
Meditating on the Lord, the Life of the World, the mortals cross over.
Your Names are so many, they are countless, O Lord. This tongue of mine cannot even count them. ||1||Pause||
O Gursikhs, chant the Lord's Name, and sing the Praises of the Lord. Take the Guru's Teachings, and meditate on the Lord.
Whoever listens to the Guru's Teachings - that humble being receives countless comforts and pleasures from the Lord. ||2||
Blessed is the ancestry, blessed is the father, and blessed is that mother who gave birth to this humble servant.
Those who meditate on my Lord, Har, Har, with every breath and morsel of food - those humble servants of the Lord look beautiful in the True Court of the Lord. ||3||
O Lord, Har, Har, Your Names are profound and infinite; Your devotees cherish them deep within.
Servant Nanak has obained the wisdom of the Guru's Teachings; meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, he crosses over to the other side. ||4||3||7||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 012

Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Setting aside all other days, it is said that the Lord was born on the eighth lunar day. ||1||
Deluded and confused by doubt, the mortal practices falsehood.
The Lord is beyond birth and death. ||1||Pause||
You prepare sweet treats and feed them to your stone god.
God is not born, and He does not die, you foolish, faithless cynic! ||2||
You sing lullabyes to your stone god - this is the source of all your mistakes.
Let that mouth be burnt, which says that our Lord and Master is subject to birth. ||3||
He is not born, and He does not die; He does not come and go in reincarnation.
The God of Nanak is pervading and permeating everywhere. ||4||1||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Standing up, I am at peace; sitting down, I am at peace.
I feel no fear, because this is what I understand. ||1||
The One Lord, my Lord and Master, is my Protector.
He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of Hearts. ||1||Pause||
I sleep without worry, and I awake without worry.
You, O God, are pervading everywhere. ||2||
I dwell in peace in my home, and I am at peace outside.
Says Nanak, the Guru has implanted His Mantra within me. ||3||2||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
I do not keep fasts, nor do I observe the month of Ramadaan.
I serve only the One, who will protect me in the end. ||1||
The One Lord, the Lord of the World, is my God Allah.
He adminsters justice to both Hindus and Muslims. ||1||Pause||
I do not make pilgrimages to Mecca, nor do I worship at Hindu sacred shrines.
I serve the One Lord, and not any other. ||2||
I do not perform Hindu worship services, nor do I offer the Muslim prayers.
I have taken the One Formless Lord into my heart; I humbly worship Him there. ||3||
I am not a Hindu, nor am I a Muslim.
My body and breath of life belong to Allah - to Raam - the God of both. ||4||
Says Kabeer, this is what I say:
meeting with the Guru, my Spiritual Teacher, I realize God, my Lord and Master. ||5||3||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
I easily tied up the deer - the ten sensory organs.
I shot five of the desires with the Word of the Lord's Bani. ||1||
I go out hunting with the Saints,
and we capture the deer without horses or weapons. ||1||Pause||
My mind used to run around outside hunting.
But now, I have found the game within the home of my body-village. ||2||
I caught the deer and brought them home.
Dividing them up, I shared them, bit by bit. ||3||
God has given this gift.
Nanak's home is filled with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||4||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Even though he may be fed with hundreds of longings and yearnings,
still the faithless cynic does not remember the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||
Take in the teachings of the humble Saints.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall obtain the supreme status. ||1||Pause||
Stones may be kept under water for a long time.
Even so, they do not absorb the water; they remain hard and dry. ||2||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 013

The six Shaastras may be read to a fool,
but it is like the wind blowing in the ten directions. ||3||
It is like threshing a crop without any corn - nothing is gained.
In the same way, no benefit comes from the faithless cynic. ||4||
As the Lord attaches them, so are all attached.
Says Nanak, God has formed such a form. ||5||5||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
He created the soul, the breath of life and the body.
He created all beings, and knows their pains. ||1||
The Guru, the Lord of the Universe, is the Helper of the soul.
Here and herafter, He always provides shade. ||1||Pause||
Worship and adoration of God is the pure way of life.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the love of duality vanishes. ||2||
Friends, well-wishers and wealth will not support you.
Blessed, blessed is my Lord. ||3||
Nanak utters the Ambrosial Bani of the Lord.
Except the One Lord, he does not know any other at all. ||4||6||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The Lord is in front of me, and the Lord is behind me.
My Beloved Lord, the Source of Nectar, is in the middle as well. ||1||
God is my Shaastra and my favorable omen.
In His Home and Mansion, I find peace, poise and bliss. ||1||Pause||
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, with my tongue, and hearing it with my ears, I live.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on God, I have become eternal, permanent and stable. ||2||
The pains of countless lifetimes have been erased.
The Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, the Word of God, vibrates in the Court of the Lord. ||3||
Granting His Grace, God has blended me with Himself.
Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of God. ||4||7||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
It brings millions of desires to fulfillment.
On the Path of Death, It will go with you and help you. ||1||
The Naam, the Name of the Lord of the Universe, is the holy water of the Ganges.
Whoever meditates on it, is saved; drinking it in, the mortal does not wander in reincarnation again. ||1||Pause||
It is my worship, meditation, austerity and cleansing bath.
Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, I have become free of desire. ||2||
It is my domain and empire, wealth, mansion and court.
Meditating in remembrance on the Naam brings perfect conduct. ||3||
Slave Nanak has deliberated, and has come to this conclusion:
Without the Lord's Name, everything is false and worthless, like ashes. ||4||8||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The poison had absolutely no harmful effect.
But the wicked Brahmin died in pain. ||1||
The Supreme Lord God Himself has saved His humble servant.
The sinner died through the Power of the Guru. ||1||Pause||
The humble servant of the Lord and Master meditates on Him.
He Himself has destroyed the ignorant sinner. ||2||
God is the Mother, the Father and the Protector of His slave.
The face of the slanderer, here and hereafter, is blackened. ||3||
The Transcendent Lord has heard the prayer of servant Nanak.
The filthy sinner lost hope and died. ||4||9||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Excellent, excellent, excellent, excellent, excellent is Your Name.
False, false, false, false is pride in the world. ||1||Pause||
The glorious vision of Your slaves, O Infinite Lord, is wonderful and beauteous.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 014

Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the whole world is just ashes. ||1||
Your Creative Power is marvellous, and Your Lotus Feet are admirable.
Your Praise is priceless, O True King. ||2||
God is the Support of the unsupported.
Meditate day and night on the Cherisher of the meek and humble. ||3||
God has been merciful to Nanak.
May I never forget God; He is my heart, my soul, my breath of life. ||4||10||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
As Gurmukh, obtain the true wealth.
Accept the Will of God as True. ||1||
Live, live, live forever.
Rise early each day, and drink in the Nectar of the Lord.
With your tongue, chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the One Name alone shall save you.
Nanak speaks the wisdom of God. ||2||11||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Serving the True Guru, all fruits and rewards are obtained.
The filth of so many lifetimes is washed away. ||1||
Your Name, God, is the Purifier of sinners.
Because of the karma of my past deeds, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I am saved.
I am blessed with honor in God's Court. ||2||
Serving at God's Feet, all comforts are obtained.
All the angels and demi-gods long for the dust of the feet of such beings. ||3||
Nanak has obtained the treasure of the Naam.
Chanting and meditating on the Lord, the whole world is saved. ||4||12||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
God hugs His slave close in His Embrace.
He throws the slanderer into the fire. ||1||
The Lord saves His servants from the sinners.
No one can save the sinner. The sinner is destroyed by his own actions. ||1||Pause||
The Lord's slave is in love with the Dear Lord.
The slanderer loves something else. ||2||
The Supreme Lord God has revealed His Innate Nature.
The evil-doer obtains the fruits of his own actions. ||3||
God does not come or go; He is All-pervading and permeating.
Slave Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||4||13||
Raag Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, Chaupadas, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The Fascinating Lord, the Creator of all, the Formless Lord, is the Giver of Peace.
You have abandoned this Lord, and you serve another. Why are you intoxicated with the pleasures of corruption? ||1||
O my mind, meditate on the Lord of the Universe.
I have seen all other sorts of efforts; whatever you can think of, will only bring failure. ||1||Pause||
The blind, ignorant, self-willed manmukhs forsake their Lord and Master, and dwell on His slave Maya.
They slander those who worship their Lord; they are like beasts, without a Guru. ||2||
Soul, life, body and wealth all belong to God, but the faithless cynics claim that they own them.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 015

They are proud and arrogant, evil-minded and filthy; without the Guru, they are reincarnated into the terrifying world-ocean. ||3||
Through burnt offerings, charitable feasts, ritualistic chants, penance, all sorts of austere self-discipline and pilgrimages to sacred shrines and rivers, they do not find God.
Self-conceit is only erased when one seeks the Lord's Sanctuary and becomes Gurmukh; O Nanak, he crosses over the world-ocean. ||4||1||14||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
I have seen Him in the woods, and I have seen Him in the fields. I have seen Him in the household, and in renunciation.
I have seen Him as a Yogi carrying His staff, as a Yogi with matted hair, fasting, making vows, and visiting sacred shrines of pilgrimage. ||1||
I have seen Him in the Society of the Saints, and within my own mind.
In the sky, in the nether regions of the underworld, and in everything, He is pervading and permeating. With love and joy, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1||Pause||
I have seen Him among the Yogis, the Sannyaasees, the celibates, the wandering hermits and the wearers of patched coats.
I have seen Him among the men of severe self-discipline, the silent sages, the actors, dramas and dances. ||2||
I have seen Him in the four Vedas, I have seen Him in the six Shaastras, in the eighteen Puraanas and the Simritees as well.
All together, they declare that there is only the One Lord. So tell me, from whom is He hidden? ||3||
Unfathomable and Inaccessible, He is our Infinite Lord and Master; His Value is beyond valuation.
Servant Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to those, within whose heart He is revealed. ||4||2||15||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
How can anyone do evil, if he realizes that the Lord is near?
One who gathers corruption, constantly feels fear.
He is near, but this mystery is not understood.
Without the True Guru, all are enticed by Maya. ||1||
Everyone says that He is near, near at hand.
But rare is that person, who, as Gurmukh, understands this mystery. ||1||Pause||
The mortal does not see the Lord near at hand; instead, he goes to the homes of others.
He steals their wealth and lives in falsehood.
Under the influence of the drug of illusion, he does not know that the Lord is with him.
Without the Guru, he is confused and deluded by doubt. ||2||
Not understanding that the Lord is near, he tells lies.
In love and attachment to Maya, the fool is plundered.
That which he seeks is within his own self, but he looks for it outside.
Without the Guru, he is confused and deluded by doubt. ||3||
One whose good karma is recorded on his forehead
serves the True Guru; thus the hard and heavy shutters of his mind are opened wide.
Within his own being and beyond, he sees the Lord near at hand.
O servant Nanak, he does not come and go in reincarnation. ||4||3||16||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Who can kill that person whom You protect, O Lord?
All beings, and the entire universe, is within You.
The mortal thinks up millions of plans,
but that alone happens, which the Lord of wondrous plays does. ||1||
Save me, save me, O Lord; shower me with Your Mercy.
I seek Your Sanctuary, and Your Court. ||1||Pause||
Whoever serves the Fearless Lord, the Giver of Peace,
is rid of all his fears; he knows the One Lord.
Whatever You do, that alone comes to pass in the end.
There is no other who can kill or protect us. ||2||
What do you think, with your human understanding?
The All-knowing Lord is the Searcher of Hearts.
The One and only Lord is my Support and Protection.
The Creator Lord knows everything. ||3||
That person who is blessed by the Creator's Glance of Grace

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 016

\- all his affairs are resolved.
The One Lord is his Protector.
O servant Nanak, no one can equal him. ||4||4||17||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
We should feel sad, if God were beyond us.
We should feel sad, if we forget the Lord.
We should feel sad, if we are in love with duality.
But why should we feel sad? The Lord is pervading everywhere. ||1||
In love and attachment to Maya, the mortals are sad, and are consumed by sadness.
Without the Name, they wander and wander and wander, and waste away. ||1||Pause||
We should feel sad, if there were another Creator Lord.
We should feel sad, if someone dies by injustice.
We should feel sad, if something were not known to the Lord.
But why should we feel sad? The Lord is totally permeating everywhere. ||2||
We should feel sad, if God were a tyrant.
We should feel sad, if He made us suffer by mistake.
The Guru says that whatever happens is all by God's Will.
So I have abandoned sadness, and I now sleep without anxiety. ||3||
O God, You alone are my Lord and Master; all belong to You.
According to Your Will, You pass judgement.
There is no other at all; the One Lord is permeating and pervading everywhere.
Please save Nanak's honor; I have come to Your Sanctuary. ||4||5||18||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Without music, how is one to dance?
Without a voice, how is one to sing?
Without strings, how is a guitar to be played?
Without the Naam, all affairs are useless. ||1||
Without the Naam - tell me: who has ever been saved?
Without the True Guru, how can anyone cross over to the other side? ||1||Pause||
Without a tongue, how can anyone speak?
Without ears, how can anyone hear?
Without eyes, how can anyone see?
Without the Naam, the mortal is of no account at all. ||2||
Without learning, how can one be a Pandit - a religious scholar?
Without power, what is the glory of an empire?
Without understanding, how can the mind become steady?
Without the Naam, the whole world is insane. ||3||
Without detachment, how can one be a detached hermit?
Without renouncing egotism, how can anyone be a renunciate?
Without overcoming the five thieves, how can the mind be subdued?
Without the Naam, the mortal regrets and repents forever and ever. ||4||
Without the Guru's Teachings, how can anyone obtain spiritual wisdom?
Without seeing - tell me: how can anyone visualize in meditation?
Without the Fear of God, all speech in useless.
Says Nanak, this is the wisdom of the Lord's Court. ||5||6||19||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Mankind is afflicted with the disease of egotism.
The disease of sexual desire overwhelms the elephant.
Because of the disease of vision, the moth is burnt to death.
Because of the disease of the sound of the bell, the deer is lured to its death. ||1||
Whoever I see is diseased.
Only my True Guru, the True Yogi, is free of disease. ||1||Pause||
Because of the disease of taste, the fish is caught.
Because of the disease of smell, the bumble bee is destroyed.
The whole world is caught in the disease of attachment.
In the disease of the three qualities, corruption is multiplied. ||2||
In disease the mortals die, and in disease they are born.
In disease they wander in reincarnation again and again.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 017

Entangled in disease, they cannot stay still, even for an instant.
Without the True Guru, the disease is never cured. ||3||
When the Supreme Lord God grants His Mercy,
He grabs hold of the mortal's arm, and pulls him up and out of the disease.
Reaching the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the mortal's bonds are broken.
Says Nanak, the Guru cures him of the disease. ||4||7||20||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
When He comes to mind, then I am in supreme bliss.
When He comes to mind, then all my pains are shattered.
When He comes to mind, my hopes are fulfilled.
When He comes to mind, I never feel sadness. ||1||
Deep within my being, my Sovereign Lord King has revealed Himself to me.
The Perfect Guru has inspired me to love Him. ||1||Pause||
When He comes to mind, I am the king of all.
When He comes to mind, all my affairs are completed.
When He comes to mind, I am dyed in the deep crimson of His Love.
When He comes to mind, I am ecstatic forever. ||2||
When He comes to mind, I am wealthy forever.
When He comes to mind, I am free of doubt forever.
When He comes to mind, then I enjoy all pleasures.
When He comes to mind, I am rid of fear. ||3||
When He comes to mind, I find the home of peace and poise.
When He comes to mind, I am absorbed in the Primal Void of God.
When He comes to mind, I continually sing the Kirtan of His Praises.
Nanak's mind is pleased and satisfied with the Lord God. ||4||8||21||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
My Father is Eternal, forever alive.
My brothers live forever as well.
My friends are permanent and imperishable.
My family abides in the home of the self within. ||1||
I have found peace, and so all are at peace.
The Perfect Guru has united me with my Father. ||1||Pause||
My mansions are the highest of all.
My countries are infinite and uncountable.
My kingdom is eternally stable.
My wealth is inexhaustible and permanent. ||2||
My glorious reputation resounds throughout the ages.
My fame has spread in all places and interspaces.
My praises echo in each and every house.
My devotional worship is known to all people. ||3||
My Father has revealed Himself within me.
The Father and son have joined together in partnership.
Says Nanak, when my Father is pleased,
then the Father and son are joined together in love, and become one. ||4||9||22||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The True Guru, the Primal Being, is free of revenge and hate; He is God, the Great Giver.
I am a sinner; You are my Forgiver.
That sinner, who finds no protection anywhere
\- if he comes seeking Your Sanctuary, then he becomes immaculate and pure. ||1||
Pleasing the True Guru, I have found peace.
Meditating on the Guru, I have obtained all fruits and rewards. ||1||Pause||
I humbly bow to the Supreme Lord God, the True Guru.
My mind and body are Yours; all the world is Yours.
When the veil of illusion is removed, then I come to see You.
You are my Lord and Master; You are the King of all. ||2||
When it pleases Him, even dry wood becomes green.
When it pleases Him, rivers flow across the desert sands.
When it pleases Him, all fruits and rewards are obtained.
Grasping hold of the Guru's feet, my anxiety is dispelled. ||3||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 018

I am unworthy and ungrateful, but He has been merciful to me.
My mind and body have been cooled and soothed; the Ambrosial Nectar rains down in my mind.
The Supreme Lord God, the Guru, has become kind and compassionate to me.
Slave Nanak beholds the Lord, enraptured. ||4||10||23||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
My True Guru is totally independent.
My True Guru is adorned with Truth.
My True Guru is the Giver of all.
My True Guru is the Primal Creator Lord, the Architect of Destiny. ||1||
There is no deity equal to the Guru.
Whoever has good destiny inscribed on his forehead, applies himself to seva - selfless service. ||1||Pause||
My True Guru is the Sustainer and Cherisher of all.
My True Guru kills and revives.
The glorious greatness of my True Guru has become manifest everywhere. ||2||
My True Guru is the power of the powerless.
My True Guru is my home and court.
I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru.
He has shown me the path. ||3||
One who serves the Guru is not afflicted with fear.
One who serves the Guru does not suffer in pain.
Nanak has studied the Simritees and the Vedas.
There is no difference between the Supreme Lord God and the Guru. ||4||11||24||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Repeating the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal is exalted and glorified.
Repeating the Naam, sin is banished from the body.
Repeating the Naam, all festivals are celebrated.
Repeating the Naam, one is cleansed at the sixty-eight sacred shrines. ||1||
My sacred shrine of pilgrimage is the Name of the Lord.
The Guru has instructed me in the true essence of spiritual wisdom. ||1||Pause||
Repeating the Naam, the mortal's pains are taken away.
Repeating the Naam, the most ignorant people become spiritual teachers.
Repeating the Naam, the Divine Light blazes forth.
Repeating the Naam, one's bonds are broken. ||2||
Repeating the Naam, the Messenger of Death does not draw near.
Repeating the Naam, one finds peace in the Court of the Lord.
Repeating the Naam, God gives His Approval.
The Naam is my true wealth. ||3||
The Guru has instructed me in these sublime teachings.
The Kirtan of the Lord's Praises and the Naam are the Support of the mind.
Nanak is saved through the atonement of the Naam.
Other actions are just to please and appease the people. ||4||12||25||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
I bow in humble worship, tens of thousands of times.
I offer this mind as a sacrifice.
Meditating in remembrance on Him, sufferings are erased.
Bliss wells up, and no disease is contracted. ||1||
Such is the diamond, the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Chanting it, all works are perfectly completed. ||1||Pause||
Beholding Him, the house of pain is demolished.
The mind seizes the cooling, soothing, Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.
Millions of devotees worship His Feet.
He is the Fulfiller of all the mind's desires. ||2||
In an instant, He fills the empty to over-flowing.
In an instant, He transforms the dry into green.
In an instant, He gives the homeless a home.
In an instant, He bestows honor on the dishonored. ||3||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 019

The One Lord is totally pervading and permeating all.
He alone meditates on the Lord, whose True Guru is Perfect.
Such a person has the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises for his Support.
Says Nanak, the Lord Himself is merciful to him. ||4||13||26||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
I was discarded and abandoned, but He has embellished me.
He has blessed me with beauty and His Love; through His Name, I am exalted.
All my pains and sorrows have been eradicated.
The Guru has become my Mother and Father. ||1||
O my friends and companions, my household is in bliss.
Granting His Grace, my Husband Lord has met me. ||1||Pause||
The fire of desire has been extinguished, and all my desires have been fulfilled.
The darkness has been dispelled, and the Divine Light blazes forth.
The Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, the Word of God, is wondrous and amazing!
Perfect is the Grace of the Perfect Guru. ||2||
That person, unto whom the Lord reveals Himself
\- by the Blessed Vision of his Darshan, I am forever enraptured.
He obtains all virtues and so many treasures.
The True Guru blesses him with the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3||
That person who meets with his Lord and Master
\- his mind and body are cooled and soothed, chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Says Nanak, such a humble being is pleasing to God;
only a rare few are blessed with the dust of his feet. ||4||14||27||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The mortal does not hesitate to think about sin.
He is not ashamed to spend time with prostitutes.
He works all day long,
but when it is time to remember the Lord, then a heavy stone falls on his head. ||1||
Attached to Maya, the world is deluded and confused.
The Deluder Himself has deluded the mortal, and now he is engrossed in worthless worldly affairs. ||1||Pause||
Gazing on Maya's illusion, its pleasures pass away.
He loves the shell, and ruins his life.
Bound to blind worldly affairs, his mind wavers and wanders.
The Creator Lord does not come into his mind. ||2||
Working and working like this, he only obtains pain,
and his affairs of Maya are never completed.
His mind is saturated with sexual desire, anger and greed.
Wiggling like a fish out of water, he dies. ||3||
One who has the Lord Himself as his Protector,
chants and meditates forever on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, he chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
O Nanak, he has found the Perfect True Guru. ||4||15||28||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
He alone obtains it, unto whom the Lord shows Mercy.
He enshrines the Name of the Lord in his mind.
With the True Word of the Shabad in his heart and mind,
the sins of countless incarnations vanish. ||1||
The Lord's Name is the Support of the soul.
By Guru's Grace, chant the Name continually, O Siblings of Destiny; It shall carry you across the world-ocean. ||1||Pause||
Those who have this treasure of the Lord's Name written in their destiny,
those humble beings are honored in the Court of the Lord.
Singing His Glorious Praises with peace, poise and bliss,
even the homeless obtain a home hereafter. ||2||
Throughout the ages, this has been the essence of reality.
Meditate in remembrance on the Lord, and contemplate the Truth.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 020

He alone is attached to the hem of the Lord's robe, whom the Lord Himself attaches.
Asleep for countless incarnations, he now awakens. ||3||
Your devotees belong to You, and You belong to Your devotees.
You Yourself inspire them to chant Your Praises.
All beings and creatures are in Your Hands.
Nanak's God is always with him. ||4||16||29||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the Inner-knower of my heart.
The Naam is so useful to me.
The Lord's Name permeates each and every hair of mine.
The Perfect True Guru has given me this gift. ||1||
The Jewel of the Naam is my treasure.
It is inaccessible, priceless, infinite and incomparable. ||1||Pause||
The Naam is my unmoving, unchanging Lord and Master.
The glory of the Naam spreads over the whole world.
The Naam is my perfect master of wealth.
The Naam is my independence. ||2||
The Naam is my food and love.
The Naam is the objective of my mind.
By the Grace of the Saints, I never forget the Naam.
Repeating the Naam, the Unstruck Sound-current of the Naad resounds. ||3||
By God's Grace, I have obtained the nine treasures of the Naam.
By Guru's Grace, I am tuned in to the Naam.
They alone are wealthy and supreme,
O Nanak, who have the treasure of the Naam. ||4||17||30||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
You are my Father, and You are my Mother.
You are my Soul, my Breath of Life, the Giver of Peace.
You are my Lord and Master; I am Your slave.
Without You, I have no one at all. ||1||
Please bless me with Your Mercy, God, and give me this gift,
that I may sing Your Praises, day and night. ||1||Pause||
I am Your musical instrument, and You are the Musician.
I am Your beggar; please bless me with Your charity, O Great Giver.
By Your Grace, I enjoy love and pleasures.
You are deep within each and every heart. ||2||
By Your Grace, I chant the Name.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I sing Your Glorious Praises.
In Your Mercy, You take away our pains.
By Your Mercy, the heart-lotus blossoms forth. ||3||
I am a sacrifice to the Divine Guru.
The Blessed Vision of His Darshan is fruitful and rewarding; His service is immaculate and pure.
Be Merciful to me, O my Lord God and Master,
that Nanak may continually sing Your Glorious Praises. ||4||18||31||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
His Regal Court is the highest of all.
I humbly bow to Him, forever and ever.
His place is the highest of the high.
Millions of sins are erased by the Name of the Lord. ||1||
In His Sanctuary, we find eternal peace.
He Mercifully unites us with Himself. ||1||Pause||
His wondrous actions cannot even be described.
All hearts rest their faith and hope in Him.
He is manifest in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
The devotees lovingly worship and adore Him night and day. ||2||
He gives, but His treasures are never exhausted.
In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes.
No one can erase the Hukam of His Command.
The True Lord is above the heads of kings. ||3||
He is my Anchor and Support; I place my hopes in Him.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 021

I place my pain and pleasure before Him.
He covers the faults of His humble servant.
Nanak sings His Praises. ||4||19||32||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The whiner whines every day.
His attachment to his household and entanglements cloud his mind.
If someone becomes detached through understanding,
he will not have to suffer in birth and death again. ||1||
All of his conflicts are extensions of his corruption.
How rare is that person who takes the Naam as his Support. ||1||Pause||
The three-phased Maya infects all.
Whoever clings to it suffers pain and sorrow.
There is no peace without meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
By great good fortune, the treasure of the Naam is received. ||2||
One who loves the actor in his mind,
later regrets it when the actor takes off his costume.
The shade from a cloud is transitory,
like the worldly paraphernalia of attachment and corruption. ||3||
If someone is blessed with the singular substance,
then all of his tasks are accomplished to perfection.
One who obtains the Naam, by Guru's Grace
\- O Nanak, his coming into the world is certified and approved. ||4||20||33||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Slandering the Saints, the mortal wanders in reincarnation.
Slandering the Saints, he is diseased.
Slandering the Saints, he suffers in pain.
The slanderer is punished by the Messenger of Death. ||1||
Those who argue and fight with the Saints
\- those slanderers find no happiness at all. ||1||Pause||
Slandering the devotees, the wall of the mortal's body is shattered.
Slandering the devotees, he suffers in hell.
Slandering the devotees, he rots in the womb.
Slandering the devotees, he loses his realm and power. ||2||
The slanderer finds no salvation at all.
He eats only that which he himself has planted.
He is worse than a thief, a lecher, or a gambler.
The slanderer places an unbearable burden upon his head. ||3||
The devotees of the Supreme Lord God are beyond hate and vengeance.
Whoever worships their feet is emancipated.
The Primal Lord God has deluded and confused the slanderer.
O Nanak, the record of one's past actions cannot be erased. ||4||21||34||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is for me the Vedas and the Sound-current of the Naad.
Through the Naam, my tasks are perfectly accomplished.
The Naam is my worship of deities.
The Naam is my service to the Guru. ||1||
The Perfect Guru has implanted the Naam within me.
The highest task of all is the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||
The Naam is my cleansing bath and purification.
The Naam is my perfect donation of charity.
Those who repeat the Naam are totally purified.
Those who chant the Naam are my friends and Siblings of Destiny. ||2||
The Naam is my auspicious omen and good fortune.
The Naam is the sublime food which satisfies me.
The Naam is my good conduct.
The Naam is my immaculate occupation. ||3||
All those humble beings whose minds are filled with the One God
have the Support of the Lord, Har, Har.
O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with your mind and body.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord bestows His Name. ||4||22||35||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 022

Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
You bless the poor with wealth, O Lord.
Countless sins are taken away, and the mind becomes immaculate and pure.
All the mind's desires are fulfilled, and one's tasks are perfectly accomplished.
You bestow Your Name upon Your devotee. ||1||
Service to the Lord, our Sovereign King, is fruitful and rewarding.
Our Lord and Master is the Creator, the Cause of causes; no one is turned away from His Door empty-handed. ||1||Pause||
God eradicates the disease from the diseased person.
God takes away the sorrows of the suffering.
And those who have no place at all - You seat them upon the place.
You link Your slave to devotional worship. ||2||
God bestows honor on the dishonored.
He makes the foolish and ignorant become clever and wise.
The fear of all fear disappears.
The Lord dwells within the mind of His humble servant. ||3||
The Supreme Lord God is the Treasure of Peace.
The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is the essence of reality.
Granting His Grace, He enjoins the mortals to serve the Saints.
O Nanak, such a person merges in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||4||23||36||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
In the Realm of the Saints, the Lord dwells in the mind.
In the Realm of the Saints, all sins run away.
In the Realm of the Saints, one's lifestyle is immaculate.
In the Society of the Saints, one comes to love the One Lord. ||1||
That alone is called the Realm of the Saints,
where only the Glorious Praises of the Supreme Lord God are sung. ||1||Pause||
In the Realm of the Saints, birth and death are ended.
In the Realm of the Saints, the Messenger of Death cannot touch the mortal.
In the Society of the Saints, one's speech becomes immaculate
In the realm of the saints, the Lord's Name is chanted. ||2||
The Realm of the Saints is the eternal, ever-stable place.
In the Realm of the Saints, sins are destroyed.
In the Realm of the Saints, the immaculate sermon is spoken.
In the Society of the Saints, the pain of egotism runs away. ||3||
The Realm of the Saints cannot be destroyed.
In the Realm of the Saints, is the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue.
The Realm of the Saints is the resting place of our Lord and Master.
O Nanak, He is woven into the fabric of His devotees, through and through. ||4||24||37||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Why worry about disease, when the Lord Himself protects us?
That person whom the Lord protects, does not suffer pain and sorrow.
That person, upon whom God showers His Mercy
\- Death hovering above him is turned away. ||1||
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is forever our Help and Support.
When He comes to mind, the mortal finds lasting peace, and the Messenger of Death cannot even approach him. ||1||Pause||
When this being did not exist, who created him then?
What has been produced from the source?
He Himself kills, and He Himself rejuvenates.
He cherishes His devotees forever. ||2||
Know that everything is in His Hands.
My God is the Master of the masterless.
His Name is the Destroyer of pain.
Singing His Glorious Praises, you shall find peace. ||3||
O my Lord and Master, please listen to the prayer of Your Saint.
I place my soul, my breath of life and wealth before You.
All this world is Yours; it meditates on You.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 023

Please shower Nanak with Your Mercy and bless him with peace. ||4||25||38||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
With Your Support, I survive in the Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
With Your Support, I sing Your Glorious Praises.
With Your Support, death cannot even touch me.
With Your Support, my entanglements vanish. ||1||
In this world and the next, I have Your Support.
The One Lord, our Lord and Master, is all-pervading. ||1||Pause||
With Your Support, I celebrate blissfully.
With Your Support, I chant the Guru's Mantra.
With Your Support, I cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
The Perfect Lord, our Protector and Savior, is the Ocean of Peace. ||2||
With Your Support, I have no fear.
The True Lord is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
With Your Support, my mind is filled with Your Power.
Here and there, You are my Court of Appeal. ||3||
I take Your Support, and place my faith in You.
All meditate on God, the Treasure of Virtue.
Chanting and meditating on You, Your slaves celebrate in bliss.
Nanak meditates in remembrance on the True Lord, the Treasure of Virtue. ||4||26||39||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
First, I gave up slandering others.
All the anxiety of my mind was dispelled.
Greed and attachment were totally banished.
I see God ever-present, close at hand; I have become a great devotee. ||1||
Such a renunciate is very rare.
Such a humble servant chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||
I have forsaken my egotistical intellect.
The love of sexual desire and anger has vanished.
I meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
In the Company of the Holy, I am emancipated. ||2||
Enemy and friend are all the same to me.
The Perfect Lord God is permeating all.
Accepting the Will of God, I have found peace.
The Perfect Guru has implanted the Name of the Lord within me. ||3||
That person, whom the Lord, in His Mercy, saves
\- that devotee chants and meditates on the Naam.
That person, whose mind is illumined, and who obtains understanding through the Guru
\- says Nanak, he is totally fulfilled. ||4||27||40||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
There is no peace in earning lots of money.
There is no peace in watching dances and plays.
There is no peace in conquering lots of countries.
All peace comes from singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||
You shall obtain peace, poise and bliss,
when you find the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, by great good fortune. As Gurmukh, utter the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||
Mother, father, children and spouse - all place the mortal in bondage.
Religious rituals and actions done in ego place the mortal in bondage.
If the Lord, the Shatterer of bonds, abides in the mind,
then peace is obtained, dwelling in the home of the self deep within. ||2||
Everyone is a beggar; God is the Great Giver.
The Treasure of Virtue is the Infinite, Endless Lord.
That person, unto whom God grants His Mercy
\- that humble being chants the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||
I offer my prayer to my Guru.
O Primal Lord God, Treasure of Virtue, please bless me with Your Grace.
Says Nanak, I have come to Your Sanctuary.
If it pleases You, please protect me, O Lord of the World. ||4||28||41||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Meeting with the Guru, I have forsaken the love of duality.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 024

As Gurmukh, I chant the Name of the Lord.
My anxiety is gone, and I am in love with the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
I was asleep for countless lifetimes, but I have now awakened. ||1||
Granting His Grace, He has linked me to His service.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, all pleasures are found. ||1||Pause||
The Word of the Guru's Shabad has eradicated disease and evil.
My mind has absorbed the medicine of the Naam.
Meeting with the Guru, my mind is in bliss.
All treasures are in the Name of the Lord God. ||2||
My fear of birth and death and the Messenger of Death has been dispelled.
In the Saadh Sangat, the inverted lotus of my heart has blossomed forth.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I have found eternal, abiding peace.
All my tasks are perfectly accomplished. ||3||
This human body, so difficult to obtain, is approved by the Lord.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, it has become fruitful.
Says Nanak, God has blessed me with His Mercy.
With every breath and morsel of food, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||29||42||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
His Name is the Highest of all.
Sing His Glorious Praises, forever and ever.
Meditating in remembrance on Him, all pain is dispelled.
All pleasures come to dwell in the mind. ||1||
O my mind, meditate in remembrance on the True Lord.
In this world and the next, you shall be saved. ||1||Pause||
The Immaculate Lord God is the Creator of all.
He gives sustenance to all beings and creatures.
He forgives millions of sins and mistakes in an instant.
Through loving devotional worship, one is emancipated forever. ||2||
True wealth and true glorious greatness,
and eternal, unchanging wisdom, are obtained from the Perfect Guru.
When the Protector, the Savior Lord, bestows His Mercy,
all spiritual darkness is dispelled. ||3||
I focus my meditation on the Supreme Lord God.
The Lord of Nirvaanaa is totally pervading and permeating all.
Eradicating doubt and fear, I have met the Lord of the World.
The Guru has become merciful to Nanak. ||4||30||43||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Meditating in remembrance on Him, the mind is illumined.
Suffering is eradicated, and one comes to dwell in peace and poise.
They alone receive it, unto whom God gives it.
They are blessed to serve the Perfect Guru. ||1||
All peace and comfort are in Your Name, God.
Twenty-four hours a day, O my mind, sing His Glorious Praises. ||1||Pause||
You shall receive the fruits of your desires,
when the Name of the Lord comes to dwell in the mind.
Meditating on the Lord, your comings and goings cease.
Through loving devotional worship, lovingly focus your attention on God. ||2||
Sexual desire, anger and egotism are dispelled.
Love and attachment to Maya are broken.
Lean on God's Support, day and night.
The Supreme Lord God has given this gift. ||3||
Our Lord and Master is the Creator, the Cause of causes.
He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of all hearts.
Bless me with Your Grace, Lord, and link me to Your service.
Slave Nanak has come to Your Sanctuary. ||4||31||44||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
One who does not repeat the Naam, the Name of the Lord, shall die of shame.
Without the Name, how can he ever sleep in peace?
The mortal abandons meditative remembrance of the Lord, and then wishes for the state of supreme salvation;

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 025

but without roots, how can there be any branches? ||1||
O my mind, meditate on the Guru, the Lord of the Universe.
The filth of countless incarnations shall be washed away. Breaking your bonds, you shall be united with the Lord. ||1||Pause||
How can a stone be purified by bathing at a sacred shrine of pilgrimage?
The filth of egotism clings to the mind.
Millions of rituals and actions taken are the root of entanglements.
Without meditating and vibrating on the Lord, the mortal gathers only worthless bundles of straw. ||2||
Without eating, hunger is not satisfied.
When the disease is cured, then the pain goes away.
The mortal is engrossed in sexual desire, anger, greed and attachment.
He does not meditate on God, that God who created him. ||3||
Blessed, blessed is the Holy Saint, and blessed is the Name of the Lord.
Twenty-four hours a day, sing the Kirtan, the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Blessed is the devotee of the Lord, and blessed is the Creator Lord.
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of God, the Primal, the Infinite. ||4||32||45||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
When the Guru was totally pleased, my fear was taken away.
I enshrine the Name of the Immaculate Lord within my mind.
He is Merciful to the meek, forever Compassionate.
All my entanglements are finished. ||1||
I have found peace, poise, and myriads of pleasures.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, fear and doubt are dispelled. My tongue chants the Ambrosial Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||
I have fallen in love with the Lord's Lotus Feet.
In an instant, the terrible demons are destroyed.
Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate and chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
The Guru is Himself the Savior Lord, the Lord of the Universe. ||2||
He Himself cherishes His servant forever.
He watches over every breath of His humble devotee.
Tell me, what is the nature of human beings?
The Lord extends His Hand, and saves them from the Messenger of Death. ||3||
Immaculate is the Glory, and Immaculate is the way of life,
of those who remember the Supreme Lord God in their minds.
The Guru, in His Mercy, has granted this Gift.
Nanak has obtained the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||4||33||46||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
My Guru is the All-powerful Lord, the Creator, the Cause of causes.
He is the Soul, the Breath of Life, the Giver of Peace, always near.
He is the Destroyer of fear, the Eternal, Unchanging, Sovereign Lord King.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all fear is dispelled. ||1||
Wherever I look, is the Protection of Your Sanctuary.
I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Feet of the True Guru. ||1||Pause||
My tasks are perfectly accomplished, meeting the Divine Guru.
He is the Giver of all rewards. Serving Him, I am immaculate.
He reaches out with His Hand to His slaves.
The Name of the Lord abides in their hearts. ||2||
They are forever in bliss, and do not suffer at all.
No pain, sorrow or disease afflicts them.
Everything is Yours, O Creator Lord.
The Guru is the Supreme Lord God, the Inaccessible and Infinite. ||3||
His Glorious Grandeur is immaculate, and the Bani of His Word is wonderful!
The Perfect Supreme Lord God is pleasing to my mind.
He is permeating the waters, the lands and the skies.
O Nanak, everything comes from God. ||4||34||47||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
My mind and body are imbued with the Love of the Lord's Feet.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 026

All the desires of my mind have been perfectly fulfilled.
Twenty-four hours a day, I sing of the Lord God.
The True Guru has imparted this perfect wisdom. ||1||
Very fortunate are those who love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Associating with them, we cross over the world-ocean. ||1||Pause||
They are spiritual teachers, who meditate in remembrance on the One Lord.
Wealthy are those who have a discriminating intellect.
Noble are those who remember their Lord and Master in meditation.
Honorable are those who understand their own selves. ||2||
By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status.
Day and night I meditate on the Glories of God.
My bonds are broken, and my hopes are fulfilled.
The Feet of the Lord now abide in my heart. ||3||
Says Nanak, one whose karma is perfect
\- that humble being enters the Sanctuary of God.
He himself is pure, and he sanctifies all.
His tongue chants the Name of the Lord, the Source of Nectar. ||4||35||48||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Repeating the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no obstacles block the way.
Listening to the Naam, the Messenger of Death runs far away.
Repeating the Naam, all pains vanish.
Chanting the Naam, the Lord's Lotus Feet dwell within. ||1||
Meditating, vibrating the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is unobstructed devotional worship.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with loving affection and energy. ||1||Pause||
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the Eye of Death cannot see you.
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, demons and ghosts shall not touch you.
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, attachment and pride shall not bind you.
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, you shall not be consigned to the womb of reincarnation. ||2||
Any time is a good time to meditate in remembrance on the Lord.
Among the masses, only a few meditate in remembrance on the Lord.
Social class or no social class, anyone may meditate on the Lord.
Whoever meditates on Him is emancipated. ||3||
Chant the Name of the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Perfect is the Love of the Lord's Name.
O God, shower Your Mercy on Nanak,
that he may think of you with each and every breath. ||4||36||49||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
He Himself is the Shaastras, and He Himself is the Vedas.
He knows the secrets of each and every heart.
He is the Embodiment of Light; all beings belong to Him.
The Creator, the Cause of causes, the Perfect All-powerful Lord. ||1||
Grab hold of the Support of God, O my mind.
As Gurmukh, worship and adore His Lotus Feet; enemies and pains shall not even approach you. ||1||Pause||
He Himself is the Essence of the forests and fields, and all the three worlds.
The universe is strung on His Thread.
He is the Uniter of Shiva and Shakti - mind and matter.
He Himself is in the detachment of Nirvaanaa, and He Himself is the Enjoyer. ||2||
Wherever I look, there He is.
Without Him, there is no one at all.
In the Love of the Naam, the world-ocean is crossed.
Nanak sings His Glorious Praises in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||3||
Liberation, the ways and means of enjoyment and union are under His Control.
His humble servant lacks nothing.
That person, with whom the Lord, in His Mercy, is pleased
\- O slave Nanak, that humble servant is blessed. ||4||37||50||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The minds of the Lord's devotee are filled with bliss.
They become stable and permanent, and all their anxiety is gone.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 027

Their fears and doubts are dispelled in an instant.
The Supreme Lord God comes to dwell in their minds. ||1||
The Lord is forever the Help and Support of the Saints.
Inside the home of the heart, and outside as well, the Transcendent Lord is always with us, permeating and pervading all places. ||1||Pause||
The Lord of the World is my wealth, property, youth and ways and means.
He continually cherishes and brings peace to my soul and breath of life.
He reaches out with His Hand and saves His slave.
He does not abandon us, even for an instant; He is always with us. ||2||
There is no other Beloved like the Lord.
The True Lord takes care of all.
The Lord is our Mother, Father, Son and Relation.
Since the beginning of time, and throughout the ages, His devotees sing His Glorious Praises. ||3||
My mind is filled with the Support and the Power of the Lord.
Without the Lord, there is no other at all.
Nanak's mind is encouraged by this hope,
that God will accomplish my objectives in life. ||4||38||51||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
Fear itself becomes afraid, when the mortal remembers the Lord's Name in meditation.
All the diseases of the three gunas - the three qualities - are cured, and tasks of the Lord's slaves are perfectly accomplished. ||1||Pause||
The people of the Lord always sing His Glorious Praises; they attain His Perfect Mansion.
Even the Righteous Judge of Dharma and the Messenger of Death yearn, day and night, to be sanctified by the Blessed Vision of the Lord's humble servant. ||1||
Sexual desire, anger, intoxication, egotism, slander and egotistical pride are eradicted in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
By great good fortune, such Saints are met. Nanak is forever a sacrifice to them. ||2||39||52||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
One who harbors the five thieves, becomes the embodiment of these five.
He gets up each day and tells lies.
He applies ceremonial religious marks to his body, but practices hypocrisy.
He wastes away in sadness and pain, like a lonely widow. ||1||
Without the Name of the Lord, everything is false.
Without the Perfect Guru, liberation is not obtained. In the Court of the True Lord, the faithless cynic is plundered. ||1||Pause||
One who does not know the Lord's Creative Power is polluted.
Ritualistically plastering one's kitchen square does not make it pure in the Eyes of the Lord.
If a person is polluted within, he may wash himself everyday on the outside,
but in the Court of the True Lord, he forfeits his honor. ||2||
He works for the sake of Maya,
but he never places his feet on the right path.
He never even remembers the One who created him.
He speaks falsehood, only falsehood, with his mouth. ||3||
That person, unto whom the Creator Lord shows Mercy,
deals with the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
One who lovingly worships the Lord's Name,
says Nanak - no obstacles ever block his way. ||4||40||53||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The entire universe curses the slanderer.
False are the dealings of the slanderer.
The slanderer's lifestyle is filthy and polluted.
The Lord is the Saving Grace and the Protector of His slave. ||1||
The slanderer dies with the rest of the slanderers.
The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, protects and saves His humble servant. Death roars and thunders over the head of the slanderer. ||1||Pause||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 028

No one belives what the slanderer says.
The slanderer tells lies, and later regrets and repents.
He wrings his hands, and hits his head against the ground.
The Lord does not forgive the slanderer. ||2||
The Lord's slave does not wish anyone ill.
The slanderer suffers, as if stabbed by a spear.
Like a crane, he spreads his feathers, to look like a swan.
When he speaks with his mouth, then he is exposed and driven out. ||3||
The Creator is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
That person, whom the Lord makes His Own, becomes stable and steady.
The Lord's slave is true in the Court of the Lord.
Servant Nanak speaks, after contemplating the essence of reality. ||4||41||54||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
With my palms pressed together, I offer this prayer.
My soul, body and wealth are His property.
He is the Creator, my Lord and Master.
Millions of times, I am a sacrifice to Him. ||1||
The dust of the feet of the Holy brings purity.
Remembering God in meditation, the mind's corruption is eradicated, and the filth of countless incarnations is washed away. ||1||Pause||
All treasures are in His household.
Serving Him, the mortal attains honor.
He is the Fulfiller of the mind's desires.
He is the Support of the soul and the breath of life of His devotees. ||2||
His Light shines in each and every heart.
Chanting and meditating on God, the Treasure of Virtue, His devotees live.
Service to Him does not go in vain.
Deep within your mind and body, meditate on the One Lord. ||3||
Following the Guru's Teachings, compassion and contentment are found.
This Treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is the immaculate object.
Please grant Your Grace, O Lord, and attach me to the hem of Your robe.
Nanak meditates continually on the Lord's Lotus Feet. ||4||42||55||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The True Guru has listened to my prayer.
All my affairs have been resolved.
Deep within my mind and body, I meditate on God.
The Perfect Guru has dispelled all my fears. ||1||
The All-powerful Divine Guru is the Greatest of all.
Serving Him, I obtain all comforts. ||Pause||
Everything is done by Him.
No one can erase His Eternal Decree.
The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent Lord, is incomparably beautiful.
The Guru is the Image of Fulfillment, the Embodiment of the Lord. ||2||
The Name of the Lord abides deep within him.
Wherever he looks, he sees the Wisdom of God.
His mind is totally enlightened and illuminated.
Within that person, the Supreme Lord God abides. ||3||
I humbly bow to that Guru forever.
I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru.
I wash the feet of the Guru, and drink in this water.
Chanting and meditating forever on Guru Nanak, I live. ||4||43||56||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 029

Raag Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, Partaal, Third House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
God is the Compassionate Cherisher. Who can count His Glorious Virtues?
Countless colors, and countless waves of joy; He is the Master of all. ||1||Pause||
Endless spiritual wisdom, endless meditations, endless chants, intense meditations and austere self-disciplines.
Countless virtues, musical notes and playful sports; countless silent sages enshrine Him in their hearts. ||1||
Countless melodies, countless instruments, countless tastes, each and every instant. Countless mistakes and countless diseases are removed by hearing His Praise.
O Nanak, serving the Infinite, Divine Lord, one earns all the rewards and merits of performing the six rituals, fasts, worship services, pilgrimages to sacred rivers, and journeys to sacred shrines. ||2||1||57||8||21||7||57||93||
Bhairao, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The Lord is in the soul, and the soul is in the Lord. This is realized through the Guru's Teachings.
The Ambrosial Word of the Guru's Bani is realized through the Word of the Shabad. Sorrow is dispelled, and egotism is eliminated. ||1||
O Nanak, the disease of egotism is so very deadly.
Wherever I look, I see the pain of the same disease. The Primal Lord Himself bestows the Shabad of His Word. ||1||Pause||
When the Appraiser Himself appraises the mortal, then he is not tested again.
Those who are blessed with His Grace meet with the Guru. They alone are true, who are pleasing to God. ||2||
Air, water and fire are diseased; the world with its enjoyments is diseased.
Mother, father, Maya and the body are diseased; those united with their relatives are diseased. ||3||
Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva are diseased; the whole world is diseased.
Those who remember the Lord's Feet and contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad are liberated. ||4||
The seven seas are diseased, along with the rivers; the continents and the nether regions of the underworlds are full of disease.
The people of the Lord dwell in Truth and peace; He blesses them with His Grace everywhere. ||5||
The six Shaastras are diseased, as are the many who follow the different religious orders.
What can the poor Vedas and Bibles do? People do not understand the One and Only Lord. ||6||
Eating sweet treats, the mortal is filled with disease; he finds no peace at all.
Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they walk on other paths, and at the very last moment, they regret and repent. ||7||
Wandering around at sacred shrines of pilgrimage, the mortal is not cured of his disease. Reading scripture, he gets involved in useless arguments.
The disease of duality is so very deadly; it causes dependence on Maya. ||8||
One who becomes Gurmukh and praises the True Shabad with the True Lord in his mind is cured of his disease.
O Nanak, the humble servant of the Lord is immaculate, night and day; he bears the insignia of the Lord's Grace. ||9||1||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 030

Bhairao, Third Mehl, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The Creator has staged His Wondrous Play.
I listen to the Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, and the Bani of His Word.
The self-willed manmukhs are deluded and confused, while the Gurmukhs understand.
The Creator creates the Cause that causes. ||1||
Deep within my being, I meditate on the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
I shall never forsake the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Prahlaad's father sent him to school, to learn to read.
He took his writing tablet and went to the teacher.
He said, "I shall not read anything except the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Write the Lord's Name on my tablet."||2||
Prahlaad's mother said to her son,
“I advise you not to read anything except what you are taught.”
He answered, "The Great Giver, my Fearless Lord God is always with me.
If I were to forsake the Lord, then my family would be disgraced."||3||
“Prahlaad has corrupted all the other students.
He does not listen to what I say, and he does his own thing.
He instigated devotional worship in the townspeople.”
The gathering of the wicked people could not do anything against him. ||4||
Sanda and Marka, his teachers, made the complaint.
All the demons kept trying in vain.
The Lord protected His humble devotee, and preserved his honor.
What can be done by mere created beings? ||5||
Because of his past karma, the demon ruled over his kingdom.
He did not realize the Lord; the Lord Himself confused him.
He started an argument with his son Prahlaad.
The blind one did not understand that his death was approaching. ||6||
Prahlaad was placed in a cell, and the door was locked.
The fearless child was not afraid at all. He said, “Within my being, is the Guru, the Lord of the World.”
The created being tried to compete with his Creator, but he assumed this name in vain.
That which was predestined for him has come to pass; he started an argument with the Lord's humble servant. ||7||
The father raised the club to strike down Prahlaad, saying,
“Where is your God, the Lord of the Universe, now?”
He replied, "The Life of the World, the Great Giver, is my Help and Support in the end.
Wherever I look, I see Him permeating and prevailing."||8||
Tearing down the pillars, the Lord Himself appeared.
The egotistical demon was killed and destroyed.
The minds of the devotees were filled with bliss, and congratulations poured in.
He blessed His servant with glorious greatness. ||9||
He created birth, death and attachment.
The Creator has ordained coming and going in reincarnation.
For the sake of Prahlaad, the Lord Himself appeared.
The word of the devotee came true. ||10||
The gods proclaimed the victory of Lakshmi, and said,
“O mother, make this form of the Man-lion disappear!”
Lakshmi was afraid, and did not approach.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 031

The humble servant Prahlaad came and fell at the Lord's Feet. ||11||
The True Guru implanted the treasure of the Naam within.
Power, property and all Maya is false.
But still, the greedy people continue clinging to them.
Without the Name of the Lord, the mortals are punished in His Court. ||12||
Says Nanak, everyone acts as the Lord makes them act.
They alone are approved and accepted, who focus their consciousness on the Lord.
He has made His devotees His Own.
The Creator has appeared in His Own Form. ||13||1||2||
Bhairao, Third Mehl:
Serving the Guru, I obtain the Ambrosial Fruit; my egotism and desire have been quenched.
The Name of the Lord dwells within my heart and mind, and the desires of my mind are quieted. ||1||
O Dear Lord, my Beloved, please bless me with Your Mercy.
Night and day, Your humble servant begs for Your Glorious Praises; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is saved. ||1||Pause||
The Messenger of Death cannot even touch the humble Saints; it does not cause them even an iota of suffering or pain.
Those who enter Your Sanctuary, Lord, save themselves, and save all their ancestors as well. ||2||
You Yourself save the honor of Your devotees; this is Your Glory, O Lord.
You cleanse them of the sins and the pains of countless incarnations; You love them without even an iota of duality. ||3||
I am foolish and ignorant, and understand nothing. You Yourself bless me with understanding.
You do whatever You please; nothing else can be done at all. ||4||
Creating the world, You have linked all to their tasks - even the evil deeds which men do.
They lose this precious human life in the gamble, and do not understand the Word of the Shabad. ||5||
The self-willed manmukhs die, understanding nothing; they are enveloped by the darkness of evil-mindedness and ignorance.
They do not cross over the terrible world-ocean; without the Guru, they drown and die. ||6||
True are those humble beings who are imbued with the True Shabad; the Lord God unites them with Himself.
Through the Word of the Guru's Bani, they come to understand the Shabad. They remain lovingly focused on the True Lord. ||7||
You Yourself are Immaculate and Pure, and pure are Your humble servants who contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Nanak is forever a sacrifice to those, who enshrine the Lord's Name within their hearts. ||8||2||3||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
He alone is a great king, who keeps the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within his heart.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart - his tasks are perfectly accomplished.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart, obtains millions of treasures.
Without the Naam, life is useless. ||1||
I praise that person, who has the capital of the Lord's Wealth.
He is very fortunate, on whose forehead the Guru has placed His Hand. ||1||Pause||
One who keeps the Naam in his heart, has many millions of armies on his side.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart, enjoys peace and poise.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 032

One who keeps the Naam in his heart becomes cool and calm.
Without the Naam, both life and death are cursed. ||2||
One who keeps the Naam in his heart is Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart knows all ways and means.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart obtains the nine treasures.
Without the Naam, the mortal wanders, coming and going in reincarnation. ||3||
One who keeps the Naam in his heart is carefree and independent.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart always earns a profit.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart has a large family.
Without the Naam, the mortal is just an ignorant, self-willed manmukh. ||4||
One who keeps the Naam in his heart has a permanent position.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart is seated on the throne.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart is the true king.
Without the Naam, no one has any honor or respect. ||5||
One who keeps the Naam in his heart is famous everywhere.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart is the Embodiment of the Creator Lord.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart is the highest of all.
Without the Naam, the mortal wanders in reincarnation. ||6||
One who keeps the Naam in his heart sees the Lord manifested in His Creation.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart - his darkness is dispelled.
One who keeps the Naam in his heart is approved and accepted.
Without the Naam, the mortal continues coming and going in reincarnation. ||7||
He alone receives the Naam, who is blessed by the Lord's Mercy.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord of the World is understood.
Coming and going in reincarnation ends, and peace is found.
Says Nanak, my essence has merged in the Essence of the Lord. ||8||1||4||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
He created millions of incarnations of Vishnu.
He created millions of universes as places to practice righteousness.
He created and destroyed millions of Shivas.
He employed millions of Brahmas to create the worlds. ||1||
Such is my Lord and Master, the Lord of the Universe.
I cannot even describe His Many Virtues. ||1||Pause||
Millions of Mayas are His maid-servants.
Millions of souls are His beds.
Millions of universes are the limbs of His Being.
Millions of devotees abide with the Lord. ||2||
Millions of kings with their crowns and canopies bow before Him.
Millions of Indras stand at His Door.
Millions of heavenly paradises are within the scope of His Vision.
Millions of His Names cannot even be appraised. ||3||
Millions of celestial sounds resound for Him.
His Wondrous Plays are enacted on millions of stages.
Millions of Shaktis and Shivas are obedient to Him.
He gives sustenance and support to millions of beings. ||4||
In His Feet are millions of sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
Millions chant His Sacred and Beautiful Name.
Millions of worshippers worship Him.
Millions of expanses are His; there is no other at all. ||5||
Millions of swan-souls sing His Immaculate Praises.
Millions of Brahma's sons sing His Praises.
He creates and destroys millions, in an instant.
Millions are Your Virtues, Lord - they cannot even be counted. ||6||
Millions of spiritual teachers teach His spiritual wisdom.
Millions of meditators focus on His meditation.
Millions of austere penitents practice austerities.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 033

Millions of silent sages dwell in silence. ||7||
Our Eternal, Imperishable, Incomprehensible Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is permeating all hearts.
Wherever I look, I see Your Dwelling, O Lord.
The Guru has blessed Nanak with enlightenment. ||8||2||5||
Bhairao, Fifth Mehl:
The True Guru has blessed me with this gift.
He has given me the Priceless Jewel of the Lord's Name.
Now, I intuitively enjoy endless pleasures and wondrous play.
God has spontaneously met with Nanak. ||1||
Says Nanak, True is the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise.
Again and again, my mind remains immersed in it. ||1||Pause||
Spontaneously, I feed on the Love of God.
Spontaneously, I take God's Name.
Spontaneously, I am saved by the Word of the Shabad.
Spontaneously, my treasures are filled to overflowing. ||2||
Spontaneously, my works are perfectly accomplished.
Spontaneously, I am rid of sorrow.
Spontaneously, my enemies have become friends.
Spontaneously, I have brought my mind under control. ||3||
Spontaneously, God has comforted me.
Spontaneously, my hopes have been fulfilled.
Spontaneously, I have totally realized the essence of reality.
Spontaneously, I have been blessed with the Guru's Mantra. ||4||
Spontaneously, I am rid of hatred.
Spontaneously, my darkness has been dispelled.
Spontaneously, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise seems so sweet to my mind.
Spontaneously, I behold God in each and every heart. ||5||
Spontaneously, all my doubts have been dispelled.
Spontaneously, peace and celestial harmony fill my mind.
Spontaneously, the Unstruck Melody of the Sound-current resounds within me.
Spontaneously, the Lord of the Universe has revealed Himself to me. ||6||
Spontaneously, my mind has been pleased and appeased.
I have spontaneously realized the Eternal, Unchanging Lord.
Spontaneously, all wisdom and knowledge has welled up within me.
Spontaneously, the Support of the Lord, Har, Har, has come into my hands. ||7||
Spontaneously, God has recorded my pre-ordained destiny.
Spontaneously, the One Lord and Master God has met me.
Spontaneously, all my cares and worries have been taken away.
Nanak, Nanak, Nanak, has merged into the Image of God. ||8||3||6||
Bhairao, The Word Of The Devotees, Kabeer Jee, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The Name of the Lord - this alone is my wealth.
I do not tie it up to hide it, nor do I sell it to make my living. ||1||Pause||
The Name is my crop, and the Name is my field.
As Your humble servant, I perform devotional worship to You; I seek Your Sanctuary. ||1||
The Name is Maya and wealth for me; the Name is my capital.
I do not forsake You; I do not know any other at all. ||2||
The Name is my family, the Name is my brother.
The Name is my companion, who will help me in the end. ||3||
One whom the Lord keeps detached from Maya
\- says Kabeer, I am his slave. ||4||1||
Naked we come, and naked we go.
No one, not even the kings and queens, shall remain. ||1||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 034

The Sovereign Lord is the nine treasures for me.
The possessions and the spouse to which the mortal is lovingly attached, are Your wealth, O Lord. ||1||Pause||
They do not come with the mortal, and they do not go with him.
What good does it do him, if he has elephants tied up at his doorway? ||2||
The fortress of Sri Lanka was made out of gold,
but what could the foolish Raawan take with him when he left? ||3||
Says Kabeer, think of doing some good deeds.
In the end, the gambler shall depart empty-handed. ||4||2||
Brahma is polluted, and Indra is polluted.
The sun is polluted, and the moon is polluted. ||1||
This world is polluted with pollution.
Only the One Lord is Immaculate; He has no end or limitation. ||1||Pause||
The rulers of kingdoms are polluted.
Nights and days, and the days of the month are polluted. ||2||
The pearl is polluted, the diamond is polluted.
Wind, fire and water are polluted. ||3||
Shiva, Shankara and Mahaysh are polluted.
The Siddhas, seekers and strivers, and those who wear religious robes, are polluted. ||4||
The Yogis and wandering hermits with their matted hair are polluted.
The body, along with the swan-soul, is polluted. ||5||
Says Kabeer, those humble beings are approved and pure, who know the Lord. ||6||3||
Let your mind be Mecca, and your body the temple of worship.
Let the Supreme Guru be the One who speaks. ||1||
O Mullah, utter the call to prayer.
The one mosque has ten doors. ||1||Pause||
So slaughter your evil nature, doubt and cruelty;
consume the five demons and you shall be blessed with contentment. ||2||
Hindus and Muslims have the same One Lord and Master.
What can the Mullah do, and what can the Shaykh do? ||3||
Says Kabeer, I have gone insane.
Slaughtering, slaughtering my mind, I have merged into the Celestial Lord. ||4||4||
When the stream flows into the Ganges, then it becomes the Ganges. ||1||
Just so, Kabeer has changed.
He has become the Embodiment of Truth, and he does not go anywhere else. ||1||Pause||
Associating with the sandalwood tree, the tree nearby is changed;
that tree begins to smell just like the sandalwood tree. ||2||
Coming into contact with the philosophers' stone, copper is transformed;
that copper is transformed into gold. ||3||
In the Society of the Saints, Kabeer is transformed;
that Kabeer is transformed into the Lord. ||4||5||
Some apply ceremonial marks to their foreheads, hold malas in their hands, and wear religious robes.
Some people think that the Lord is a play-thing. ||1||
If I am insane, then I am Yours, O Lord.
How can people know my secret? ||1||Pause||
I do not pick leaves as offerings, and I do not worship idols.
Without devotional worship of the Lord, service is useless. ||2||
I worship the True Guru; forever and ever, I surrender to Him.
By such service, I find peace in the Court of the Lord. ||3||
People say that Kabeer has gone insane.
Only the Lord realizes the secret of Kabeer. ||4||6||
Turning away from the world, I have forgotten both my social class and ancestry.
My weaving now is in the most profound celestial stillness. ||1||
I have no quarrel with anyone.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 035

I have abandoned both the Pandits, the Hindu religious scholars, and the Mullahs, the Muslim priests. ||1||Pause||
I weave and weave, and wear what I weave.
Where egotism does not exist, there I sing God's Praises. ||2||
Whatever the Pandits and Mullahs have written,
I reject; I do not accept any of it. ||3||
My heart is pure, and so I have seen the Lord within.
Searching, searching within the self, Kabeer has met the Lord. ||4||7||
No one respects the poor man.
He may make thousands of efforts, but no one pays any attention to him. ||1||Pause||
When the poor man goes to the rich man,
and sits right in front of him, the rich man turns his back on him. ||1||
But when the rich man goes to the poor man,
the poor man welcomes him with respect. ||2||
The poor man and the rich man are both brothers.
God's pre-ordained plan cannot be erased. ||3||
Says Kabeer, he alone is poor,
who does not have the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in his heart. ||4||8||
Serving the Guru, devotional worship is practiced.
Then, this human body is obtained.
Even the gods long for this human body.
So vibrate that human body, and think of serving the Lord. ||1||
Vibrate, and meditate on the Lord of the Universe, and never forget Him.
This is the blessed opportunity of this human incarnation. ||1||Pause||
As long as the disease of old age has not come to the body,
and as long as death has not come and seized the body,
and as long as your voice has not lost its power,
O mortal being, vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the World. ||2||
If you do not vibrate and meditate on Him now, when will you, O Sibing of Destiny?
When the end comes, you will not be able to vibrate and meditate on Him.
Whatever you have to do - now is the best time to do it.
Otherwise, you shall regret and repent afterwards, and you shall not be carried across to the other side. ||3||
He alone is a servant, whom the Lord enjoins to His service.
He alone attains the Immaculate Divine Lord.
Meeting with the Guru, his doors are opened wide,
and he does not have to journey again on the path of reincarnation. ||4||
This is your chance, and this is your time.
Look deep into your own heart, and reflect on this.
Says Kabeer, you can win or lose.
In so many ways, I have proclaimed this out loud. ||5||1||9||
In the City of God, sublime understanding prevails.
There, you shall meet with the Lord, and reflect on Him.
Thus, you shall understand this world and the next.
What is the use of claiming that you own everything, if you only die in the end? ||1||
I focus my meditation on my inner self, deep within.
The Name of the Sovereign Lord is my spiritual wisdom. ||1||Pause||
In the first chakra, the root chakra, I have grasped the reins and tied them.
I have firmly placed the moon above the sun.
The sun blazes forth at the western gate.
Through the central channel of the Shushmanaa, it rises up above my head. ||2||
There is a stone at that western gate,
and above that stone, is another window.
Above that window is the Tenth Gate.
Says Kabeer, it has no end or limitation. ||3||2||10||
He alone is a Mullah, who struggles with his mind,
and through the Guru's Teachings, fights with death.
He crushes the pride of the Messenger of Death.
Unto that Mullah, I ever offer greetings of respect. ||1||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 036

God is present, right here at hand; why do you say that He is far away?
Tie up your disturbing passions, and find the Beauteous Lord. ||1||Pause||
He alone is a Qazi, who contemplates the human body,
and through the fire of the body, is illumined by God.
He does not lose his semen, even in his dreams;
for such a Qazi, there is no old age or death. ||2||
He alone is a sultan and a king, who shoots the two arrows,
gathers in his outgoing mind,
and assembles his army in the realm of the mind's sky, the Tenth Gate.
The canopy of royalty waves over such a sultan. ||3||
The Yogi cries out, “Gorakh, Gorakh”.
The Hindu utters the Name of Raam.
The Muslim has only One God.
The Lord and Master of Kabeer is all-pervading. ||4||3||11||
Fifth Mehl:
Those who call a stone their god
\- their service is useless.
Those who fall at the feet of a stone god
\- their work is wasted in vain. ||1||
My Lord and Master speaks forever.
God gives His gifts to all living beings. ||1||Pause||
The Divine Lord is within the self, but the spiritually blind one does not know this.
Deluded by doubt, he is caught in the noose.
The stone does not speak; it does not give anything to anyone.
Such religious rituals are useless; such service is fruitless. ||2||
If a corpse is anointed with sandalwood oil,
what good does it do?
If a corpse is rolled in manure,
what does it lose from this? ||3||
Says Kabeer, I proclaim this out loud
\- behold, and understand, you ignorant, faithless cynic.
The love of duality has ruined countless homes.
The Lord's devotees are forever in bliss. ||4||4||12||
The fish in the water is attached to Maya.
The moth fluttering around the lamp is pierced through by Maya.
The sexual desire of Maya afflicts the elephant.
The snakes and bumble bees are destroyed through Maya. ||1||
Such are the enticements of Maya, O Siblings of Destiny.
As many living beings are there are, have been deceived. ||1||Pause||
The birds and the deer are imbued with Maya.
Sugar is a deadly trap for the flies.
Horses and camels are absorbed in Maya.
The eighty-four Siddhas, the beings of miraculous spiritual powers, play in Maya. ||2||
The six celibates are slaves of Maya.
So are the nine masters of Yoga, and the sun and the moon.
The austere disciplinarians and the Rishis are asleep in Maya.
Death and the five demons are in Maya. ||3||
Dogs and jackals are imbued with Maya.
Monkeys, leopards and lions,
cats, sheep, foxes,
trees and roots are planted in Maya. ||4||
Even the gods are drenched with Maya,
as are the oceans, the sky and the earth.
Says Kabeer, whoever has a belly to fill, is under the spell of Maya.
The mortal is emancipated only when he meets the Holy Saint. ||5||5||13||
As long as he cries out, “Mine! Mine!”,
none of his tasks is accomplished.
When such possessiveness is erased and removed,

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 037

then God comes and resolves his affairs. ||1||
Contemplate such spiritual wisdom, O mortal man.
Why not meditate in remembrance on the Lord, the Destroyer of pain? ||1||Pause||
As long as the tiger lives in the forest,
the forest does not flower.
But when the jackal eats the tiger,
then the entire forest flowers. ||2||
The victorious are drowned, while the defeated swim across.
By Guru's Grace, one crosses over and is saved.
Slave Kabeer speaks and teaches:
remain lovingly absorbed, attuned to the Lord alone. ||3||6||14||
He has 7,000 commanders,
and hundreds of thousands of prophets;
He is said to have 88,000,000 shaykhs,
and 56,000,000 attendants. ||1||
I am meek and poor - what chance do I have of being heard there?
His Court is so far away; only a rare few attain the Mansion of His Presence. ||1||Pause||
He has 33,000,000 play-houses.
His beings wander insanely through 8.4 million incarnations.
He bestowed His Grace on Adam, the father of mankind,
who then lived in paradise for a long time. ||2||
Pale are the faces of those whose hearts are disturbed.
They have forsaken their Bible, and practice Satanic evil.
One who blames the world, and is angry with people,
shall receive the fruits of his own actions. ||3||
You are the Great Giver, O Lord; I am forever a beggar at Your Door.
If I were to deny You, then I would be a wretched sinner.
Slave Kabeer has entered Your Shelter.
Keep me near You, O Merciful Lord God - that is heaven for me. ||4||7||15||
Everyone speaks of going there,
but I do not even know where heaven is. ||1||Pause||
One who does not even know the mystery of his own self,
speaks of heaven, but it is only talk. ||1||
As long as the mortal hopes for heaven,
he will not dwell at the Lord's Feet. ||2||
Heaven is not a fort with moats and ramparts, and walls plastered with mud;
I do not know what heaven's gate is like. ||3||
Says Kabeer, now what more can I say?
The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is heaven itself. ||4||8||16||
How can the beautiful fortress be conquered, O Siblings of Destiny?
It has double walls and triple moats. ||1||Pause||
It is defended by the five elements, the twenty-five categories, attachment, pride, jealousy and the awesomely powerful Maya.
The poor mortal being does not have the strength to conquer it; what should I do now, O Lord? ||1||
Sexual desire is the window, pain and pleasure are the gate-keepers, virtue and sin are the gates.
Anger is the great supreme commander, full of argument and strife, and the mind is the rebel king there. ||2||
Their armor is the pleasure of tastes and flavors, their helmets are worldly attachments; they take aim with their bows of corrupt intellect.
The greed that fills their hearts is the arrow; with these things, their fortress is impregnable. ||3||
But I have made divine love the fuse, and deep meditation the bomb; I have launched the rocket of spiritual wisdom.
The fire of God is lit by intuition, and with one shot, the fortress is taken. ||4||
Taking truth and contentment with me, I begin the battle and storm both the gates.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and by Guru's Grace, I have captured the king of the fortress. ||5||

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 038

With the army of God's devotees, and Shakti, the power of meditation, I have snapped the noose of the fear of death.
Slave Kabeer has climbed to the top of the fortress; I have obtained the eternal, imperishable domain. ||6||9||17||
The mother Ganges is deep and profound.
Tied up in chains, they took Kabeer there. ||1||
My mind was not shaken; why should my body be afraid?
My consciousness remained immersed in the Lotus Feet of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
The waves of the Ganges broke the chains,
and Kabeer was seated on a deer skin. ||2||
Says Kabeer, I have no friend or companion.
On the water, and on the land, the Lord is my Protector. ||3||10||18||
Bhairao, Kabeer Jee, Ashtapadees, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
God constructed a fortress, inaccessible and unreachable, in which He dwells.
There, His Divine Light radiates forth.
Lightning blazes, and bliss prevails there,
where the Eternally Young Lord God abides. ||1||
This soul is lovingly attuned to the Lord's Name.
It is saved from old age and death, and its doubt runs away. ||1||Pause||
Those who believe in high and low social classes,
only sing songs and chants of egotism.
The Unstruck Sound-current of the Shabad, the Word of God, resounds in that place,
where the Supreme Lord God abides. ||2||
He creates planets, solar systems and galaxies;
He destroys the three worlds, the three gods and the three qualities.
The Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord God dwells in the heart.
No one can find the limits or the secrets of the Lord of the World. ||3||
The Lord shines forth in the plantain flower and the sunshine.
He dwells in the pollen of the lotus flower.
The Lord's secret is within the twelve petals of the heart-lotus.
The Supreme Lord, the Lord of Lakshmi dwells there. ||4||
He is like the sky, stretching across the lower, upper and middle realms.
In the profoundly silent celestial realm, He radiates forth.
Neither the sun nor the moon are there,
but the Primal Immaculate Lord celebrates there. ||5||
Know that He is in the universe, and in the body as well.
Take your cleansing bath in the Mansarovar Lake.
Chant “Sohang” - “He is me.”
He is not affected by either virtue or vice. ||6||
He is not affected by either high or low social class, sunshine or shade.
He is in the Guru's Sanctuary, and nowhere else.
He is not diverted by diversions, comings or goings.
Remain intuitively absorbed in the celestial void. ||7||
One who knows the Lord in the mind
\- whatever he says, comes to pass.
One who firmly implants the Lord's Divine Light, and His Mantra within the mind
\- says Kabeer, such a mortal crosses over to the other side. ||8||1||
Millions of suns shine for Him,
millions of Shivas and Kailash mountains.
Millions of Durga goddesses massage His Feet.
Millions of Brahmas chant the Vedas for Him. ||1||
When I beg, I beg only from the Lord.
I have nothing to do with any other deities. ||1||Pause||
Millions of moons twinkle in the sky.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 039

Three hundred thirty million gods eat the Lord's offerings.
The nine stars, a million times over, stand at His Door.
Millions of Righteous Judges of Dharma are His gate-keepers. ||2||
Millions of winds blow around Him in the four directions.
Millions of serpents prepare His bed.
Millions of oceans are His water-carriers.
The eighteen million loads of vegetation are His Hair. ||3||
Millions of treasurers fill His Treasury.
Millions of Lakshmis adorn themselves for Him.
Many millions of vices and virtues look up to Him.
Millions of Indras serve Him. ||4||
Fifty-six million clouds are His.
In each and every village, His infinite fame has spread.
Wild demons with dishevelled hair move about.
The Lord plays in countless ways. ||5||
Millions of charitable feasts are held in His Court,
and millions of celestial singers celebrate His victory.
Millions of sciences all sing His Praises.
Even so, the limits of the Supreme Lord God cannot be found. ||6||
Rama, with millions of monkeys, conquered Raawan's army.
Billions of Puraanas greatly praise Him;
He humbled the pride of Duyodhan. ||7||
Millions of gods of love cannot compete with Him.
He steals the hearts of mortal beings.
Says Kabeer, please hear me, O Lord of the World.
I beg for the blessing of fearless dignity. ||8||2||18||20||
Bhairao, The Word Of Naam Dayv Jee, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O my tongue, I will cut you into a hundred pieces,
if you do not chant the Name of the Lord. ||1||
O my tongue, be imbued with the Lord's Name.
Meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, and imbue yourself with this most excellent color. ||1||Pause||
O my tongue, other occupations are false.
The state of Nirvaanaa comes only through the Lord's Name. ||2||
The performance of countless millions of other devotions
is not equal to even one devotion to the Name of the Lord. ||3||
Prays Naam Dayv, this is my occupation.
O Lord, Your Forms are endless. ||4||1||
One who stays away from others' wealth and others' spouses
\- the Lord abides near that person. ||1||
Those who do not meditate and vibrate on the Lord
\- I do not even want to see them. ||1||Pause||
Those whose inner beings are not in harmony with the Lord,
are nothing more than beasts. ||2||
Prays Naam Dayv, a man without a nose
does not look handsome, even if he has the thirty-two beauty marks. ||3||2||
Naam Dayv milked the brown cow, and brought a cup of milk and a jug of water to his family god. ||1||
“Please drink this milk, O my Sovereign Lord God.
Drink this milk and my mind will be happy.
Otherwise, my father will be angry with me."||1||Pause||
Taking the golden cup, Naam Dayv filled it with the ambrosial milk,
and placed it before the Lord. ||2||
The Lord looked upon Naam Dayv and smiled. “This one devotee abides within my heart.”||3||
The Lord drank the milk, and the devotee returned home.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 040

Thus did Naam Dayv come to receive the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||4||3||
I am crazy - the Lord is my Husband.
I decorate and adorn myself for Him. ||1||
Slander me well, slander me well, slander me well, O people.
My body and mind are united with my Beloved Lord. ||1||Pause||
Do not engage in any arguments or debates with anyone.
With your tongue, savor the Lord's sublime essence. ||2||
Now, I know within my soul, that such an arrangement has been made;
I will meet with my Lord by the beat of the drum. ||3||
Anyone can praise or slander me.
Naam Dayv has met the Lord. ||4||4||
Sometimes, people do not appreciate milk, sugar and ghee.
Sometimes, they have to beg for bread from door to door.
Sometimes, they have to pick out the grain from the chaff. ||1||
As the Lord keeps us, so do we live, O Siblings of Destiny.
The Lord's Glory cannot even be described. ||1||Pause||
Sometimes, people prance around on horses.
Sometimes, they do not even have shoes for their feet. ||2||
Sometimes, people sleep on cozy beds with white sheets.
Sometimes, they do not even have straw to put down on the ground. ||3||
Naam Dayv prays, only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, can save us.
One who meets the Guru, is carried across to the other side. ||4||5||
Laughing and playing, I came to Your Temple, O Lord.
While Naam Dayv was worshipping, he was grabbed and driven out. ||1||
I am of a low social class, O Lord;
why was I born into a family of fabric dyers? ||1||Pause||
I picked up my blanket and went back,
to sit behind the temple. ||2||
As Naam Dayv uttered the Glorious Praises of the Lord,
the temple turned around to face the Lord's humble devotee. ||3||6||
Bhairao, Naam Dayv Jee, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
As the hungry person loves food,
and the thirsty person is obsessed with water,
and as the fool is attached to his family
\- just so, the Lord is very dear to Naam Dayv. ||1||
Naam Dayv is in love with the Lord.
He has naturally and intuitively become detached from the world. ||1||Pause||
Like the woman who falls in love with another man,
and the greedy man who loves only wealth,
and the sexually promiscuous man who loves women and sex,
just so, Naam Dayv is in love with the Lord. ||2||
But that alone is real love, which the Lord Himself inspires;
by Guru's Grace, duality is eradicated.
Such love never breaks; through it, the mortal remains merged in the Lord.
Naam Dayv has focused his consciousness on the True Name. ||3||
Like the love between the child and its mother,
so is my mind imbued with the Lord.
Prays Naam Dayv, I am in love with the Lord.
The Lord of the Universe abides within my consciousness. ||4||1||7||
The blind fool abandons the wife of his own home,

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 041

and has an affair with another woman.
He is like the parrot, who is pleased to see the simbal tree;
but in the end, he dies, stuck to it. ||1||
The home of the sinner is on fire.
It keeps burning, and the fire cannot be extinguished. ||1||Pause||
He does not go to see where the Lord is being worshipped.
He abandons the Lord's Path, and takes the wrong path.
He forgets the Primal Lord God, and is caught in the cycle of reincarnation.
He throws away the Ambrosial Nectar, and gathers poison to eat. ||2||
He is like the prostitute, who comes to dance,
wearing beautiful clothes, decorated and adorned.
She dances to the beat, exciting the breath of those who watch her.
But the noose of the Messenger of Death is around her neck. ||3||
One who has good karma recorded on his forehead,
hurries to enter the Guru's Sanctuary.
Says Naam Dayv, consider this:
O Saints, this is the way to cross over to the other side. ||4||2||8||
Sanda and Marka went and complained to Harnaakhash,
“Your son does not read his lessons. We are tired of trying to teach him.
He chants the Lord's Name, clapping his hands to keep the beat; he has spoiled all the other students. ||1||
He chants the Lord's Name,
and he has enshrined meditative remembrance of the Lord within his heart."||1||Pause||
“Your father the king has conquered the whole world”, said his mother the queen.
“O Prahlad my son, you do not obey him, so he has decided to deal with you in another way.”||2||
The council of villians met and resolved to send Prahlaad into the life hereafter.
Prahlaad was thrown off a mountain, into the water, and into a fire, but the Sovereign Lord God saved him, by changing the laws of nature. ||3||
Harnaakhash thundered with rage and threatened to kill Prahlaad. “Tell me, who can save you?”
Prahlaad answered, “The Lord, the Master of the three worlds, is contained even in this pillar to which I am tied.”||4||
The Lord who tore Harnaakhash apart with His nails proclaimed Himself the Lord of gods and men.
Says Naam Dayv, I meditate on the Lord, the Man-lion, the Giver of fearless dignity. ||5||3||9||
The Sultan said, "Listen, Naam Dayv:
let me see the actions of your Lord."||1||
The Sultan arrested Naam Dayv,
and said, “Let me see your Beloved Lord.”||1||Pause||
“Bring this dead cow back to life.
Otherwise, I shall cut off your head here and now."||2||
Naam Dayv answered, "O king, how can this happen?
No one can bring the dead back to life. ||3||
I cannot do anything by my own actions.
Whatever the Lord does, that alone happens."||4||
The arrogant king was enraged at this reply.
He incited an elephant to attack. ||5||
Naam Dayv's mother began to cry,
and she said, “Why don't you abandon your Lord Raam, and worship his Lord Allah?”||6||
Naam Dayv answered, "I am not your son, and you are not my mother.
Even if my body dies, I will still sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord."||7||
The elephant attacked him with his trunk,
but Naam Dayv was saved, protected by the Lord. ||8||
The king said, "The Qazis and the Mullahs bow down to me,
but this Hindu has trampled my honor."||9||
The people pleaded with the king, "Hear our prayer, O king.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 042

Here, take Naam Dayv's weight in gold, and release him."||10||
The king replied, "If I take the gold, then I will be consigned to hell,
by forsaking my faith and gathering worldly wealth."||11||
With his feet in chains, Naam Dayv kept the beat with his hands,
singing the Praises of the Lord. ||12||
“Even if the Ganges and the Jamunaa rivers flow backwards,
I will still continue singing the Praises of the Lord."||13||
Three hours passed,
and even then, the Lord of the three worlds had not come. ||14||
Playing on the instrument of the feathered wings,
the Lord of the Universe came, mounted on the eagle garura. ||15||
He cherished His devotee,
and the Lord came, mounted on the eagle garura. ||16||
The Lord said to him, "If you wish, I shall turn the earth sideways.
If you wish, I shall turn it upside down. ||17||
If you wish, I shall bring the dead cow back to life.
Everyone will see and be convinced."||18||
Naam Dayv prayed, and milked the cow.
He brought the calf to the cow, and milked her. ||19||
When the pitcher was filled with milk,
Naam Dayv took it and placed it before the king. ||20||
The king went into his palace,
and his heart was troubled. ||21||
Through the Qazis and the Mullahs, the king offered his prayer,
“Forgive me, please, O Hindu; I am just a cow before you.”||22||
Naam Dayv said, "Listen, O king:
have I done this miracle? ||23||
The purpose of this miracle is
that you, O king, should walk on the path of truth and humility."||24||
Naam Dayv became famous everywhere for this.
The Hindus all went together to Naam Dayv. ||25||
If the cow had not been revived,
people would have lost faith in Naam Dayv. ||26||
The fame of Naam Dayv spread throughout the world.
The humble devotees were saved and carried across with him. ||27||
All sorts of troubles and pains afflicted the slanderer.
There is no difference between Naam Dayv and the Lord. ||28||1||10||
SECOND HOUSE:
By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one meets the Lord.
By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one is carried across to the other side.
By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one swims across to heaven.
By the Grace of the Divine Guru, one remains dead while yet alive. ||1||
True, True, True True, True is the Divine Guru.
False, false, false, false is all other service. ||1||Pause||
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is implanted within.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one does not wander in the ten directions.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the five demons are kept far away.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one does not die regretting. ||2||
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one is blessed with the Ambrosial Bani of the Word.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one speaks the Unspoken Speech.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's body becomes like ambrosial nectar.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one utters and chants the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3||
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one sees the three worlds.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one understands the state of supreme dignity.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's head is in the Akaashic ethers.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one is always congratulated everywhere. ||4||
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one remains detached forever.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one forsakes the slander of others.

## Section 28 - Raag Bhairao - Part 043

When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one looks upon good and bad as the same.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one has good destiny written on his forehead. ||5||
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the wall of the body is not eroded.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, the temple turns itself towards the mortal.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's home is constructed.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's bed is lifted up out of the water. ||6||
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one has bathed at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one's body is stamped with the sacred mark of Vishnu.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one has performed the twelve devotional services.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, all poison is transformed into fruit. ||7||
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, skepticism is shattered.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one escapes from the Messenger of Death.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one crosses over the terrifying world-ocean.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one is not subject to the cycle of reincarnation. ||8||
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one understands the rituals of the eighteen Puraanas.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, it is as if one has made an offering of the eighten loads of vegetation.
When the Divine Guru grants His Grace, one needs no other place of rest.
Naam Dayv has entered the Sanctuary of the Guru. ||9||1||2||11||
Bhairao, The Word Of Ravi Daas Jee, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Without seeing something, the yearning for it does not arise.
Whatever is seen, shall pass away.
Whoever chants and praises the Naam, the Name of the Lord,
is the true Yogi, free of desire. ||1||
When someone utters the Name of the Lord with love,
it is as if he has touched the philosopher's stone; his sense of duality is eradicated. ||1||Pause||
He alone is a silent sage, who destroys the duality of his mind.
Keeping the doors of his body closed, he merges in the Lord of the three worlds.
Everyone acts according to the inclinations of the mind.
Attuned to the Creator Lord, one remains free of fear. ||2||
Plants blossom forth to produce fruit.
When the fruit is produced, the flowers wither away.
For the sake of spiritual wisdom, people act and practice rituals.
When spiritual wisdom wells up, then actions are left behind. ||3||
For the sake of ghee, wise people churn milk.
Those who are Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive - are forever in the state of Nirvaanaa.
Says Ravi Daas, O you unfortunate people,
why not meditate on the Lord with love in your heart? ||4||1||
NAAM DAYV:
Come, O Lord of beautiful hair,
wearing the robes of a Sufi Saint. ||Pause||
Your cap is the realm of the Akaashic ethers; the seven nether worlds are Your sandals.
The body covered with skin is Your temple; You are so beautiful, O Lord of the World. ||1||
The fifty-six million clouds are Your gowns, the 16,000 milkmaids are your skirts.
The eighteen loads of vegetation is Your stick, and all the world is Your plate. ||2||
The human body is the mosque, and the mind is the priest, who peacefully leads the prayer.
You are married to Maya, O Formless Lord, and so You have taken form. ||3||
Performing devotional worship services to You, my cymbals were taken away; unto whom should I complain?
Naam Dayv's Lord and Master, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, wanders everywhere; He has no specific home. ||4||1||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/27">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">27. Raag Kaydaaraa</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/29">
          <span class="pr-2">29. Raag Basant</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
