---
title: "31. Raag Malaar"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/30">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">30. Raag Saarang</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/32">
          <span class="pr-2">32. Raag Kaanraa</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 001

Raag Malaar, Chau-Padas, First Mehl, First House:
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Eating, drinking, laughing and sleeping, the mortal forgets about dying.
Forgetting his Lord and Master, the mortal is ruined, and his life is cursed. He cannot remain forever. ||1||
O mortal, meditate on the One Lord.
You shall go to your true home with honor. ||1 Pause||
Those who serve You - what can they give You? They beg for and receive what cannot remain.
You are the Great Giver of all souls; You are the Life within all living beings. ||2||
The Gurmukhs meditate, and receive the Ambrosial Nectar; thus they become pure.
Day and night, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O mortal. It makes the filthy immacuate. ||3||
As is the season, so is the comfort of the body, and so is the body itself.
O Nanak, that season is beautiful; without the Name, what season is it? ||4||1||
Malaar, First Mehl:
I offer prayers to my Beloved Guru, that He may unite me with my Husband Lord.
I hear the thunder in the clouds, and my mind is cooled and soothed; imbued with the Love of my Dear Beloved, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1||
The rain pours down, and my mind is drenched with His Love.
The drop of Ambrosial Nectar pleases my heart; the Guru has fascinated my mind, which is drenched in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
With intuitive peace and poise, the soul-bride is loved by her Husband Lord; her mind is pleased and appeased by the Guru's Teachings.
She is the happy soul-bride of her Husband Lord; her mind and body are filled with joy by His Love. ||2||
Discarding her demerits, she becomes detached; with the Lord as her Husband, her marriage is eternal.
She never suffers separation or sorrow; her Lord God showers her with His Grace. ||3||
Her mind is steady and stable; she does not come and go in reincarnation.
She takes the Shelter of the Perfect Guru. O Nanak, as Gurmukh, chant the Naam; you shall be accepted as the true soul-bride of the Lord. ||4||2||
Malaar, First Mehl:
They pretend to understand the Truth, but they are not satisfied by the Naam; they waste their lives in egotism.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 002

Caught in slander and attachment to the wealth and women of others, they eat poison and suffer in pain.
They think about the Shabad, but they are not released from their fear and fraud; the minds and mouths are filled with Maya, Maya.
Loading the heavy and crushing load, they die, only to be reborn, and waste their lives again. ||1||
The Word of the Shabad is so very beautiful; it is pleasing to my mind.
The mortal wanders lost in reincarnation, wearing various robes and clothes; when he is saved and protected by the Guru, then he finds the Truth. ||1||Pause||
He does not try to wash away his angry passions by bathing at sacred shrines. He does not love the Name of the Lord.
He abandons and discards the priceless jewel, and he goes back from where he came.
And so he becomes a maggot in manure, and in that, he is absorbed.
The more he tastes, the more he is diseased; without the Guru, there is no peace and poise. ||2||
Focusing my awareness on selfless service, I joyfully sing His Praises. As Gurmukh, I contemplate spiritual wisdom.
The seeker comes forth, and the debater dies down; I am a sacrifice, a sacrifice to the Guru, the Creator Lord.
I am low and wretched, with shallow and false understanding; You embellish and exalt me through the Word of Your Shabad.
And wherever there is self-realization, You are there; O True Lord Savior, You save us and carry us across. ||3||
Where should I sit to chant Your Praises; which of Your Infinite Praises should I chant?
The Unknown cannot be known; O Inaccessible, Unborn Lord God, You are the Lord and Master of masters.
How can I compare You to anyone else I see? All are beggars - You are the Great Giver.
Lacking devotion, Nanak looks to Your Door; please bless him with Your One Name, that he may enshrine it in his heart. ||4||3||
Malaar, First Mehl:
The soul-bride who has not known delight with her Husband Lord, shall weep and wail with a wretched face.
She becomes hopeless, caught in the noose of her own karma; without the Guru, she wanders deluded by doubt. ||1||
So rain down, O clouds. My Husband Lord has come home.
I am a sacrifice to my Guru, who has led me to meet my Lord God. ||1||Pause||
My love, my Lord and Master is forever fresh; I am embellished with devotional worship night and day.
I am liberated, gazing on the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. Devotional worship has made me glorious and exalted throughout the ages. ||2||
I am Yours; the three worlds are Yours as well. You are mine, and I am Yours.
Meeting with the True Guru, I have found the Immaculate Lord; I shall not be consigned to this terrifying world-ocean ever again. ||3||
If the soul-bride is filled with delight on seeing her Husband Lord, then her decorations are true.
With the Immaculate Celestial Lord, she becomes the truest of the true. Following the Guru's Teachings, she leans on the Support of the Naam. ||4||
She is liberated; the Guru has untied her bonds. Focusing her awareness on the Shabad, she attains honor.
O Nanak, the Lord's Name is deep within her heart; as Gurmukh, she is united in His Union. ||5||4||
First Mehl, Malaar:
Others' wives, others' wealth, greed, egotism, corruption and poison;
evil passions, slander of others, sexual desire and anger - give up all these. ||1||
The Inaccessible, Infinite Lord is sitting in His Mansion.
That humble being, whose conduct is in harmony with the jewel of the Guru's Shabad, obtains the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||Pause||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 003

He sees pleasure and pain as both the same, along with good and bad in the world.
Wisdom, understanding and awareness are found in the Name of the Lord. In the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, embrace love for the Guru. ||2||
Day and night, profit is obtained through the Lord's Name. The Guru, the Giver, has given this gift.
That Sikh who becomes Gurmukh obtains it. The Creator blesses him with His Glance of Grace. ||3||
The body is a mansion, a temple, the home of the Lord; He has infused His Infinite Light into it.
O Nanak, the Gurmukh is invited to the Mansion of the Lord's Presence; the Lord unites him in His Union. ||4||5||
Malaar, First Mehl, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Know that the creation was formed through air and water;
have no doubt that the body was made through fire.
And if you know where the soul comes from,
you shall be known as a wise religious scholar. ||1||
Who can know the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, O mother?
Without seeing Him, we cannot say anything about Him.
How can anyone speak and describe Him, O mother? ||1||Pause||
He is high above the sky, and beneath the nether worlds.
How can I speak of Him? Let me understand.
Who knows what sort of Name is chanted, in the heart, without the tongue? ||2||
Undoubtedly, words fail me.
He alone understands, who is blessed.
Day and night, deep within, he remains lovingly attuned to the Lord.
He is the true person, who is merged in the True Lord. ||3||
If someone of high social standing becomes a selfless servant,
then his praises cannot even be expressed.
And if someone from a low social class becomes a selfless servant,
O Nanak, he shall wear shoes of honor. ||4||1||6||
Malaar, First Mehl:
The pain of separation - this is the hungry pain I feel.
Another pain is the attack of the Messenger of Death.
Another pain is the disease consuming my body.
O foolish doctor, don't give me medicine. ||1||
O foolish doctor, don't give me medicine.
The pain persists, and the body continues to suffer.
Your medicine has no effect on me. ||1||Pause||
Forgetting his Lord and Master, the mortal enjoys sensual pleasures;
then, disease rises up in his body.
The blind mortal receives his punishment.
O foolish doctor, don't give me medicine. ||2||
The value of sandalwood lies in its fragrance.
The value of the human lasts only as long as the breath in the body.
When the breath is taken away, the body crumbles into dust.
After that, no one takes any food. ||3||
The mortal's body is golden, and the soul-swan is immaculate and pure,
if even a tiny particle of the Immaculate Naam is within.
All pain and disease are eradicated.
O Nanak, the mortal is saved through the True Name. ||4||2||7||
Malaar, First Mehl:
Pain is the poison. The Lord's Name is the antidote.
Grind it up in the mortar of contentment, with the pestle of charitable giving.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 004

Take it each and every day, and your body shall not waste away.
At the very last instant, you shall strike down the Messenger of Death. ||1||
So take such medicine, O fool,
by which your corruption shall be taken away. ||1||Pause||
Power, wealth and youth are all just shadows,
as are the vehicles you see moving around.
Neither your body, nor your fame, nor your social status shall go along with you.
In the next world it is day, while here, it is all night. ||2||
Let your taste for pleasures be the firewood, let your greed be the ghee,
and your sexual desire and anger the cooking oil; burn them in the fire.
Some make burnt offerings, hold sacred feasts, and read the Puraanas.
Whatever pleases God is acceptable. ||3||
Intense meditation is the paper, and Your Name is the insignia.
Those for whom this treasure is ordered,
look wealthy when they reach their true home.
O Nanak, blessed is that mother who gave birth to them. ||4||3||8||
Malaar, First Mehl:
You wear white clothes, and speak sweet words.
Your nose is sharp, and your eyes are black.
Have you ever seen your Lord and Master, O sister? ||1||
O my All-powerful Lord and Master, by Your power, I fly and soar, and ascend to the heavens.
I see Him in the water, on the land, in the mountains, on the river-banks,
in all places and interspaces, O brother. ||2||
He fashioned the body, and gave it wings;
He gave it great thirst and desire to fly.
When He bestows His Glance of Grace, I am comforted and consoled.
As He makes me see, so do I see, O brother. ||3||
Neither this body, nor its wings, shall go to the world hereafter.
It is a fusion of air, water and fire.
O Nanak, if it is in the mortal's karma, then he meditates on the Lord, with the Guru as his Spiritual Teacher.
This body is absorbed in the Truth. ||4||4||9||
Malaar, Third Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The Formless Lord is formed by Himself. He Himself deludes in doubt.
Creating the Creation, the Creator Himself beholds it; He enjoins us as He pleases.
This is the true greatness of His servant, that he obeys the Hukam of the Lord's Command. ||1||
Only He Himself knows His Will. By Guru's Grace, it is grasped.
When this play of Shiva and Shakti comes to his home, he remains dead while yet alive. ||1||Pause||
They read the Vedas, and read them again, and engage in arguments about Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.
This three-phased Maya has deluded the whole world into cynicism about death and birth.
By Guru's Grace, know the One Lord, and the anxiety of your mind will be allayed. ||2||
I am meek, foolish and thoughtless, but still, You take care of me.
Please be kind to me, and make me the slave of Your slaves, so that I may serve You.
Please bless me with the treasure of the One Name, that I may chant it, day and night. ||3||
Says Nanak, by Guru's Grace, understand. Hardly anyone considers this.
Like foam bubbling up on the surface of the water, so is this world.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 005

It shall eventually merge back into that from which it came, and all its expanse shall be gone. ||4||1||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
Those who realize the Hukam of the Lord's Command are united with Him; through the Word of His Shabad, their egotism is burnt away.
They perform true devotional worship day and night; they remain lovingly attuned to the True Lord.
They gaze on their True Lord forever, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, with loving ease. ||1||
O mortal, accept His Will and find peace.
God is pleased by the Pleasure of His Own Will. Whomever He forgives, meets no obstacles on the way. ||1||Pause||
Under the influence of the three gunas, the three dispositions, the mind wanders everywhere, without love or devotion to the Lord.
No one is ever saved or liberated, by doing deeds in ego.
Whatever our Lord and Master wills, comes to pass. People wander according to their past actions. ||2||
Meeting with the True Guru, the mind is overpowered; the Lord's Name comes to abide in the mind.
The value of such a person cannot be estimated; nothing at all can be said about him.
He comes to dwell in the fourth state; he remains merged in the True Lord. ||3||
My Lord God is Inaccessible and Unfathomable. His value cannot be expressed.
By Guru's Grace, he comes to understand, and live the Shabad.
O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; you shall be honored in the Court of the Lord. ||4||2||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
Rare is that person who, as Gurmukh, understands; the Lord has bestowed His Glance of Grace.
There is no Giver except the Guru. He grants His Grace and forgives.
Meeting the Guru, peace and tranquility well up; chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night. ||1||
O my mind, meditate on the Ambrosial Name of the Lord.
Meeting with the True Guru and the Primal Being, the Name is obtained, and one remains forever absorbed in the Lord's Name. ||1||Pause||
The self-willed manmukhs are forever separated from the Lord; no one is with them.
They are stricken with the great disease of egotism; they are hit on the head by the Messenger of Death.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings are never separated from the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. They dwell on the Naam, night and day. ||2||
You are the One and Only Creator of all. You continually create, watch over and contemplate.
Some are Gurmukh - You unite them with Yourself. You bless then with the treasure of devotion.
You Yourself know everything. Unto whom should I complain? ||3||
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is Ambrosial Nectar. By the Lord's Grace, it is obtained.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, night and day, the intuitive peace and poise of the Guru is obtained.
O Nanak, the Naam is the greatest treasure. Focus your consciousness on the Naam. ||4||3||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
I praise the Guru, the Giver of peace, forever. He truly is the Lord God.
By Guru's Grace, I have obtained the supreme status. His glorious greatness is glorious!
One who sings the Glorious Praises of the True Lord, merges in the True Lord. ||1||
O mortal, contemplate the Guru's Word in your heart.
Abandon your false family, poisonous egotism and desire; remember in your heart, that you will have to leave. ||1||Pause||
The True Guru is the Giver of the Lord's Name. There is no other giver at all.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 006

Bestowing the gift of the soul, He satisfies the mortal beings, and merges them in the True Name.
Night and day, they ravish and enjoy the Lord within the heart; they are intuitively absorbed in Samaadhi. ||2||
The Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, has pierced my mind. The True Word of His Bani permeates my heart.
My God is Unseen; He cannot be seen. The Gurmukh speaks the Unspoken.
When the Giver of peace grants His Grace, the mortal being meditates on the Lord, the Life of the Universe. ||3||
He does not come and go in renicarnation any longer; the Gurmukh meditates intuitively.
From the mind, the mind merges into our Lord and Master; the mind is absorbed into the Mind.
In truth, the True Lord is pleased with truth; eradicate egotism from within yourself. ||4||
Our One and Only Lord and Master dwells within the mind; there is no other at all.
The One Name is Sweet Ambrosial Nectar; it is Immaculate Truth in the world.
O Nanak, the Name of God is obtained, by those who are so predestined. ||5||4||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
All the heavenly heralds and celestial singers are saved through the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
They contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. Subduing their ego, the Name abides in their minds; they keep the Lord enshrined in their hearts.
He alone understands, whom the Lord causes to understand; the Lord unites him with Himself.
Night and day, he sings the Word of the Shabad and the Guru's Bani; he remains lovingly attuned to the True Lord. ||1||
O my mind, each and every moment, dwell on the Naam.
The Shabad is the Guru's Gift. It shall bring you lasting peace deep within; it shall always stand by you. ||1||Pause||
The self-willed manmukhs never give up their hypocrisy; in the love of duality, they suffer in pain.
Forgetting the Naam, their minds are imbued with corruption. They waste away their lives uselessly.
This opportunity shall not come into their hands again; night and day, they shall always regret and repent.
They die and die again and again, only to be reborn, but they never understand. They rot away in manure. ||2||
The Gurmukhs are imbued with the Naam, and are saved; they contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Meditating on the Name of the Lord, they are Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive. They enshrine the Lord within their hearts.
Their minds and bodies are immaculate, their intellect is immaculate and sublime. Their speech is sublime as well.
They realize the One Primal Being, the One Lord God. There is no other at all. ||3||
God Himself is the Doer, and He Himself is the Cause of causes. He Himself bestows His Glance of Grace.
My mind and body are imbued with the Word of the Guru's Bani. My consciousness is immersed in His service.
The Unseen and Inscrutable Lord dwells deep within. He is seen only by the Gurmukh.
O Nanak, He gives to whomever He pleases. According to the Pleasure of His Will, He leads the mortals on. ||4||5||
Malaar, Third Mehl, Du-Tukas:
Through the True Guru, the mortal obtains the special place, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence in his own home.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, his egotistical pride is dispelled. ||1||
Those who have the Naam inscribed on their foreheads,
meditate on the Naam night and day, forever and ever. They are honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
From the True Guru, they learn the ways and means of the mind. Night and day, they focus their meditation on the Lord forever.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 007

Imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they remain forever detached. They are honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||2||
This mind plays, subject to the Lord's Will; in an instant, it wanders out in the ten directions and returns home again.
When the True Lord God Himself bestows His Glance of Grace, then this mind is instantly brought under control by the Gurmukh. ||3||
The mortal comes to know the ways and means of the mind, realizing and contemplating the Shabad.
O Nanak, meditate forever on the Naam, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||4||6||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
Soul, body and breath of life are all His; He is permeating and pervading each and every heart.
Except the One Lord, I do not know any other at all. The True Guru has revealed this to me. ||1||
O my mind, remain lovingly attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I meditate on the Lord, the Unseen, Unfathomable and Infinite Creator. ||1||Pause||
Mind and body are pleased, lovingly attuned to the One Lord, intuitively absorbed in peace and poise.
By Guru's Grace, doubt and fear are dispelled, being lovingly attuned to the One Name. ||2||
When the mortal follows the Guru's Teachings, and lives the Truth, then he attains the state of emancipation.
Among millions, how rare is that one who understands, and is lovingly attuned to the Name of the Lord. ||3||
Wherever I look, there I see the One. This understanding has come through the Guru's Teachings.
I place my mind, body and breath of life in offering before Him; O Nanak, self-conceit is gone. ||4||7||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
My True Lord God, the Eradicator of suffering, is found through the Word of the Shabad.
Imbued with devotional worship, the mortal remains forever detached. He is honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||1||
O mind, remain absorbed in the Mind.
The mind of the Gurmukh is pleased with the Lord's Name, lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||1||Pause||
My God is totally Inaccessible and Unfathomable; through the Guru's Teachings, He is understood.
True self-discipline rests in singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||2||
He Himself is the Shabad, and He Himself is the True Teachings; He merges our light into the Light.
The breath vibrates through this frail body; the Gurmukh obtains the ambrosial nectar. ||3||
He Himself fashions, and He Himself links us to our tasks; the True Lord is pervading everywhere.
O Nanak, without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no one is anything. Through the Naam,we are blessed with glory. ||4||8||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
The mortal is enticed by the poison of corruption, burdened with such a heavy load.
The Lord has placed the magic spell of the Shabad into his mouth, and destroyed the poison of ego. ||1||
O mortal, egotism and attachment are such heavy loads of pain.
This terrifying world-ocean cannot be crossed; through the Lord's Name, the Gurmukh crosses over to the other side. ||1||Pause||
Attachment to the three-phased show of Maya pervades all the created forms.
In the Sat Sangat, the Society of the Saints, the state of supreme awareness is attained. The Merciful Lord carries us across. ||2||
The smell of sandalwood is so sublime; its fragrance spreads out far and wide.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 008

The lifestyle of the Lord's humble servant is exalted and sublime. He spreads the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises throughout the world. ||3||
O my Lord and Master, please be merciful, merciful to me, that I may enshrine the Lord, Har, Har, Har, within my heart.
Nanak has found the Perfect True Guru; in his mind, he chants the Name of the Lord. ||4||9||
Malaar, Third Mehl, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Is this mind a householder, or is this mind a detached renunciate?
Is this mind beyond social class, eternal and unchanging?
Is this mind fickle, or is this mind detached?
How has this mind been gripped by possessiveness? ||1||
O Pandit, O religious scholar, reflect on this in your mind.
Why do you read so many other things, and carry such a heavy load? ||1||Pause||
The Creator has attached it to Maya and possessiveness.
Enforcing His Order, He created the world.
By Guru's Grace, understand this, O Siblings of Destiny.
Remain forever in the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||2||
He alone is a Pandit, who sheds the load of the three qualities.
Night and day, he chants the Name of the One Lord.
He accepts the Teachings of the True Guru.
He offers his head to the True Guru.
He remains forever unattached in the state of Nirvaanaa.
Such a Pandit is accepted in the Court of the Lord. ||3||
He preaches that the One Lord is within all beings.
As he sees the One Lord, he knows the One Lord.
That person, whom the Lord forgives, is united with Him.
He finds eternal peace, here and hereafter. ||4||
Says Nanak, what can anyone do?
He alone is liberated, whom the Lord blesses with His Grace.
Night and day, he sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Then, he no longer bothers with the proclamations of the Shaastras or the Vedas. ||5||1||10||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
The self-willed manmukhs wander lost in reincarnation, confused and deluded by doubt.
The Messenger of Death constantly beats them and disgraces them.
Serving the True Guru, the mortal's subservience to Death is ended.
He meets the Lord God, and enters the Mansion of His Presence. ||1||
O mortal, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
In duality, you are ruining and wasting this priceless human life. You trade it away in exchange for a shell. ||1||Pause||
The Gurmukh falls in love with the Lord, by His Grace.
He enshrines loving devotion to the Lord, Har, Har, deep within his heart.
The Word of the Shabad carries him across the terrifying world-ocean.
He appears true in the True Court of the Lord. ||2||
Performing all sorts of rituals, they do not find the True Guru.
Without the Guru, so many wander lost and confused in Maya.
Egotism, possessiveness and attachment rise up and increase within them.
In the love of dualty, the self-willed manmukhs suffer in pain. ||3||
The Creator Himself is Inaccessible and Infinite.
Chant the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and earn the true profit.
The Lord is Independent, Ever-present, here and now.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 009

O Nanak, the Gurmukh merges in the Naam. ||4||2||11||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
Those who are attached to the Guru's Teachings, are Jivan-mukta, liberated while yet alive.
They remain forever awake and aware night and day, in devotional worship of the Lord.
They serve the True Guru, and eradicate their self-conceit.
I fall at the feet of such humble beings. ||1||
Constantly singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, I live.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad is such totally sweet elixir. Through the Name of the Lord, I have attained the state of liberation. ||1||Pause||
Attachment to Maya leads to the darkness of ignorance.
The self-willed manukhs are attached, foolish and ignorant.
Night and day, their lives pass away in worldly entanglements.
They die and die again and again, only to be reborn and receive their punishment. ||2||
The Gurmukh is lovingly attuned to the Name of the Lord.
He does not cling to false greed.
Whatever he does, he does with intuitive poise.
He drinks in the sublime essence of the Lord; his tongue delights in its flavor. ||3||
Among millions, hardly any understand.
The Lord Himself forgives, and bestows His glorious greatness.
Whoever meets with the Primal Lord God, shall never be separated again.
Nanak is absorbed in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||3||12||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
Everyone speaks the Name of the Lord with the tongue.
But only by serving the True Guru does the mortal receive the Name.
His bonds are shattered, and he stays in the house of liberation.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he sits in the eternal, unchanging house. ||1||
O my mind, why are you angry?
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord's Name is the source of profit. Contemplate and appreciate the Guru's Teachings within your heart, night and day. ||1||Pause||
Each and every instant, the rainbird cries and calls.
Without seeing her Beloved, she does not sleep at all.
She cannot endure this separation.
When she meets the True Guru, then she intuitively meets her Beloved. ||2||
Lacking the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mortal suffers and dies.
He is burnt in the fire of desire, and his hunger does not depart.
Without good destiny, he cannot find the Naam.
He performs all sorts of rituals until he is exhausted. ||3||
The mortal thinks about the Vedic teachings of the three gunas, the three dispositions.
He deals in corruption, filth and vice.
He dies, only to be reborn; he is ruined over and over again.
The Gurmukh enshrines the glory of the supreme state of celestial peace. ||4||
One who has faith in the Guru - everyone has faith in him.
Through the Guru's Word, the mind is cooled and soothed.
Throughout the four ages, that humble being is known to be pure.
O Nanak, that Gurmukh is so rare. ||5||4||13||9||13||22||
Raag Malaar, Fourth Mehl, First House, Chau-Padas:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Night and day, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har, within my heart; through the Guru's Teachings, my pain is forgotten.
The chains of all my hopes and desires have been snapped; my Lord God has showered me with His Mercy. ||1||
My eyes gaze eternally on the Lord, Har, Har.
Gazing on the True Guru, my mind blossoms forth. I have met with the Lord, the Lord of the World. ||1||Pause||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 010

One who forgets such a Name of the Lord, Har, Har - his family is dishonored.
His family is sterile and barren, and his mother is made a widow. ||2||
O Lord, let me meet the Holy Guru, who night and day keep the Lord enshrined in his heart.
Seeing the Guru, the GurSikh blossoms forth, like the child seeing his mother. ||3||
The soul-bride and the Husband Lord live together as one, but the hard wall of egotism has come between them.
The Perfect Guru demolishes the wall of egotism; servant Nanak has met the Lord, the Lord of the World. ||4||1||
Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
The Ganges, the Jamunaa, the Godaavari and the Saraswati - these rivers strive for the dust of the feet of the Holy.
Overflowing with their filthy sins, the mortals take cleansing baths in them; the rivers' pollution is washed away by the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||1||
Instead of bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, take your cleansing bath in the Name.
When the dust of the feet of the Sat Sangat rises up into the eyes, all filthy evil-mindedness is removed. ||1||Pause||
Bhaageerat'h the penitent brought the Ganges down, and Shiva established Kaydaar.
Krishna grazed cows in Kaashi; through the humble servant of the Lord, these places became famous. ||2||
And all the sacred shrines of pilgrimage established by the gods, long for the dust of the feet of the Holy.
Meeting with the Lord's Saint, the Holy Guru, I apply the dust of His feet to my face. ||3||
And all the creatures of Your Universe, O my Lord and Master, long for the dust of the feet of the Holy.
O Nanak, one who has such destiny inscribed on his forehead, is blessed with the dust of the feet of the Holy; the Lord carries him across. ||4||2||
Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
The Lord seems sweet to that humble being who is blessed by the Grace of the Lord.
His hunger and pain are totally taken away; he chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||
Meditating on the Lord, Har, Har, Har, the mortal is emancipated.
One who listens to the Guru's Teachings and meditates on them, is carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||
I am the slave of that humble being, who is blessed by the Grace of the Lord, Har, Har.
Meeting with the Lord's humble servant, peace is obtained; all the pollution and filth of evil-mindedness is washed away. ||2||
The humble servant of the Lord feels hunger only for the Lord. He is satisfied only when he chants the Lord's Glories.
The humble servant of the Lord is a fish in the Water of the Lord. Forgetting the Lord, he would dry up and die. ||3||
He alone knows this love, who enshrines it within his mind.
Servant Nanak gazes upon the Lord and is at peace; The hunger of his body is totally satisfied. ||4||3||
Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
All the beings and creatures which God has created - on their foreheds, He has written their destiny.
The Lord blesses His humble servant with glorious greatness. The Lord enjoins him to his tasks. ||1||
The True Guru implants the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 011

Chant the Name of the Lord, O Sikhs of the Guru, O my Siblings of Destiny. Only the Lord will carry you across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||
That humble being who worships, adores and serves the Guru is pleasing to my Lord God.
To worship and adore the True Guru is to serve the Lord. In His Mercy, He saves us and carries us across. ||2||
The ignorant and the blind wander deluded by doubt; deluded and confused, they pick flowers to offer to their idols.
They worship lifeless stones and serve the tombs of the dead; all their efforts are useless. ||3||
He alone is said to be the True Guru, who realizes God, and proclaims the Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har.
Offer the Guru sacred foods, clothes, silk and satin robes of all sorts; know that He is True. The merits of this shall never leave you lacking. ||4||
The Divine True Guru is the Embodiment, the Image of the Lord; He utters the Ambrosial Word.
O Nanak, blessed and good is the destiny of that humble being, who focuses his consciousness on the Feet of the Lord. ||5||4||
Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
Those whose hearts are filled with my True Guru - those Saints are good and noble in every way.
Seeing them, my mind blossoms forth in bliss; I am forever a sacrifice to them. ||1||
O spiritual teacher, chant the Name of the Lord, day and night.
All hunger and thirst are satisfied, for those who partake of the sublime essence of the Lord, through the Guru's Teachings. ||1||Pause||
The slaves of the Lord are our Holy companions. Meeting with them, doubt is taken away.
As the swan separates the milk from the water, the Holy Saint removes the fire of egotism from the body. ||2||
Those who do not love the Lord in their hearts are deceitful; they continually practice deception.
What can anyone give them to eat? Whatever they themselves plant, they must eat. ||3||
This is the Quality of the Lord, and of the Lord's humble servants as well; the Lord places His Own Essence within them.
Blessed, blessed, is Guru Nanak, who looks impartially on all; He crosses over and transcends both slander and praise. ||4||5||
Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
The Name of the Lord is inaccessible, unfathomable, exalted and sublime. It is chanted by the Lord's Grace.
By great good fortune, I have found the True Congregation, and in the Company of the Holy, I am carried across. ||1||
My mind is in ecstasy, night and day.
By Guru's Grace, I chant the Name of the Lord. Doubt and fear are gone from my mind. ||1||Pause||
Those who chant and meditate on the Lord - O Lord, in Your Mercy, please unite me with them.
Gazing upon them, I am at peace; the pain and disease of egotism are gone. ||2||
Those who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord in their hearts - their lives become totally fruitful.
They themselves swim across, and carry the world across with them. Their ancestors and family cross over as well. ||3||
You Yourself created the whole world, and You Yourself keep it under Your control.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 012

God has showered His Mercy on servant Nanak; He has lifted him up, and rescued him from the ocean of poison. ||4||6||
Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
Those who do not drink in the Ambrosial Nectar by Guru's Grace - their thirst and hunger are not relieved.
The foolish self-willed manmukh burns in the fire of egotistical pride; he suffers painfully in egotism.
Coming and going, he wastes his life uselessly; afflicted with pain, he regrets and repents.
He does not even think of the One, from whom he originated. Cursed is his life, and cursed is his food. ||1||
O mortal, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
The Lord, Har, Har, in His Mercy leads the mortal to meet the Guru; he is absorbed in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||
The life of the self-willed manmukh is useless; he comes and goes in shame.
In sexual desire and anger, the proud ones are drowned. They are burnt in their egotism.
They do not attain perfection or understanding; their intellect is dimmed. Tossed by the waves of greed, they suffer in pain.
Without the Guru, they suffer in terrible pain. Seized by Death, they weep and wail. ||2||
As Gurmukh, I have attained the Unfathomable Name of the Lord, with intuitive peace and poise.
The treasure of the Naam abides deep within my heart. My tongue sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
I am forever in bliss, day and night, lovingly attuned to the One Word of the Shabad.
I have obtained the treasure of the Naam with intuitive ease; this is the glorious greatness of the True Guru. ||3||
Through the True Guru, the Lord, Har, Har, comes to dwell within my mind. I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru.
I have dedicated my mind and body to Him, and placed everything before Him in offering. I focus my consciousness on His Feet.
Please be merciful to me, O my Perfect Guru, and unite me with Yourself.
I am just iron; the Guru is the boat, to carry me across. ||4||7||
Malaar, Fourth Mehl, Partaal, Third House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The humble servant of the Lord chants the Name of the Supreme Lord; he joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Lord's Holy. ||1||Pause||
Deal only in the wealth of the Lord, and gather only the wealth of the Lord. No thief can ever steal it. ||1||
The rainbirds and the peacocks sing day and night, hearing the thunder in the clouds. ||2||
Whatever the deer, the fish and the birds sing, they chant to the Lord, and no other. ||3||
Servant Nanak sings the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises; the sound and fury of Death has totally gone away. ||4||1||8||
Malaar, Fourth Mehl:
They speak and chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam; the very fortunate ones seek Him.
Whoever shows me the Way of the Lord - I fall at his feet. ||1||Pause||
The Lord is my Friend and Compansion; I am in love with the Lord.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 013

I sing of the Lord, and I speak of the Lord; I have discarded all other loves. ||1||
My Beloved is the Enticer of the mind; The Detached Lord God is the Embodiment of Supreme bliss.
Nanak lives by gazing upon the Lord; may I see Him for a moment, for even just an instant. ||2||2||9||9||13||9||31||
Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
What are you so worried about? What are you thinking? What have you tried?
Tell me - the Lord of the Universe - who controls Him? ||1||
The rain showers down from the clouds, O companion. The Guest has come into my home.
I am meek; my Lord and Master is the Ocean of Mercy. I am absorbed in the nine treasures of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
I have prepared all sorts of foods in various ways, and all sorts of sweet deserts.
I have made my kitchen pure and sacred. Now, O my Sovereign Lord King, please sample my food. ||2||
The villains have been destroyed, and my friends are delighted. This is Your Own Mansion and Temple, O Lord.
When my Playful Beloved came into my household, then I found total peace. ||3||
In the Society of the Saints, I have the Support and Protection of the Perfect Guru; this is the pre-ordained destiny inscribed upon my forehead.
Servant Nanak has found his Playful Husband Lord. He shall never suffer in sorrow again. ||4||1||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
When the baby's only food is milk, it cannot survive without its milk.
The mother takes care of it, and pours milk into its mouth; then, it is satisfied and fulfilled. ||1||
I am just a baby; God, the Great Giver, is my Father.
The child is so foolish; it makes so many mistakes. But it has nowhere else to go. ||1||Pause||
The mind of the poor child is fickle; he touches even snakes and fire.
His mother and father hug him close in their embrace, and so he plays in joy and bliss. ||2||
What hunger can the child ever have, O my Lord and Master, when You are his Father?
The treasure of the Naam and the nine treasures are in Your celestial household. You fulfill the desires of the mind. ||3||
My Merciful Father has issued this Command: whatever the child asks for, is put into his mouth.
Nanak, the child, longs for the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. May His Feet always dwell within my heart. ||4||2||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
I tried everything, and gathered all devices together; I have discarded all my anxieties.
I have begun to set all my household affairs right; I have placed my faith in my Lord and Master. ||1||
I listen to the celestial vibrations resonating and resounding.
Sunrise has come, and I gaze upon the Face of my Beloved. My household is filled with peace and pleasure. ||1||Pause||
I focus my mind, and embellish and adorn the place within; then I go out to speak with the Saints.
Seeking and searching, I have found my Husband Lord; I bow at His Feet and worship Him with devotion. ||2||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 014

When my Beloved came to live in my house, I began to sing the songs of bliss.
My friends and companions are happy; God leads me to meet the Perfect Guru. ||3||
My friends and companions are in ecstasy; the Guru has completed all my projects.
Says Nanak, I have met my Husband, the Giver of peace; He shall never leave me and go away. ||4||3||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
From a king to a worm, and from a worm to the lord of gods, they engage in evil to fill their bellies.
They renounce the Lord, the Ocean of Mercy, and worship some other; they are thieves and killers of the soul. ||1||
Forgetting the Lord, they suffer in sorrow and die.
They wander lost in reincarnation through all sorts of species; they do not find shelter anywhere. ||1||Pause||
Those who abandon their Lord and Master and think of some other, are foolish, stupid, idiotic donkeys.
How can they cross over the ocean in a paper boat? Their eogtistical boasts that they will cross over are meaningless. ||2||
Shiva, Brahma, angels and demons, all burn in the fire of death.
Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord's Lotus Feet; O God, Creator, please do not send me into exile. ||3||4||
Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Du-Padas, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
My God is detached and free of desire.
I cannot survive without Him, even for an instant. I am so in love with Him. ||1||Pause||
Associating with the Saints, God has come into my consciousness. By their Grace, I have been awakened.
Hearing the Teachings, my mind has become immaculate. Imbued with the Lord's Love, I sing His Glorious Praises. ||1||
Dedicating this mind, I have made friends with the Saints. They have become merciful to me; I am very fortunate.
I have found absolute peace - I cannot describe it. Nanak has obtained the dust of the feet of the humble. ||2||1||5||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
O mother, please lead me to union with my Beloved.
All my friends and companions sleep totally in peace; their Beloved Lord has come into the homes of their hearts. ||1||Pause||
I am worthless; God is forever Merciful. I am unworthy; what clever tricks could I try?
I claim to be on a par with those who are imbued with the Love of their Beloved. This is my stubborn egotism. ||1||
I am dishonored - I seek the Sanctuary of the One, the Guru, the True Guru, the Primal Being, the Giver of peace.
In an instant, all my pains have been taken away; Nanak passes the night of his life in peace. ||2||2||6||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Rain down, O cloud; do not delay.
O beloved cloud, O support of the mind, you bring lasting bliss and joy to the mind. ||1||Pause||
I take to Your Support, O my Lord and Master; how could You forget me?

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 015

I am Your beautiful bride, Your servant and slave. I have no nobility without my Husband Lord. ||1||
When my Lord and Master listened to my prayer, He hurried to shower me with His Mercy.
Says Nanak, I have become just like my Husband Lord; I am blessed with honor, nobility and the lifestyle of goodness. ||2||3||7||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Meditate on the True Name of your Beloved.
The pains and sorrows of the terrifying world-ocean are dispelled, by enshrining the Image of the Guru within your heart. ||1||Pause||
Your enemies shall be destroyed, and all the evil-doers shall perish, when you come to the Sanctuary of the Lord.
The Savior Lord has given me His Hand and saved me; I have obtained the wealth of the Naam. ||1||
Granting His Grace, He has eradicated all my sins; He has placed the Immaculate Naam within my mind.
O Nanak, the Treasure of Virtue fills my mind; I shall never again suffer in pain. ||2||4||8||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
My Beloved God is the Lover of my breath of life.
Please bless me with the loving devotional worship of the Naam, O Kind and Compassionate Lord. ||1||Pause||
I meditate in remembrance on Your Feet, O my Beloved; my heart is filled with hope.
I offer my prayer to the humble Saints; my mind thirsts for the Blssed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. ||1||
Separation is death, and Union with the Lord is life. Please bless Your humble servant with Your Darshan.
O my God, please be Merciful, and bless Nanak with the support, the life and wealth of the Naam. ||2||5||9||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Now, I have become just like my Beloved.
Dwelling on my Sovereign Lord King, I have found peace. Rain down, O peace-giving cloud. ||1||Pause||
I cannot forget Him, even for an instant; He is the Ocean of peace. Through the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I have obtained the nine treasures.
My perfect destiny has been activated, meeting with the Saints, my help and support. ||1||
Peace has welled up, and all pain has been dispelled, lovingly attuned to the Supreme Lord God.
The arduous and terrifying world-ocean is crossed over, O Nanak, by meditating on the Feet of the Lord. ||2||6||10||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
The clouds have rained down all over the world.
My Beloved Lord God has become merciful to me; I am blessed with ecstasy, bliss and peace. ||1||Pause||
My sorrows are erased, and all my thirsts are quenched, meditating on the Supreme Lord God.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, death and birth come to an end, and the mortal does not wander anywhere, ever again. ||1||
My mind and body are imbued with the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord; I am lovingly attuned to His Lotus Feet.
God has made Nanak His Own; slave Nanak seeks His Sanctuary. ||2||7||11||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Separated from the Lord, how can any living being live?
My consciousness is filled with yearning and hope to meet my Lord, and drink in the sublime essence of His Lotus Feet. ||1||Pause||
Those who are thirsty for You, O my Beloved, are not separated from You.
Those who forget my Beloved Lord are dead and dying. ||1||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 016

The Lord of the Universe is permeating and pervading my mind and body; I see Him Ever-present, here and now
. O Nanak, He is permeating the inner being of all; He is all-pervading everywhere. ||2||8||12||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Vibrating and meditating on the Lord, who has not been carried across?
Those reborn into the body of a bird, the body of a fish, the body of a deer, and the body of a bull - in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, they are saved. ||1||Pause||
The families of gods, the families of demons, titans, celestial singers and human beings are carried across the ocean.
Whoever meditates and vibrates on the Lord in the Saadh Sangat - his pains are taken away. ||1||
Sexual desire, anger and the pleasures of terrible corruption - he keeps away from these.
He meditates on the Lord, Merciful to the meek, the Embodiment of Compassion; Nanak is forever a sacrifice to Him. ||2||9||13||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Today, I am seated in the Lord's store.
With the wealth of the Lord, I have entered into partnership with the humble; I shall not have take the Highway of Death. ||1||Pause||
Showering me with His Kindness, the Supreme Lord God has saved me; the doors of doubt have been opened wide.
I have found God, the Banker of Infinity; I have earned the profit of the wealth of His Feet. ||1||
I have grasped the protection of the Sanctuary of the Unchanging, Unmoving, Imperishable Lord; He has picked up my sins and thrown them out.
Slave Nanak's sorrow and suffering has ended. He shall never again be squeezed into the mold of reincarnation. ||2||10||14||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
In so many ways, attachment to Maya leads to ruin.
Among millions, it is very rare to find a selfless servant who remains a perfect devotee for very long. ||1||Pause||
Roaming and wandering here and there, the mortal finds only trouble; his body and wealth become strangers to himself.
Hiding from people, he practices deception; he does not know the One who is always with him. ||1||
He wanders through troubled incarnations of low and wretched species as a deer, a bird and a fish.
Says Nanak, O God, I am a stone - please carry me across, that I may enjoy peace in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||2||11||15||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
The cruel and evil ones died after taking poison, O mother.
And the One, to whom all creatures belong, has saved us. God has granted His Grace. ||1||Pause||
The Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts, is contained within all; why should I be afraid, O Siblings of Destiny?
God, my Help and Support, is always with me. He shall never leave; I see Him everywhere. ||1||
He is the Master of the masterless, the Destroyer of the pains of the poor; He has attached me to the hem of His robe.
O Lord, Your slaves live by Your Support; Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of God. ||2||12||16||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
O my mind, dwell on the Feet of the Lord.
My mind is enticed by thirst for the Blessed Vision of the Lord; I would take wings and fly out to meet Him. ||1||Pause||
Searching and seeking, I have found the Path, and now I serve the Holy.
O my Lord and Master, please be kind to me, that I may drink in Your most sublime essence. ||1||
Begging and pleading, I have come to Your Sanctuary; I am on fire - please shower me with Your Mercy!
Please give me Your Hand - I am Your slave, O Lord. Please make Nanak Your Own. ||2||13||17||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 017

Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
It is God's Nature to love His devotees.
He destroys the slanderers, crushing them beneath His Feet. His Glory is manifest everywhere. ||1||Pause||
His Victory is celebrated all throughout the world. He blesses all creatures with compassion.
Hugging him close in His Embrace, the Lord saves and protects His slave. The hot winds cannot even touch him. ||1||
My Lord and Master has made me His Own; dispelling my doubts and fears, He has made me happy.
The Lord's slaves enjoy ultimate ecstasy; O Nanak, faith has welled up in my mind. ||2||14||18||
Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The Gurmukh sees God pervading everywhere.
The Gurmukh knows that the universe is the extension of the three gunas, the three dispositions.
The Gurmukh reflects on the Sound-current of the Naad, and the wisdom of the Vedas.
Without the Perfect Guru, there is only pitch-black darkness. ||1||
O my mind, calling on the Guru, eternal peace is found.
Following the Guru's Teachings, the Lord comes to dwell within the heart; I meditate on my Lord and Master with every breath and morsel of food. ||1||Pause||
I am a sacrifice to the Guru's Feet.
Night and day, I continually sing the Glorious Praises of the Guru.
I take my cleansing bath in the dust of the Guru's Feet.
I am honored in the True Court of the Lord. ||2||
The Guru is the boat, to carry me across the terrifying world-ocean.
Meeting with the Guru, I shall not be reincarnated ever again.
That humble being serves the Guru,
who has such karma inscribed on his forehead by the Primal Lord. ||3||
The Guru is my life; the Guru is my support.
The Guru is my way of life; the Guru is my family.
The Guru is my Lord and Master; I seek the Sanctuary of the True Guru.
O Nanak, the Guru is the Supreme Lord God; His value cannot be estimated. ||4||1||19||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
I enshrine the Lord's Feet within my heart;
in His Mercy, God has united me with Himself.
God enjoins His servant to his tasks.
His worth cannot be expressed. ||1||
Please be merciful to me, O Perfect Giver of peace.
By Your Grace, You come to mind; I am imbued with Your Love, twenty-four hours a day. ||1||Pause||
Singing and listening, it is all by Your Will.
One who understands the Hukam of Your Command is absorbed in Truth.
Chanting and meditating on Your Name, I live.
Without You, there is no place at all. ||2||
Pain and pleasure come by Your Command, O Creator Lord.
By the Pleasure of Your Will You forgive, and by the Pleasure of Your Will You award punishment.
You are the Creator of both realms.
I am a sacrifice to Your Glorious Grandeur. ||3||
You alone know Your value.
You alone understand, You Yourself speak and listen.
They alone are devotees, who are pleasing to Your Will.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 018

Nanak is forever a sacrifice to them. ||4||2||20||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
The Transcendent Lord God has become merciful;
Ambrosial Nectar is raining down from the clouds.
All beings and creatures are satisfied;
their affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1||
O my mind, dwell on the Lord, forever and ever.
Serving the Perfect Guru, I have obtained it. It shall stay with me both here and hereafter. ||1||Pause||
He is the Destroyer of pain, the Eradicator of fear.
He takes care of His beings.
The Savior Lord is kind and compassionate forever.
I am a sacrifice to Him, forever and ever. ||2||
The Creator Himself has eliminated death.
Meditate on Him forever and ever, O my mind.
He watches all with His Glance of Grace and protects them.
Continually and continuously, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord God. ||3||
The One and Only Creator Lord is Himself by Himself.
The Lord's devotees know His Glorious Grandeur.
He preserves the Honor of His Name.
Nanak speaks as the Lord inspires him to speak. ||4||3||21||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
All treasures are found in the Sanctuary of the Guru.
Honor is obtained in the True Court of the Lord.
Doubt, fear, pain and suffering are taken away,
forever singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||
O my mind, praise the Perfect Guru.
Chant the treasure of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, day and night. You shall obtain the fruits of your mind's desires. ||1||Pause||
No one else is as great as the True Guru.
The Guru is the Supreme Lord, the Transcendent Lord God.
He saves us from the pains of death and birth,
and we will not have to taste the poison of Maya ever again. ||2||
The Guru's glorious grandeur cannot be described.
The Guru is the Transcendent Lord, in the True Name.
True is His self-discipline, and True are all His actions.
Immaculate and pure is that mind, which is imbued with love for the Guru. ||3||
The Perfect Guru is obtained by great good fortune.
Drive out sexual desire, anger and greed from your mind.
By His Grace, the Guru's Feet are enshrined within.
Nanak offers his prayer to the True Lord God. ||4||4||22||
Raag Malaar, Fifth Mehl, Partaal, Third House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Pleasing the Guru, I have fallen in love with my Merciful Beloved Lord.
I have made all my decorations,
and renounced all corruption;
my wandering mind has become steady and stable. ||1||Pause||
O my mind, lose your self-conceit by associating with the Holy, and you shall find Him.
The unstruck celestial melody vibrates and resounds; like a song-bird, chant the Lord's Name, with words of sweetness and utter beauty. ||1||
Such is the glory of Your Darshan, so utterly inifinte and fruitful, O my Love; so do we become by associating with the Saints.
Vibrating, chanting Your Name, we cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
They dwell on the Lord, Raam, Raam, chanting on their malas;

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 019

their minds are turned towards the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
O servant Nanak, their Beloved Lord seems so sweet to them. ||2||1||23||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
My mind wanders through the dense forest.
It walks with eagerness and love,
hoping to meet God. ||1||Pause||
Maya with her three gunas - the three dispositions - has come to entice me; whom can I tell of my pain? ||1||
I tried everything else, but nothing could rid me of my sorrow.
So hurry to the Sanctuary of the Holy, O Nanak; joining them, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. ||2||2||24||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
The glory of my Beloved is noble and sublime.
The celestial singers and angels sing His Sublime Praises in ecstasy, happiness and joy. ||1||Pause||
The most worthy beings sing God's Praises in beautiful harmonies, in all sorts of ways, in myriads of sublime forms. ||1||
Throughout the mountains, trees, deserts, oceans and galaxies, permeating each and every heart, the sublime grandeur of my Love is totally pervading.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Love of the Lord is found; O Nanak, sublime is that faith. ||2||3||25||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
With love for the Guru, I enshrine the Lotus Feet of my Lord deep within my heart. ||1||Pause||
I gaze on the Blessed Vision of His Fruitful Darshan; my sins are erased and taken away.
My mind is immaculate and enlightened. ||1||
I am wonderstruck, stunned and amazed.
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, millions of sins are destroyed.
I fall at His Feet, and touch my forehead to them.
You alone are, You alone are, O God.
Your devotees take Your Support.
Servant Nanak has come to the Door of Your Sanctuary. ||2||4||26||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Rain down with happiness in God's Will.
Bless me with total bliss and good fortune. ||1||Pause||
My mind blossoms forth in the Society of the Saints; soaking up the rain, the earth is blessed and beautified. ||1||
The peacock loves the thunder of the rain clouds.
The rainbird's mind is drawn to the rain-drop
\- so is my mind enticed by the Lord.
I have renounced Maya, the deceiver.
Joining with the Saints, Nanak is awakened. ||2||5||27||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
Sing forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World.
Enshrine the Lord's Name in your consciousness. ||1||Pause||
Forsake your pride, and abandon your ego; join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Meditate in loving remembrance on the One Lord; your sorrows shall be ended, O friend. ||1||
The Supreme Lord God has become merciful;
corrupt entanglements have come to an end.
Grasping the feet of the Holy,
Nanak sings forever the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the World. ||2||6||28||
Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
The Embodiment of the Lord of the Universe roars like the thunder-cloud.
Singing His Glorious Praises brings peace and bliss. ||1||Pause||
The Sanctuary of the Lord's Feet carries us across the world-ocean. His Sublime Word is the unstruck celestial melody. ||1||
The thirsty traveller's consciousness obtains the water of the soul from the pool of nectar.
Servant Nanak loves the Blessed Vision of the Lord; in His Mercy, God has blessed him with it. ||2||7||29||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 020

Malaar, Fifth Mehl:
O Lord of the Universe, O Lord of the World, O Dear Merciful Beloved. ||1||Pause||
You are the Master of the breath of life, the Companion of the lost and forsaken, the Destroyer of the pains of the poor. ||1||
O All-powerful, Inaccessible, Perfect Lord, please shower me with Your Mercy. ||2||
Please, carry Nanak across the terrible, deep dark pit of the world to the other side. ||3||8||30||
Malaar, First Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The chakvi bird does not long for sleepy eyes; without her beloved, she does not sleep.
When the sun rises, she sees her beloved with her eyes; she bows and touches his feet. ||1||
The Love of my Beloved is pleasing; it is my Companion and Support.
Without Him, I cannot live in this world even for an instant; such is my hunger and thirst. ||1||Pause||
The lotus in the pool blossoms forth intuitively and naturally, with the rays of the sun in the sky.
Such is the love for my Beloved which imbues me; my light has merged into the Light. ||2||
Without water, the rainbird cries out, Pri-o! Pri-o! - Beloved! Beloved! It cries and wails and laments.
The thundering clouds rain down in the ten directions; its thirst is not quenched until it catches the rain-drop in its mouth. ||3||
The fish lives in water, from which it was born. It finds peace and pleasure according to its past actions.
It cannot survive without water for a moment, even for an instant. Life and death depend on it. ||4||
The soul-bride is separated from her Husband Lord, who lives in His Own Country. He sends the Shabad, His Word, through the True Guru.
She gathers virtues, and enshrines God within her heart. Imbued with devotion, she is happy. ||5||
Everyone cries out, Beloved! Beloved! But she alone finds her Beloved, who is pleasing to the Guru.
Our Beloved is always with us; through the Truth, He blesses us with His Grace, and unites us in His Union. ||6||
He is the life of the soul in each and every soul; He permeates and pervades each and every heart.
By Guru's Grace, He is revealed within the home of my heart; I am intuitively, naturally, absorbed into Him. ||7||
He Himself shall resolve all your affairs, when you meet with the Giver of peace, the Lord of the World.
By Guru's Grace, you shall find your Husband Lord within your own home; then, O Nanak, the fire within you shall be quenched. ||8||1||
Malaar, First Mehl:
Remain awake and aware, serving the Guru; except for the Lord, no one is mine.
Even by making all sorts of efforts, you shall not remain here; it shall melt like glass in the fire. ||1||
Tell me - why are you so proud of your body and wealth?
They shall vanish in an instant; O madman, this is how the world is wasting away, in egotism and pride. ||1||Pause||
Hail to the Lord of the Universe, God, our Saving Grace; He judges and saves the mortal beings.
All that is, belongs to You. No one else is equal to You. ||2||
Creating all beings and creatures, their ways and means are under Your control; You bless the Gurmukhs with the ointment of spiritual wisdom.
My Eternal, Unmastered Lord is over the heads of all. He is the Destroyer of death and rebirth, doubt and fear. ||3||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 021

This wretched world is a fortress of paper, of color and form and clever tricks.
A tiny drop of water or a little puff of wind destroys its glory; in an instant, its life is ended. ||4||
It is like a tree-house near the bank of a river, with a serpent's den in that house.
When the river overflows, what happens to the tree house? The snake bites, like duality in the mind. ||5||
Through the magic spell of the Guru's spiritual wisdom, and meditation on the Word of the Guru's Teachings, vice and corruption are burnt away.
The mind and body are cooled and soothed and Truth is obtained, through the wondrous and unique devotional worship of the Lord. ||6||
All that exists begs of You; You are merciful to all beings.
I seek Your Sanctuary; please save my honor, O Lord of the World, and bless me with Truth. ||7||
Bound in worldly affairs and entanglements, the blind one does not understand; he acts like a murderous butcher.
But if he meets with the True Guru, then he comprehends and understands, and his mind is imbued with true spiritual wisdom. ||8||
Without the Truth, this worthless body is false; I have consulted my Guru on this.
O Nanak, that God has revealed God to me; without the Truth, all the world is just a dream. ||9||2||
Malaar, First Mehl:
The rainbird and the fish find peace in water; the deer is pleased by the sound of the bell. ||1||
The rainbird chirps in the night, O my mother. ||1||Pause||
O my Beloved, my love for You shall never end, if it is Your Will. ||2||
Sleep is gone, and egotism is exhausted from my body; my heart is permeated with the Teachings of Truth. ||3||
Flying among the trees and plants, I remain hungry; lovingly drinking in the Naam, the Name of the Lord, I am satisfied. ||4||
I stare at You, and my tongue cries out to You; I am so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||5||
Without my Beloved, the more I decorate myself, the more my body burns; these clothes do not look good on my body. ||6||
Without my Beloved, I cannot survive even for an instant; without meeting Him, I cannot sleep. ||7||
Her Husband Lord is nearby, but the wretched bride does not know it. The True Guru reveals Him to her. ||8||
When she meets Him with intuitive ease, she finds peace; the Word of the Shabad quenches the fire of desire. ||9||
Says Nanak, through You, O Lord, my mind is pleased and appeased; I cannot express Your worth. ||10||3||
Malaar, First Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The earth bends under the weight of the water,
the lofty mountains and the caverns of the underworld.
Contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the oceans become calm.
The path of liberation is found by subduing the ego. ||1||
I am blind; I seek the Light of the Name.
I take the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. I walk on the path of mystery of the Guru's Fear. ||1||Pause||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 022

Through the Shabad, the Word of the True Guru, the Path is known.
With the Guru's Support, one is blessed with the strength of the True Lord.
Dwell on the Naam, and realize the Beauteous Word of His Bani.
If it is Your Will, Lord, You lead me to find Your Door. ||2||
Flying high or sitting down, I am lovingly focused on the One Lord.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I take the Naam as my Suppport.
There is no ocean of water, no mountain ranges rising up.
I dwell within the home of my own inner being, where there is no path and no one travelling on it. ||3||
You alone know the way to that House in which You dwell. No one else knows the Mansion of Your Presence.
Without the True Guru, there is no understanding. The whole world is buried under its nightmare.
The mortal tries all sorts of things, and weeps and wails, but without the Guru, he does not know the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
In the twinkling of an eye, the Naam saves him, if he realizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||4||
Some are foolish, blind, stupid and ignorant.
Some, through fear of the True Guru, take the Support of the Naam.
The True Word of His Bani is sweet, the source of ambrosial nectar.
Whoever drinks it in, finds the Door of Salvation. ||5||
One who, through the love and fear of God, enshrines the Naam within his heart, acts according to the Guru's Instructions and knows the True Bani.
When the clouds release their rain, the earth becomes beautiful; God's Light permeates each and every heart.
The evil-minded ones plant their seed in the barren soil; such is the sign of those who have no Guru.
Without the True Guru, there is utter darkness; they drown there, even without water. ||6||
Whatever God does, is by His Own Will.
That which is pre-ordained cannot be erased.
Bound to the Hukam of the Lord's Command, the mortal does his deeds.
Permeated by the One Word of the Shabad, the mortal is immersed in Truth. ||7||
Your Command, O God, rules in the four directions; Your Name pervades the four corners of the nether regions as well.
The True Word of the Shabad is pervading amongst all. By His Grace, the Eternal One unites us with Himself.
Birth and death hang over the heads of all beings, along with hunger, sleep and dying.
The Naam is pleasing to Nanak's mind; O True Lord, Source of bliss, please bless me with Your Grace. ||8||1||4||
Malaar, First Mehl:
You do not understand the nature of death and liberation.
You are sitting on the river-bank; realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||
You stork! - how were you caught in the net?
You do not remember in your heart the Unseen Lord God. ||1||Pause||
For your one life, you consume many lives.
You were supposed to swim in the water, but you are drowning in it instead. ||2||
You have tormented all beings.
When Death seizes you, then you shall regret and repent. ||3||
When the heavy noose is placed around your neck,
you may spread your wings, but you shall not be able to fly. ||4||
You enjoy the tastes and flavors, you foolish self-willed manmukh.
You are trapped. You can only be saved by virtuous conduct, spiritual wisdom and contemplation. ||5||
Serving the True Guru, you will shatter the Messenger of Death.
In your heart, dwell on the True Word of the Shabad. ||6||
The Guru's Teachings, the True Word of the Shabad, is excellent and sublime.
Keep the Name of the Lord enshrined in your heart. ||7||
One who is obsessed with enjoying pleasures here, shall suffer in pain hereafter.
O Nanak, there is no liberation without the True Name. ||8||2||5||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 023

Malaar, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
If it is in his karma, then he finds the True Guru; without such karma, He cannot be found.
He meets the True Guru, and he is transformed into gold, if it is the Lord's Will. ||1||
O my mind, focus your consciousness on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
The Lord is found through the True Guru, and then he remains merged with the True Lord. ||1||Pause||
Spiritual wisdom wells up through the True Guru, and then this cynicism is dispelled.
Through the True Guru, the Lord is realized, and then, he is not consigned to the womb of reincarnation ever again. ||2||
By Guru's Grace, the mortal dies in life, and by so dying, lives to practice the Word of the Shabad.
He alone finds the Door of Salvation, who eradicates self-conceit from within himself. ||3||
By Guru's Grace, the mortal is reincarnated into the Home of the Lord, having eradicated Maya from within.
He eats the uneatable, and is blessed with a discriminating intellect; he meets the Supreme Person, the Primal Lord God. ||4||
The world is unconscious, like a passing show; the mortal departs, having lost his capital.
The profit of the Lord is obtained in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation; by good karma, it is found. ||5||
Without the True Guru, no one finds it; see this in your mind, and consider this in your heart.
By great good fortune, the mortal finds the Guru, and crosses over the terrifying world-ocean. ||6||
The Name of the Lord is my Anchor and Support. I take only the Support of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
O Dear Lord, please be kind and lead me to meet the Guru, that I may find the Door of Salvation. ||7||
The pre-ordained destiny inscribed on the mortal's forehead by our Lord and Master cannot be erased.
O Nanak, those humble beings are perfect, who are pleased by the Lord's Will. ||8||1||
Malaar, Third Mehl:
The world is involved with the words of the Vedas, thinking about the three gunas - the three dispositions.
Without the Name, it suffers punishment by the Messenger of Death; it comes and goes in reincarnation, over and over again.
Meeting with the True Guru, the world is liberated, and finds the Door of Salvation. ||1||
O mortal, immerse yourself in service to the True Guru.
By great good fortune, the mortal finds the Perfect Guru, and meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||
The Lord, by the Pleasure of His Own Will, created the Universe, and the Lord Himself gives it sustenance and support.
The Lord, by His Own Will, makes the mortal's mind immaculate, and lovingly attunes him to the Lord.
The Lord, by His Own Will, leads the mortal to meet the True Guru, the Embellisher of all his lives. ||2||
Waaho! Waaho! Blessed and Great is the True Word of His Bani. Only a few, as Gurmukh, understand.
Waaho! Waaho! Praise God as Great! No one else is as Great as He.
When God's Grace is received, He Himself forgives the mortal, and unites him with Himself. ||3||
The True Guru has revealed our True, Supreme Lord and Master.
The Ambrosial Nectar rains down and the mind is satisfied, remaining lovingly attuned to the True Lord.
In the Lord's Name, it is forever rejuvenated; it shall never wither and dry up again. ||4||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 024

Without the True Guru, no one finds the Lord; anyone can try and see.
By the Lord's Grace, the True Guru is found, and then the Lord is met with intuitive ease.
The self-willed manmukh is deluded by doubt; without good destiny, the Lord's wealth is not obtained. ||5||
The three dispositions are completely distracting; people read and study and contemplate them.
Those people are never liberated; they do not find the Door of Salvation.
Without the True Guru, they are never released from bondage; they do not embrace love for the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||6||
The Pandits, the religious scholars, and the silent sages, reading and studying the Vedas, have grown weary.
They do not even think of the Lord's Name; they do not dwell in the home of their own inner being.
The Messenger of Death hovers over their heads; they are ruined by the deceit within themselves. ||7||
Everyone longs for the Name of the Lord; without good destiny, it is not obtained.
When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, the mortal meets the True Guru, and the Lord's Name comes to dwell within the mind.
O Nanak, through the Name, honor wells up, and the mortal remains immersed in the Lord. ||8||2||
Malaar, Third Mehl, Ashtapadees, Second House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
When the Lord shows His Mercy, He enjoins the mortal to work for the Guru.
His pains are taken away, and the Lord's Name comes to dwell within.
True deliverance comes by focusing one's consciousness on the True Lord.
Listen to the Shabad, and the Word of the Guru's Bani. ||1||
O my mind, serve the Lord, Har, Har, the true treasure.
By Guru's Grace, the wealth of the Lord is obtained. Night and day, focus your meditation on the Lord. ||1||Pause||
The soul-bride who adorns herself without her Husband Lord,
is ill-mannered and vile, wasted away into ruin.
This is the useless way of life of the self-willed manmukh.
Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, he performs all sorts of empty rituals. ||2||
The bride who is Gurmukh is beautifully embellished.
Through the Word of the Shabad, she enshrines her Husband Lord within her heart.
She realizes the One Lord, and subdues her ego.
That soul-bride is virtuous and noble. ||3||
Without the Guru, the Giver, no one finds the Lord.
The greedy self-willed manmukh is attracted and engrossed in duality.
Only a few spiritual teachers realize this,
that without meeting the Guru, liberation is not obtained. ||4||
Everyone tells the stories told by others.
Without subduing the mind, devotional worship does not come.
When the intellect achieves spiritual wisdom, the heart-lotus blossoms forth.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, comes to abide in that heart. ||5||
In egotism, everyone can pretend to worship God with devotion.
But this does not soften the mind, and it does not bring peace.
By speaking and preaching, the mortal only shows off his self-conceit.
His devotional worship is useless, and his life is a total waste. ||6||
They alone are devotees, who are pleasing to the Mind of the True Guru.
Night and day, they remain lovingly attuned to the Name.
They behold the Naam, the Name of the Lord, ever-present, near at hand.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 025

Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is pervading and permeating everywhere. ||7||
God Himself forgives, and bestows His Love.
The world is suffering from the terrible disease of egotism.
By Guru's Grace, this disease is cured.
O Nanak, through the Truth, the mortal remains immersed in the True Lord. ||8||1||3||5||8||
Raag Malaar, Chhant, Fifth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
My Beloved Lord is the Giver of loving devotional worship.
His humble servants are imbued with His Love.
He is imbued with His servants, day and night; He does not forget them from His Mind, even for an instant.
He is the Lord of the World, the Treasure of virtue; He is always with me. All glorious virtues belong to the Lord of the Universe.
With His Feet, He has fascinated my mind; as His humble servant, I am intoxicated with love for His Name.
O Nanak, my Beloved is forever Merciful; out of millions, hardly anyone realizes Him. ||1||
O Beloved, Your state is inaccessible and infinite.
You save even the worst sinners.
He is the Purifier of sinners, the Lover of His devotees, the Ocean of mercy, our Lord and Master.
In the Society of the Saints, vibrate and meditate on Him with commitment forever; He is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
Those who wander in reincarnation through millions of births, are saved and carried across, by meditating in remembrance on the Naam.
Nanak is thirsty for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan, O Dear Lord; please take care of him. ||2||
My mind is absorbed in the Lotus Feet of the Lord.
O God, You are the water; Your humble servants are fish.
O Dear God, You alone are the water and the fish. I know that there is no difference between the two.
Please take hold of my arm and bless me with Your Name. I am honored only by Your Grace.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, vibrate and meditate with love on the One Lord of the Universe, who is Merciful to the meek.
Nanak, the lowly and helpless, seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, who in His Kindness has made him His Own. ||3||
He unites us with Himself.
Our Sovereign Lord King is the Destroyer of fear.
My Wondrous Lord and Master is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts. My Beloved, the Treasure of virtue, has met me.
Supreme happiness and peace well up, as I cherish the Glorious Virtues of the Lord of the Universe.
Meeting with Him, I am embellished and exalted; gazing on Him, I am fascinated, and I realize my pre-ordained destiny.
Prays Nanak, I seek the Sanctuary of those who meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||1||
Vaar Of Malaar, First Mehl, Sung To The Tune Of Rana Kailaash And Malda:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Meeting with the Guru, the mind is delighted, like the earth embellished by the rain.
Everything becomes green and lush; the pools and ponds are filled to overflowing.
The inner self is imbued with the deep crimson color of love for the True Lord.
The heart-lotus blossoms forth and the mind becomes true; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is ecstatic and exalted.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 026

The self-willed manmukh is on the wrong side. You can see this with your own eyes.
He is caught in the trap like the deer; the Messenger of Death hovers over his head.
Hunger, thirst and slander are evil; sexual desire and anger are horrible.
These cannot be seen with your eyes, until you contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
Whoever is pleasing to You is content; all his entanglements are gone.
Serving the Guru, his capital is preserved. The Guru is the ladder and the boat.
O Nanak, whoever is attached to the Lord receives the essence; O True Lord, You are found when the mind is true. ||1||
First Mehl:
There is one path and one door. The Guru is the ladder to reach one's own place.
Our Lord and Master is so beautiful, O Nanak; all comfort and peace are in the Name of the True Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself created Himself; He Himself understands Himself.
Separating the sky and the earth, He has spread out His canopy.
Without any pillars, He supports the sky, through the insignia of His Shabad.
Creating the sun and the moon, He infused His Light into them.
He created the night and the day; Wondrous are His miraculous plays.
He created the sacred shrines of pilgrimage, where people contemplate righteousness and Dharma, and take cleansing baths on special occasions.
There is no other equal to You; how can we speak and describe You?
You are seated on the throne of Truth; all others come and go in reincarnation. ||1||
Shalok, First Mehl:
O Nanak, when it rains in the month of Saawan, four are delighted:
the snake, the deer, the fish and the wealthy people who seek pleasure. ||1||
First Mehl:
O Nanak, when it rains in the month of Saawan, four suffer the pains of separation:
the cow's calves, the poor, the travellers and the servants. ||2||
Pauree:
You are True, O True Lord; You dispense True Justice.
Like a lotus, You sit in the primal celestial trance; You are hidden from view.
Brahma is called great, but even he does not know Your limits.
You have no father or mother; who gave birth to You?
You have no form or feature; You transcend all social classes.
You have no hunger or thirst; You are satisfied and satiated.
You have merged Yourself into the Guru; You are pervading through the Word of Your Shabad.
When he is pleasing to the True Lord, the mortal merges in Truth. ||2||
Shalok, First Mehl:
The physician was called in; he touched my arm and felt my pulse.
The foolish physician did not know that the pain was in the mind. ||1||
Second Mehl:
O physician, you are a competent physician, if you first diagnose the disease.
Prescribe such a remedy, by which all sorts of illnesses may be cured.
Administer that medicine, which will cure the disease, and allow peace to come and dwell in the body.
Only when you are rid of your own disease, O Nanak, will you be known as a physician. ||2||
Pauree:
Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva and the deities were created.
Brahma was given the Vedas, and enjoined to worship God.
The ten incarnations, and Rama the king, came into being.
According to His Will, they quickly killed all the demons.
Shiva serves Him, but cannot find His limits.
He established His throne on the principles of Truth.
He enjoined all the world to its tasks, while He keeps Himself hidden from view.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 027

The Primal Lord has ordained that mortals must practice righteousness. ||3||
Shalok, Second Mehl:
The month of Saawan has come, O my companions; think of your Husband Lord.
O Nanak, the discarded bride is in love with another; now she weeps and wails, and dies. ||1||
Second Mehl:
The month of Saawan has come, O my companions; the clouds have burst forth with rain.
O Nanak, the blessed soul-brides sleep in peace; they are in love with their Husband Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself has staged the tournament, and arranged the arena for the wrestlers.
They have entered the arena with pomp and ceremony; the Gurmukhs are joyful.
The false and foolish self-willed manmukhs are defeated and overcome.
The Lord Himself wrestles, and He Himself defeats them. He Himself staged this play.
The One God is the Lord and Master of all; this is known by the Gurmukhs.
He writes the inscription of His Hukam on the foreheads of all, without pen or ink.
In the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, Union with Him is obtained; there, the Glorious Praises of the Lord are chanted forever.
O Nanak, praising the True Word of His Shabad, one comes to realize the Truth. ||4||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Hanging low, low and thick in the sky, the clouds are changing color.
How do I know whether my love for my Husband Lord shall endure?
The love of those soul-brides endures, if their minds are filled with the Love and the Fear of God.
O Nanak, she who has no Love and Fear of God - her body shall never find peace. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Hanging low, low and thick in the sky, the clouds come, and pure water rains down.
O Nanak, that soul-bride suffers in pain, whose mind is torn away from her Husband Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
The One Lord created both sides and pervades the expanse.
The words of the Vedas became pervasive, with arguments and divisions.
Attachment and detachment are the two sides of it; Dharma, true religion, is the guide between the two.
The self-willed manmukhs are worthless and false. Without a doubt, they lose in the Court of the Lord.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings are the true spiritual warriors; they have conquered sexual desire and anger.
They enter into the True Mansion of the Lord's Presence, embellished and exalted by the Word of the Shabad.
Those devotees are pleasing to Your Will, O Lord; they dearly love the True Name.
I am a sacrifice to those who serve their True Guru. ||5||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Hanging low, low and thick in the sky, the clouds come, and water rains down in torrents.
O Nanak, she walks in harmony with the Will of her Husband Lord; she enjoys peace and pleasure forever. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Why are you standing up, standing up to look? You poor wretch, this cloud has nothing in its hands.
The One who sent this cloud - cherish Him in your mind.
He alone enshrines the Lord in his mind, upon whom the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace.
O Nanak, all those who lack this Grace, cry and weep and wail. ||2||
Pauree:
Serve the Lord forever; He acts in no time at all.
He stretched the sky across the heavens; in an instant, He creates and destroys.
He Himself created the world; He contemplates His Creative Omnipotence.
The self-willed manmukh will be called to account hereafter; he will be severely punished.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 028

The Gurmukh's account is settled with honor; the Lord blesses him with the treasure of His Praise.
No one's hands can reach there; no one will hear anyone's cries.
The True Guru will be your best friend there; at the very last instant, He will save you.
These beings should serve no other than the True Guru or the Creator Lord above the heads of all. ||6||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
O rainbird, the One unto whom you call - everyone longs for that Lord.
When He grants His Grace, it rains, and the forests and fields blossom forth in their greenery.
By Guru's Grace, He is found; only a rare few understand this.
Sitting down and standing up, meditate continually on Him, and be at peace forever and ever.
O Nanak, the Ambrosial Nectar rains down forever; the Lord gives it to the Gurmukh. ||1||
Third Mehl:
When the people of the world are suffering in pain, they call upon the Lord in loving prayer.
The True Lord naturally listens and hears and gives comfort.
He commands the god of rain, and the rain pours down in torrents.
Corn and wealth are produced in great abundance and prosperity; their value cannot be estimated.
O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; He reaches out and gives sustenance to all beings.
Eating this, peace is produced, and the mortal never again suffers in pain. ||2||
Pauree:
O Dear Lord, You are the Truest of the True. You blend those who are truthful into Your Own Being.
Those caught in duality are on the side of duality; entrenched in falsehood, they cannot merge into the Lord.
You Yourself unite, and You Yourself separate; You display Your Creative Omnipotence.
Attachment brings the sorrow of separation; the mortal acts in accordance with pre-ordained destiny.
I am a sacrifice to those who remain lovingly attached to the Lord's Feet.
They are like the lotus which remains detached, floating upon the water.
They are peaceful and beautiful forever; they eradicate self-conceit from within.
They never suffer sorrow or separation; they are merged in the Being of the Lord. ||7||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
O Nanak, praise the Lord; everything is in His power.
Serve Him, O mortal beings; there is none other than Him.
The Lord God abides within the mind of the Gurmukh, and then he is at peace, forever and ever.
He is never cynical; all anxiety has been taken out from within him.
Whatever happens, happens naturally; no one has any say about it.
When the True Lord abides in the mind, then the mind's desires are fulfilled.
O Nanak, He Himself hears the words of those, whose accounts are in His Hands. ||1||
Third Mehl:
The Ambrosial Nectar rains down continually; realize this through realization.
Those who, as Gurmukh, realize this, keep the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar enshrined within their hearts.
They drink in the Lord's Ambrosial Nectar, and remain forever imbued with the Lord; they conquer egotism and thirsty desires.
The Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar; the Lord showers His Grace, and it rains down.
O Nanak, the Gurmukh comes to behold the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||2||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 029

Pauree:
How can the unweighable be weighed? Without weighing Him, He cannot be obtained.
Reflect on the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and immerse yourself in His Glorious Virtues.
He Himself weighs Himself; He unites in Union with Himself.
His value cannot be estimated; nothing can be said about this.
I am a sacrifice to my Guru; He has made me realize this true realization.
The world has been deceived, and the Ambrosial Nectar is being plundered. The self-willed manmukh does not realize this.
Without the Name, nothing will go along with him; he wastes his life, and departs.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings and remain awake and aware, preserve and protect the home of their heart; demons have no power against them. ||8||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
O rainbird, do not cry out. Do not let this mind of yours be so thirsty for a drop of water. Obey the Hukam, the Command of your Lord and Master,
and your thirst shall be quenched. Your love for Him shall increase four-fold. ||1||
Third Mehl:
O rainbird, your place is in the water; you move around in the water.
But you do not appreciate the water, and so you cry out.
In the water and on the land, it rains down in the ten directions. No place is left dry.
With so much rain, those who are die of thirst are very unfortunate.
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs understand; the Lord abides within their minds. ||2||
Pauree:
The Yogic Masters, celibates, Siddhas and spiritual teachers - none of them has found the limits of the Lord.
The Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam, and merge in You, O Lord.
For thirty-six ages, God remained in utter darkness, as He pleased.
The vast expanse of water swirled around.
The Creator of all is Infinite, Endless and Inaccessible.
He formed fire and conflict, hunger and thirst.
Death hangs over the heads of the people of the world, in the love of duality.
The Savior Lord saves those who realize the Word of the Shabad. ||9||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
This rain pours down on all; it rains down in accordance with God's Loving Will.
Those trees become green and lush, which remain immersed in the Guru's Word.
O Nanak, by His Grace, there is peace; the pain of these creatures is gone. ||1||
Third Mehl:
The night is wet with dew; lightning flashes, and the rain pours down in torrents.
Food and wealth are produced in abundance when it rains, if it is the Will of God.
Consuming it, the minds of His creatures are satisfied, and they adopt the lifestyle of the way.
This wealth is the play of the Creator Lord. Sometimes it comes, and sometimes it goes.
The Naam is the wealth of the spiritually wise. It is permeating and pervading forever.
O Nanak, those who are blessed with His Glance of Grace receive this wealth. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself does, and causes all to be done. Unto whom can I complain?
He Himself calls the mortal beings to account; He Himself causes them to act.
Whatever pleases Him happens. Only a fool issues commands.
He Himself saves and redeems; He Himself is the Forgiver.
He Himself sees, and He Himself hears; He gives His Support to all.
He alone is pervading and permeating all; He considers each and every one.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 030

The Gurmukh reflects on the self, lovingly attached to the True Lord.
O Nanak, whom can we ask? He Himself is the Great Giver. ||10||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
This world is a rainbird; let no one be deluded by doubt.
This rainbird is an animal; it has no understanding at all.
The Name of the Lord is Ambrosial Nectar; drinking it in, thirst is quenched.
O Nanak, those Gurmukhs who drink it in shall never again be afflicted by thirst. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Malaar is a calming and soothing raga; meditating on the Lord brings peace and tranquility.
When the Dear Lord grants His Grace, then the rain falls on all the people of the world.
From this rain, all creatures find the ways and means to live, and the earth is embellished.
O Nanak, this world is all water; everything came from water.
By Guru's Grace, a rare few realize the Lord; such humble beings are liberated forever. ||2||
Pauree:
O True and Independent Lord God, You alone are my Lord and Master.
You Yourself are everything; who else is of any account?
False is the pride of man. True is Your glorious greatness.
Coming and going in reincarnation, the beings and species of the world came into being.
But if the mortal serves his True Guru, his coming into the world is judged to be worthwhile.
And if he eradicates eogtism from within himself, then how can he be judged?
The self-willed manmukh is lost in the darkness of emotional attachment, like the man lost in the wilderness.
Countless sins are erased, by even a tiny particle of the Lord's Name. ||11||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
O rainbird, you do not know the Mansion of your Lord and Master's Presence. Offer your prayers to see this Mansion.
You speak as you please, but your speech is not accepted.
Your Lord and Master is the Great Giver; whatever you desire, you shall receive from Him.
Not only the thirst of the poor rainbird, but the thirst of the whole world is quenched. ||1||
Third Mehl:
The night is wet with dew; the rainbird sings the True Name with intuitive ease.
This water is my very soul; without water, I cannot survive.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, this water is obtained, and egotism is eradicated from within.
O Nanak, I cannot live without Him, even for a moment; the True Guru has led me to meet Him. ||2||
Pauree:
There are countless worlds and nether regions; I cannot calculate their number.
You are the Creator, the Lord of the Universe; You create it, and You destroy it.
The 8.4 million species of beings issued forth from You.
Some are called kings, emperors and nobles.
Some claim to be bankers and accumulate wealth, but in duality they lose their honor.
Some are givers, and some are beggars; God is above the heads of all.
Without the Name, they are vulgar, dreadful and wretched.
Falsehood shall not last, O Nanak; whatever the True Lord does, comes to pass. ||12||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
O rainbird, the virtuous soul-bride attains the Mansion of her Lord's Presence; the unworthy, unvirtuous one is far away.
Deep within your inner being, the Lord abides. The Gurmukh beholds Him ever-present.
When the Lord bestows His Glance of Grace, the mortal no longer weeps and wails.
O Nanak, those who are imbued with the Naam intuitively merge with the Lord; they practice the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 031

Third Mehl:
The rainbird prays: O Lord, grant Your Grace, and bless me with the gift of the life of the soul.
Without the water, my thirst is not quenched, and my breath of life is ended and gone.
You are the Giver of peace, O Infinite Lord God; You are the Giver of the treasure of virtue.
O Nanak, the Gurmukh is forgiven; in the end, the Lord God shall be your only friend. ||2||
Pauree:
He created the world; He considers the merits and demerits of the mortals.
Those who are entangled in the three gunas - the three dispositions - do not love the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Forsaking virtue, they practice evil; they shall be miserable in the Court of the Lord.
They lose their life in the gamble; why did they even come into the world?
But those who conquer and subdue their minds, through the True Word of the Shabad - night and day, they love the Naam.
Those people enshrine the True, Invisible and Infinite Lord in their hearts.
You, O Lord, are the Giver, the Treasure of virtue; I am unvirtuous and unworthy.
He alone finds You, whom You bless and forgive, and inspire to contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||13||
Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
The faithless cynics forget the Name of the Lord; the night of their lives does not pass in peace.
Their days and nights become comfortable, O Nanak, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||
Fifth Mehl:
All sorts of jewels and gems, diamonds and rubies, shine forth from their foreheads.
O Nanak, those who are pleasing to God, look beautiful in the Court of the Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
Serving the True Guru, I dwell on the True Lord.
The work you have done for the True Guru shall be very useful in the end.
The Messenger of Death cannot even touch that person who is protected by the True Lord.
Lighting the lamp of the Guru's Teachings, my awareness has been awakened.
The self-willed manmukhs are false; without the Name, they wander around like demons.
They are nothing more than beasts, wrapped up in human skin; they are black-hearted within.
The True Lord is pervading all; through the True Word of the Shabad, He is seen.
O Nanak, the Naam is the greatest treasure. The Perfect Guru has revealed it to me. ||14||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
The rainbird realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command with intuitive ease through the Guru.
The clouds mercifully burst forth, and the rain pours down in torrents.
The cries and wailings of the rainbird have ceased, and peace has come to abide in its mind.
O Nanak, praise that Lord, who reaches out and gives sustenance to all beings and creatures. ||1||
Third Mehl:
O rainbird, you do not know what thirst is within you, or what you can drink to quench it.
You wander in the love of duality, and you do not obtain the Ambrosial Water.
When God casts His Glance of Grace, then the mortal automatically meets the True Guru.
O Nanak, the Ambrosial Water is obtained from the True Guru, and then the mortal remains merged in the Lord with intuitive ease. ||2||
Pauree:
Some go and sit in the forest realms, and do not answer any calls.
Some, in the dead of winter, break the ice and immerse themselves in freezing water.
Some rub ashes on their bodies, and never wash off their dirt.
Some look hideous, with their uncut hair matted and dishevelled. They bring dishonor to their family and ancestry.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 032

Some wander naked day and night and never sleep.
Some burn their limbs in fire, damaging and ruining themselves.
Without the Name, the body is reduced to ashes; what good is it to speak and cry then?
Those who serve the True Guru, are embellished and exalted in the Court of their Lord and Master. ||15||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
The rainbird chirps in the ambrosial hours of the morning before the dawn; its prayers are heard in the Court of the Lord.
The order is issued to the clouds, to let the rains of mercy shower down.
I am a sacrifice to those who enshrine the True Lord within their hearts.
O Nanak, through the Name, all are rejuvenated, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||
Third Mehl:
O rainbird, this is not the way to quench your thirst, even though you may cry out a hundred times.
By God's Grace, the True Guru is found; by His Grace, love wells up.
O Nanak, when the Lord and Master abides in the mind, corruption and evil leave from within. ||2||
Pauree:
Some are Jains, wasting their time in the wilderness; by their pre-ordained destiny, they are ruined.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is not on their lips; they do not bathe at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
They pull out their hair with their hands, instead of shaving.
They remain unclean day and night; they do not love the Word of the Shabad.
They have no status, no honor, and no good karma. They waste away their lives in vain.
Their minds are false and impure; that which they eat is impure and defiled.
Without the Shabad, no one achieves a lifestyle of good conduct.
The Gurmukh is absorbed in the True Lord God, the Universal Creator. ||16||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
In the month of Saawan, the bride is happy, contemplating the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
O Nanak, she is a happy soul-bride forever; her love for the Guru is unlimited. ||1||
Third Mehl:
In Saawan, she who has no virtue is burned, in attachment and love of duality.
O Nanak, she does not appreciate the value of her Husband Lord; all her decorations are worthless. ||2||
Pauree:
The True, Unseen, Mysterious Lord is not won over by stubbornness.
Some sing according to traditional ragas, but the Lord is not pleased by these ragas.
Some dance and dance and keep the beat, but they do not worship Him with devotion.
Some refuse to eat; what can be done with these fools?
Thirst and desire have greatly increased; nothing brings satisfaction.
Some are tied down by rituals; they hassle themselves to death.
In this world, profit comes by drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam.
The Gurmukhs gather in loving devotional worship of the Lord. ||17||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Those Gurmukhs who sing in the Raga of Malaar - their minds and bodies become cool and calm.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they realize the One, the One True Lord.
Their minds and bodies are true; they obey the True Lord, and they are known as true.
True devotional worship is deep within them; they are automatically blessed with honor.
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, there is utter darkness; the self-willed manmukh cannot find the way.
O Nanak, very blessed are those Gurmukhs, unto whom the Lord is revealed. ||1||
Third Mehl:
The clouds rain down mercifully, and joy wells up in the minds of the people.
I am forever a sacrifice to the One, by whose Command the clouds burst forth with rain.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 033

The Gurmukhs dwell on the Word of the Shabad. They sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
O Nanak, those humble beings who are imbued with the Naam are pure and immaculate. They are intuitively merged in the True Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
Serving the Perfect True Guru, I have found the Perfect Lord.
Meditating on the Perfect Lord, by perfect karma, I have enshrined the Shabad within my mind.
Through perfect spiritual wisdom and meditation, my filth has been washed away.
The Lord is my sacred shrine of pilgrimage and pool of purification; I wash my mind in Him.
One who dies in the Shabad and conquers his mind - blessed is the mother who gave birth to him.
He is true in the Court of the Lord, and his coming into this world is judged to be true.
No one can challenge that person, with whom our Lord and Master is pleased.
O Nanak, praising the True Lord, his pre-ordained destiny is activated. ||18||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
Those who give out ceremonial hats of recognition are fools; those who receive them have no shame.
The mouse cannot enter its hole with a basket tied around its waist.
Those who give out blessings shall die, and those that they bless shall also depart.
O Nanak, no one knows the Lord's Command, by which all must depart.
The spring harvest is the Name of the One Lord; the harvest of autumn is the True Name.
I receive a letter of pardon from my Lord and Master, when I reach His Court.
There are so many courts of the world, and so many who come and go there.
There are so many beggars begging; so many beg and beg until death. ||1||
First Mehl:
The elephant eats a hundred pounds of ghee and molasses, and five hundred pounds of corn.
He belches and grunts and scatters dust, and when the breath leaves his body, he regrets it.
The blind and arrogant die insane.
Submitting to the Lord, one become pleasing to Him.
The sparrow eats only half a grain, then it flies through the sky and chirps.
The good sparrow is pleasing to her Lord and Master, if she chirps the Name of the Lord.
The powerful tiger kills hundreds of deer, and all sorts of other animals eat what it leaves.
It becomes very strong, and cannot be contained in its den, but when it must go, it regrets.
So who is impressed by the roar of the blind beast?
He is not pleasing at all to his Lord and Master.
The insect loves the milkweed plant; perched on its branch, it eats it.
It becomes good and pleasing to its Lord and Master, if it chirps the Name of the Lord.
O Nanak, the world lasts for only a few days; indulging in pleasures, pain is produced.
There are many who boast and brag, but none of them can remain detached from the world.
The fly dies for the sake of sweets.
O Lord, death does not even approach those whom You protect. You carry them across the terrifying world-ocean. ||2||
Pauree:
You are Inaccessible and Unfathomable, O Invisible and Infinite True Lord Master.
You are the Giver, all are beggars of You. You alone are the Great Giver.
Those who serve You find peace, reflecting on the Guru's Teachings.
Some, according to Your Will, are in love with Maya.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, praise the Lord with love and affection within.
Without love, there is no devotion. Without the True Guru, love is not enshrined.
You are the Lord God; everyone serves You. This is the prayer of Your humble minstrel.
Please bless me with the gift of contentment, that I may receive the True Name as my Support. ||19||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 034

Shalok, First Mehl:
Through the night the time ticks away; through the day the time ticks away.
The body wears away and turns to straw.
All are involved and entangled in worldly entanglements.
The mortal has mistakenly renounced the way of service.
The blind fool is caught in conflict, bothered and bewildered.
Those who weep after someone has died - can they bring him back to life?
Without realization, nothing can be understood.
The weepers who weep for the dead shall themselves die as well.
O Nanak, this is the Will of our Lord and Master.
Those who do not remember the Lord, are dead. ||1||
First Mehl:
Love dies, and affection dies; hatred and strife die.
The color fades, and beauty vanishes; the body suffers and collapses.
Where did he come from? Where is he going? Did he exist or not?
The self-willed manmukh made empty boasts, indulging in parties and pleasures.
O Nanak, without the True Name, his honor is torn away, from head to foot. ||2||
Pauree:
The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is forever the Giver of peace. It shall be your Help and Support in the end.
Without the Guru, the world is insane. It does not appreciate the worth of the Name.
Those who serve the True Guru are accepted and approved. Their light merges into the Light.
That servant who enshrines the Lord's Will within his mind, becomes just like his Lord and Master.
Tell me, who has ever found peace by following his own will? The blind act in blindness.
No one is ever satisfied and fulfilled by evil and corruption. The hunger of the fool is not satisfied.
Attached to duality, all are ruined; without the True Guru, there is no understanding.
Those who serve the True Guru find peace; they are blessed with Grace by the Will of the Lord. ||20||
Shalok, First Mehl:
Modesty and righteousness both, O Nanak, are qualities of those who are blessed with true wealth.
Do not refer to that wealth as your friend, which leads you to get your head beaten.
Those who possess only this worldly wealth are known as paupers.
But those, within whose hearts You dwell, O Lord - those people are oceans of virtue. ||1||
First Mehl:
Worldly possessions are obtained by pain and suffering; when they are gone, they leave pain and suffering.
O Nanak, without the True Name, hunger is never satisfied.
Beauty does not satisfy hunger; when the man sees beauty, he hungers even more.
As many as are the pleasures of the body, so many are the pains which afflict it. ||2||
First Mehl:
Acting blindly, the mind becomes blind. The blind mind makes the body blind.
Why make a dam with mud and plaster? Even a dam made of stones gives way.
The dam has burst. There is no boat. There is no raft. The water's depth is unfathomable.
O Nanak, without the True Name, many multitudes have drowned. ||3||
First Mehl:
Thousands of pounds of gold, and thousands of pounds of silver; the king over the heads of thousands of kings.
Thousands of armies, thousands of marching bands and spearmen; the emperor of thousands of horsemen.
The unfathomable ocean of fire and water must be crossed.
The other shore cannot be seen; only the roar of pitiful cries can be heard.
O Nanak, there, it shall be known, whether anyone is a king or an emperor. ||4||
Pauree:
Some have chains around their necks, in bondage to the Lord.
They are released from bondage, realizing the True Lord as True.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 035

One whose pre-ordained destiny is activated, comes to know the True Lord.
By God's Command, it is ordained. When the mortal goes, he knows.
Realize the Word of the Shabad, and cross over the terrifying world-ocean.
Thieves, adulterers and gamblers are pressed like seeds in the mill.
Slanderers and gossipers are hand-cuffed.
The Gurmukh is absorbed in the True Lord, and is famous in the Court of the Lord. ||21||
Shalok, Second Mehl:
The beggar is known as an emperor, and the fool is known as a religious scholar.
The blind man is known as a seer; this is how people talk.
The trouble-maker is called a leader, and the liar is seated with honor.
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs know that this is justice in the Dark Age of Kali Yuga. ||1||
First Mehl:
Deer, falcons and government officials are known to be trained and clever.
When the trap is set, they trap their own kind; hereafter they will find no place of rest.
He alone is learned and wise, and he alone is a scholar, who practices the Name.
First, the tree puts down its roots, and then it spreads out its shade above.
The kings are tigers, and their officials are dogs;
they go out and awaken the sleeping people to harass them.
The public servants inflict wounds with their nails.
The dogs lick up the blood that is spilled.
But there, in the Court of the Lord, all beings will be judged.
Those who have violated the people's trust will be disgraced; their noses will be cut off. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself creates the world, and He himself takes care of it.
Without the Fear of God, doubt is not dispelled, and love for the Name is not embraced.
Through the True Guru, the Fear of God wells up, and the Door of Salvation is found.
Through the Fear of God, intuitive ease is obtained, and one's light merges into the Light of the Infinite.
Through the Fear of God, the terrifying world-ocean is crossed over, reflecting on the Guru's Teachings.
Through the Fear of God, the Fearless Lord is found; He has no end or limitation.
The self-willed manmukhs do not appreciate the value of the Fear of God. Burning in desire, they weep and wail.
O Nanak, through the Name, peace is obtained, by enshrining the Guru's Teachings within the heart. ||22||
Shalok, First Mehl:
Beauty and sexual desire are friends; hunger and tasty food are tied together.
Greed is bound up in its search for wealth, and sleep will use even a tiny space as a bed.
Anger barks and brings ruin on itself, blindly pursuing useless conflicts.
It is good to be silent, O Nanak; without the Name, one's mouth spews forth only filth. ||1||
First Mehl:
Royal power, wealth, beauty, social status and youth are the five thieves.
These thieves have plundered the world; no one's honor has been spared.
But these thieves themselves are robbed, by those who fall at the Guru's Feet.
O Nanak, the multitudes who do not have good karma are plundered. ||2||
Pauree:
The learned and educated are called to account for their actions.
Without the Name, they are judged false; they become miserable and suffer hardship.
Their path becomes treacherous and difficult, and their way is blocked.
Through the Shabad, the Word of the True and Independent Lord God, one becomes content.
The Lord is deep and profound and unfathomable; His depth cannot be measured.
Without the Guru, the mortals are beaten and punched in the face and the mouth, and no one is released.
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, one returns to his true home with honor.
Know that the Lord, by the Hukam of His Command, gives sustenance and the breath of life. ||23||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 036

Shalok, First Mehl:
Living beings are formed of air, water and fire. They are subject to pleasure and pain.
In this world, in the nether regions of the underworld, and in the Akaashic ethers of the heavens, some remain ministers in the Court of the Lord.
Some live long lives, while others suffer and die.
Some give and consume, and still their wealth is not exhausted, while others remain poor forever.
In His Will He creates, and in His Will He destroys thousands in an instant.
He has harnessed everyone with His harness; when He forgives, he breaks the harness.
He has no color or features; He is invisible and beyond calculation.
How can He be described? He is known as the Truest of the True.
All the actions which are done and described, O Nanak, are done by the Indescribable Lord Himself.
Whoever hears the description of the indescribable,
is blessed with wealth, intelligence, perfection, spiritual wisdom and eternal peace. ||1||
First Mehl:
One who bears the unbearable, controls the nine holes of the body.
One who worships and adores the Lord with his breath of life, gains stability in his body-wall.
Where has he come from, and where will he go?
Remaining dead while yet alive, he is accepted and approved.
Whoever understands the Hukam of the Lord's Command, realizes the essence of reality.
This is known by Guru's Grace.
O Nanak, know this: egotism leads to bondage.
Only those who have no ego and no self-conceit, are not consigned to reincarnation. ||2||
Pauree:
Read the Praise of the Lord's Name; other intellectual pursuits are false.
Without dealing in Truth, life is worthless.
No one has ever found the Lord's end or limitation.
All the world is enveloped by the darkness of egotistical pride. It does not like the Truth.
Those who depart from this world, forgetting the Naam, shall be roasted in the frying pan.
They pour the oil of duality within, and burn.
They come into the world and wander around aimlessly; they depart when the play is finished.
O Nanak, imbued with Truth, the mortals merge in Truth. ||24||
Shalok, First Mehl:
First, the mortal is conceived in the flesh, and then he dwells in the flesh.
When he comes alive, his mouth takes flesh; his bones, skin and body are flesh.
He comes out of the womb of flesh, and takes a mouthful of flesh at the breast.
His mouth is flesh, his tongue is flesh; his breath is in the flesh.
He grows up and is married, and brings his wife of flesh into his home.
Flesh is produced from flesh; all relatives are made of flesh.
When the mortal meets the True Guru, and realizes the Hukam of the Lord's Command, then he comes to be reformed.
Releasing himself, the mortal does not find release; O Nanak, through empty words, one is ruined. ||1||
First Mehl:
The fools argue about flesh and meat, but they know nothing about meditation and spiritual wisdom.
What is called meat, and what is called green vegetables? What leads to sin?
It was the habit of the gods to kill the rhinoceros, and make a feast of the burnt offering.
Those who renounce meat, and hold their noses when sitting near it, devour men at night.
They practice hypocrisy, and make a show before other people, but they do not understand anything about meditation or spiritual wisdom.
O Nanak, what can be said to the blind people? They cannot answer, or even understand what is said.
They alone are blind, who act blindly. They have no eyes in their hearts.
They are produced from the blood of their mothers and fathers, but they do not eat fish or meat.

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 037

But when men and women meet in the night, they come together in the flesh.
In the flesh we are conceived, and in the flesh we are born; we are vessels of flesh.
You know nothing of spiritual wisdom and meditation, even though you call yourself clever, O religious scholar.
O master, you believe that flesh on the outside is bad, but the flesh of those in your own home is good.
All beings and creatures are flesh; the soul has taken up its home in the flesh.
They eat the uneatable; they reject and abandon what they could eat. They have a teacher who is blind.
In the flesh we are conceived, and in the flesh we are born; we are vessels of flesh.
You know nothing of spiritual wisdom and meditation, even though you call yourself clever, O religious scholar.
Meat is allowed in the Puraanas, meat is allowed in the Bible and the Koran. Throughout the four ages, meat has been used.
It is featured in sacred feasts and marriage festivities; meat is used in them.
Women, men, kings and emperors originate from meat.
If you see them going to hell, then do not accept charitable gifts from them.
The giver goes to hell, while the receiver goes to heaven - look at this injustice.
You do not understand your own self, but you preach to other people. O Pandit, you are very wise indeed.
O Pandit, you do not know where meat originated.
Corn, sugar cane and cotton are produced from water. The three worlds came from water.
Water says, I am good in many ways. But water takes many forms.
Forsaking these delicacies, one becomes a true Sannyaasee, a detached hermit. Nanak reflects and speaks. ||2||
Pauree:
What can I say with only one tongue? I cannot find your limits.
Those who contemplate the True Word of the Shabad are absorbed into You, O Lord.
Some wander around in saffron robes, but without the True Guru, no one finds the Lord.
They wander in foreign lands and countries until they grow weary, but You hide Yourself within them.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad is a jewel, through which the Lord shines forth and reveals Himself.
Realizing one's own self, following the Guru's Teachings, the mortal is absorbed into Truth.
Coming and going, the tricksters and magicians put on their magic show.
But those whose minds are pleased by the True Lord, praise the True One, the Ever-stable Lord. ||25||
Shalok, First Mehl:
O Nanak, the tree of actions done in Maya yields ambrosial fruit and poisonous fruit.
The Creator does all deeds; we eat the fruits as He ordains. ||1||
Second Mehl:
O Nanak, burn worldly greatness and glory in the fire.
These burnt offerings have caused mortals to forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Not even one of them will go along with you in the end. ||2||
Pauree:
He judges each and every being; by the Hukam of His Command, He leads us on.
Justice is in Your Hands, O Lord; You are pleasing to my mind.
The mortal is bound and gagged by Death and lead away; no one can rescue him.
Old age, the tyrant, dances on the mortal's shoulders.
So climb aboard the boat of the True Guru, and the True Lord will rescue you.
The fire of desire burns like an oven, consuming mortals night and day.
Like trapped birds, the mortals peck at the corn; only through the Lord's Command will they find release.
Whatever the Creator does, comes to pass; falsehood shall fail in the end. ||26||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 038

Shalok, First Mehl:
The True Guru is the All-knowing Primal Being; He shows us our true home within the home of the self.
The Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, resonate and resound within; the insignia of the Shabad is revealed there, vibrating gloriously.
Worlds and realms, nether regions, solar systems and galaxies are wondrously revealed.
The strings and the harps vibrate and resound; the true throne of the Lord is there.
Listen to the music of the home of the heart - Sukhmani, peace of mind. Lovingly tune in to His state of celestial ecstasy.
Contemplate the Unspoken Speech, and the desires of the mind are dissolved.
The heart-lotus is turned upside-down, and is filled with Ambrosial Nectar. This mind does not go out; it does not get distracted.
It does not forget the Chant which is chanted without chanting; it is immersed in the Primal Lord God of the ages.
All the sister-companions are blessed with the five virtues. The Gurmukhs dwell in the home of the self deep within.
Nanak is the slave of that one who seeks the Shabad and finds this home within. ||1||
First Mehl:
The extravagant glamor of the world is a passing show.
My twisted mind does not believe that it will end up in a grave.
I am meek and lowly; You are the great river.
Please, bless me with the one thing; everything else is poison, and does not tempt me.
You filled this fragile body with the water of life, O Lord, by Your Creative Power.
By Your Omnipotence, I have become powerful.
Nanak is a dog in the Court of the Lord, intoxicated more and more, all the time.
The world is on fire; the Name of the Lord is cooling and soothing. ||2||
New Pauree, Fifth Mehl:
His wonderful play is all-pervading; it is wonderful and amazing!
As Gurmukh, I know the the Transcendent Lord, the Supreme Lord God.
All my sins and corruption are washed away, through the insignia of the Shabad, the Word of God.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, one is saved, and becomes free.
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Great Giver, I enjoy all comforts and pleasures.
I have become famous throughout the world, under the canopy of His kindness and grace.
He Himself has forgiven me, and united me with Himself; I am forever a sacrifice to Him.
O Nanak, by the Pleasure of His Will, my Lord and Master has blended me with Himself. ||27||
Shalok, First Mehl:
Blessed is the paper, blessed is the pen, blessed is the inkwell, and blessed is the ink.
Blessed is the writer, O Nanak, who writes the True Name. ||1||
First Mehl:
You Yourself are the writing tablet, and You Yourself are the pen. You are also what is written on it.
Speak of the One Lord, O Nanak; how could there be any other? ||2||
Pauree:
You Yourself are all-pervading; You Yourself made the making.
Without You, there is no other at all; You are permeating and pervading everywhere.
You alone know Your state and extent. Only You can estimate Your worth.
You are invisible, imperceptible and inaccessible. You are revealed through the Guru's Teachings.
Deep within, there is ignorance, suffering and doubt; through the spiritual wisdom of the Guru, they are eradicated.
He alone meditates on the Naam, whom You unite with Yourself, in Your Mercy.
You are the Creator, the Inaccessible Primal Lord God; You are all-pervading everywhere.
To whatever You link the mortal, O True Lord, to that he is linked. Nanak sings Your Glorious Praises. ||28||1||
SUDH||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 039

Raag Malaar, The Word Of The Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Serve the King, the Sovereign Lord of the World. He has no ancestry; He is immaculate and pure.
Please bless me with the gift of devotion, which the humble Saints beg for. ||1||Pause||
His Home is the pavilion seen in all directions; His ornamental heavenly realms fill the seven worlds alike.
In His Home, the virgin Lakshmi dwells. The moon and the sun are His two lamps; the wretched Messenger of Death stages his dramas, and levies taxes on all.
Such is my Sovereign Lord King, the Supreme Lord of all. ||1||
In His House, the four-faced Brahma, the cosmic potter lives. He created the entire universe.
In His House, the insane Shiva, the Guru of the World, lives; he imparts spiritual wisdom to expain the essence of reality.
Sin and virtue are the standard-bearers at His Door; Chitr and Gupt are the recording angels of the conscious and subconscious.
The Righteous Judge of Dharma, the Lord of Destruction, is the door-man.
Such is the Supreme Sovereign Lord of the World. ||2||
In His Home are the heavenly heralds, celestial singers, Rishis and poor minstrels, who sing so sweetly.
All the Shaastras take various forms in His theater, singing beautiful songs.
The wind waves the fly-brush over Him;
His hand-maiden is Maya, who has conquered the world.
The shell of the earth is His fireplace.
Such is the Sovereign Lord of the three worlds. ||3||
In His Home, the celestial turtle is the bed-frame, woven with the strings of the thousand-headed snake.
His flower-girls are the eighteen loads of vegetation; His water-carriers are the nine hundred sixty million clouds.
His sweat is the Ganges River.
The seven seas are His water-pitchers.
The creatures of the world are His household utensils.
Such is the Sovereign Lord King of the three worlds. ||4||
In His home are Arjuna, Dhroo, Prahlaad, Ambreek, Naarad, Nayjaa, the Siddhas and Buddhas, the ninety-two heavenly heralds and celestial singers in their wondrous play.
All the creatures of the world are in His House.
The Lord is diffused in the inner beings of all.
Prays Naam Dayv, seek His Protection.
All the devotees are His banner and insignia. ||5||1||
MALAAR:
Please do not forget me; please do not forget me,
please do not forget me, O Lord. ||1||Pause||
The temple priests have doubts about this, and everyone is furious with me.
Calling me low-caste and untouchable, they beat me and drove me out; what should I do now, O Beloved Father Lord? ||1||
If You liberate me after I am dead, no one will know that I am liberated.
These Pandits, these religious scholars, call me low-born; when they say this, they tarnish Your honor as well. ||2||
You are called kind and compassionate; the power of Your Arm is absolutely unrivalled.
The Lord turned the temple around to face Naam Dayv; He turned His back on the Brahmins. ||3||2||

## Section 31 - Raag Malaar - Part 040

Malaar, The Word Of The Devotee Ravi Daas Jee:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O humble townspeople, I am obviously just a shoemaker.
In my heart I cherish the Glories of the Lord, the Lord of the Universe. ||1||Pause||
Even if wine is made from the water of the Ganges, O Saints, do not drink it.
This wine, and any other polluted water which mixes with the Ganges, is not separate from it. ||1||
The palmyra palm tree is considered impure, and so its leaves are considered impure as well.
But if devotional prayers are written on paper made from its leaves, then people bow in reverence and worship before it. ||2||
It is my occupation to prepare and cut leather; each day, I carry the carcasses out of the city.
Now, the important Brahmins of the city bow down before me; Ravi Daas, Your slave, seeks the Sanctuary of Your Name. ||3||1||
MALAAR:
Those humble beings who meditate on the Lord's Lotus Feet - none are equal to them.
The Lord is One, but He is diffused in many forms. Bring in, bring in, that All-pervading Lord. ||Pause||
He who writes the Praises of the Lord God, and sees nothing else at all, is a low-class, untouchable fabric-dyer by trade.
The Glory of the Name is seen in the writings of Vyaas and Sanak, throughout the seven continents. ||1||
And he whose family used to kill cows at the festivals of Eed and Bakareed, who worshipped Shayks, martyrs and spiritual teachers,
whose father used to do such things - his son Kabeer became so successful that he is now famous throughout the three worlds. ||2||
And all the leather-workers in those families still go around Benares removing the dead cattle
\- the ritualistic Brahmins bow in reverence before their son Ravi Daas, the slave of the Lord's slaves. ||3||2||
Malaar:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
What sort of devotional worship will lead me to meet my Beloved, the Lord of my breath of life?
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have obtained the supreme status. ||Pause||
How long shall I wash these dirty clothes?
How long shall I remain asleep? ||1||
Whatever I was attached to, has perished.
The shop of false merchandise has closed down. ||2||
Says Ravi Daas, when the account is called for and given,
whatever the mortal has done, he shall see. ||3||1||3||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/30">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">30. Raag Saarang</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/32">
          <span class="pr-2">32. Raag Kaanraa</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
