---
title: "34. Raag Prabhaatee"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/33">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">33. Raag Kalyaan</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/35">
          <span class="pr-2">35. Raag Jaijaavantee</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 001

One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Raag Parbhaatee Bibhaas, First Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
Your Name carries us across; Your Name brings respect and worship.
Your Name embellishes us; it is the object of the awakened mind.
Your Name brings honor to everyone's name.
Without Your Name, no one is ever respected. ||1||
All other clever tricks are just for show.
Whoever the Lord blesses with forgiveness - his affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1||Pause||
Your Name is my strength; Your Name is my support.
Your Name is my army; Your Name is my king.
Your Name brings honor, glory and approval.
By Your Grace, one is blessed with the banner and the insignia of Your Mercy. ||2||
Your Name brings intuitive peace and poise; Your Name brings praise.
Your Name is the Ambrosial Nectar which cleans out the poison.
Through Your Name, all peace and comfort comes to abide in the mind.
Without the Name, they are bound and gagged, and dragged off to the City of Death. ||3||
Man is involved with his wife, hearth and home, land and country,
the pleasures of the mind and fine clothes;
but when the call comes, he cannot delay.
O Nanak, in the end, the false turn out to be false. ||4||1||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Your Name is the Jewel, and Your Grace is the Light. In awareness, there is Your Light.
Darkness fills the dark, and then everything is lost. ||1||
This whole world is corrupt.
Your Name is the only cure; nothing else works, O Infinite Creator Lord. ||1||Pause||
One side of the scale holds tens of thousands, millions of nether regions and realms.
O my Beloved, Your Worth could only be estimated if something else could be placed on the other side of the scale. ||2||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 002

Out of pain, pleasure is produced, and out of pleasure comes pain.
That mouth which praises You - what hunger could that mouth ever suffer? ||3||
O Nanak, you alone are foolish; all the rest of the world is good.
That body in which the Naam does not well up - that body becomes miserable. ||4||2||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
For His sake, Brahma uttered the Vedas, and Shiva renounced Maya.
For His sake, the Siddhas became hermits and renunciates; even the gods have not realized His Mystery. ||1||
O Baba, keep the True Lord in your mind, and utter the Name of the True Lord with your mouth; the True Lord will carry you across.
Enemies and pain shall not even approach you; only a rare few realize the Wisdom of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Fire, water and air make up the world; these three are the slaves of the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
One who does not chant the Naam is a thief, dwelling in the fortress of the five thieves. ||2||
If someone does a good deed for someone else, he totally puffs himself up in his conscious mind.
The Lord bestows so many virtues and so much goodness; He does not ever regret it. ||3||
Those who praise You gather the wealth in their laps; this is Nanak's wealth.
Whoever shows respect to them is not summoned by the Messenger of Death. ||4||3||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
One who has no beauty, no social status, no mouth, no flesh
\- meeting with the True Guru, he finds the Immaculate Lord, and dwells in Your Name. ||1||
O detached Yogi, contemplate the essence of reality,
and you shall never again come to be born into the world. ||1||Pause||
One who does not have good karma or Dharmic faith, sacred rosary or mala
\- through the Light of God, wisdom is bestowed; the True Guru is our Protector. ||2||
One who does not observe any fasts, make religious vows or chant
\- he does not have to worry about good luck or bad, if he obeys the Command of the True Guru. ||3||
One who is not hopeful, nor hopeless, who has trained his intuitive consciousness
\- his being blends with the Supreme Being. O Nanak, his awareness is awakened. ||4||4||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
What he says is approved in the Court of the Lord.
He looks upon poison and nectar as one and the same. ||1||
What can I say? You are permeating and pervading all.
Whatever happens, is all by Your Will. ||1||Pause||
The Divine Light shines radiantly, and egotistical pride is dispelled.
The True Guru bestows the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, one's birth is approved,
if one is honored in the True Court. ||3||
Speaking and listening, one goes to the Celestial Home of the Indescribable Lord.
Mere words of mouth, O Nanak, are burnt away. ||4||5||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
One who bathes in the Ambrosial Water of spiritual wisdom takes with him the virtues of the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
The Guru's Teachings are the gems and jewels; the Sikh who serves Him searches and finds them. ||1||
There is no sacred shrine equal to the Guru.
The Guru encompasses the ocean of contentment. ||1||Pause||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 003

The Guru is the River, from which the Pure Water is obtained forever; it washes away the filth and pollution of evil-mindedness.
Finding the True Guru, the perfect cleansing bath is obtained, which transforms even beasts and ghosts into gods. ||2||
He is said to be the Guru, with the scent of sandalwood, who is imbued with the True Name to the bottom of His Heart.
By His Fragrance, the world of vegetation is perfumed. Lovingly focus yourself on His Feet. ||3||
The life of the soul wells up for the Gurmukh; the Gurmukh goes to the House of God.
The Gurmukh, O Nanak, merges in the True One; the Gurmukh attains the exalted state of the self. ||4||6||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
By Guru's Grace, contemplate spiritual knowledge; read it and study it, and you shall be honored.
Within the self, the self is revealed, when one is blessed with the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||
O Creator Lord, You alone are my Benefactor.
I beg for only one blessing from You: please bless me with Your Name. ||1||Pause||
The five wandering thieves are captured and held, and the egotistical pride of the mind is subdued.
Visions of corruption, vice and evil-mindedness run away. Such is the spiritual wisdom of God. ||2||
Please bless me with the rice of truth and self-restraint, the wheat of compassion, and the leaf-plate of meditation.
Bless me with the milk of good karma, and the clarified butter, the ghee, of compassion. Such are the gifts I beg of You, Lord. ||3||
Let forgiveness and patience be my milk-cows, and let the calf of my mind intuitively drink in this milk.
I beg for the clothes of modesty and the Lord's Praise; Nanak chants the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||4||7||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
No one can hold anyone back from coming; how could anyone hold anyone back from going?
He alone thoroughly understands this, from whom all beings come; all are merged and immersed in Him. ||1||
Waaho! - You are Great, and Wondrous is Your Will.
Whatever You do, surely comes to pass. Nothing else can happen. ||1||Pause||
The buckets on the chain of the Persian wheel rotate; one empties out to fill another.
This is just like the Play of our Lord and Master; such is His Glorious Greatness. ||2||
Following the path of intuitive awareness, one turns away from the world, and one's vision is enlightened.
Contemplate this in your mind, and see, O spiritual teacher. Who is the householder, and who is the renunciate? ||3||
Hope comes from the Lord; surrendering to Him, we remain in the state of nirvaanaa.
We come from Him; surrendering to Him, O Nanak, one is approved as a householder, and a renunciate. ||4||8||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
I am a sacrifice to that one who binds in bondage his evil and corrupted gaze.
One who does not know the difference between vice and virtue wanders around uselessly. ||1||
Speak the True Name of the Creator Lord.
Then, you shall never again have to come into this world. ||1||Pause||
The Creator transforms the high into the low, and makes the lowly into kings.
Those who know the All-knowing Lord are approved and certified as perfect in this world. ||2||
If anyone is mistaken and fooled, you should go to instruct him.

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 004

The Creator Himself plays all the games; only a few understand this. ||3||
Meditate on the Name, and the Word of the Shabad, in the early hours before dawn; leave your worldly entanglements behind.
Prays Nanak, the slave of God's slaves: the world loses, and he wins. ||4||9||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
The mind is Maya, the mind is a chaser; the mind is a bird flying across the sky.
The thieves are overpowered by the Shabad, and then the body-village prospers and celebrates.
Lord, when You save someone, he is saved; his capital is safe and sound. ||1||
Such is my Treasure, the Jewel of the Naam;
please bless me with the Guru's Teachings, so that I may fall at Your Feet. ||1||Pause||
The mind is a Yogi, the mind is a pleasure-seeker; the mind is foolish and ignorant.
The mind is the giver, the mind is the beggar; the mind is the Great Guru, the Creator.
The five thieves are conquered, and peace is attained; such is the contemplative wisdom of God. ||2||
The One Lord is said to be in each and every heart, but no one can see Him.
The false are cast upside-down into the womb of reincarnation; without the Name, they lose their honor.
Those whom You unite, remain united, if it is Your Will. ||3||
God does not ask about social class or birth; you must find your true home.
That is your social class and that is your status - the karma of what you have done.
The pains of death and rebirth are eradicated; O Nanak, salvation is in the Lord's Name. ||4||10||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
He is awake, and even happy, but he is being plundered - he is blind!
The noose is around his neck, and yet, his head is busy with worldly affairs.
In hope, he comes and in desire, he leaves.
The strings of his life are all tangled up; he is utterly helpless. ||1||
The Lord of Awareness, the Lord of Life is awake and aware.
He is the Ocean of peace, the Treasure of Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||Pause||
He does not understand what he is told; he is blind - he does not see, and so he does his evil deeds.
The Transcendent Lord Himself showers His Love and Affection; by His Grace, He bestows glorious greatness. ||2||
With the coming of each and every day, his life is wearing away, bit by bit; but still, his heart is attached to Maya.
Without the Guru, he is drowned, and finds no place of rest, as long as he is caught in duality. ||3||
Day and night, God watches over and takes care of His living beings; they receive pleasure and pain according to their past actions.
Nanak, the unfortunate one, begs for the charity of Truth; please bless him with this glory. ||4||11||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
If I remain silent, the world calls me a fool.
If I talk too much, I miss out on Your Love.
My mistakes and faults will be judged in Your Court.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, how can I maintain good conduct? ||1||
Such is the falsehood which is plundering the world.
The slanderer slanders me, but even so, I love him. ||1||Pause||
He alone knows the way, who has been slandered.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, he is stamped with the Lord's Insignia in His Court.
He realizes the Naam, the Cause of causes, deep within himself.
He alone knows the way, who is blessed by the Lord's Glance of Grace. ||2||
I am filthy and polluted; the True Lord is Immaculate and Sublime.
Calling oneself sublime, one does not become exalted.
The self-willed manmukh openly eats the great poison.
But one who becomes Gurmukh is absorbed in the Name. ||3||
I am blind, deaf, foolish and ignorant,

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 005

the lowest of the low, the worst of the worst.
I am poor, but I have the Wealth of Your Name, O my Beloved.
This is the most excellent wealth; all else is poison and ashes. ||4||
I pay no attention to slander and praise; I contemplate the Word of the Shabad.
I celebrate the One who blesses me with His Bounty.
Whomever You forgive, O Lord, is blessed with status and honor.
Says Nanak, I speak as He causes me to speak. ||5||12||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Eating too much, one's filth only increases; wearing fancy clothes, one's home is disgraced.
Talking too much, one only starts arguments. Without the Name, everything is poison - know this well. ||1||
O Baba, such is the treacherous trap which has caught my mind;
riding out the waves of the storm, it will be enlightened by intuitive wisdom. ||1||Pause||
They eat poison, speak poison and do poisonous deeds.
Bound and gagged at Death's door, they are punished; they can be saved only through the True Name. ||2||
As they come, they go. Their actions are recorded, and go along with them.
The self-willed manmukh loses his capital, and is punished in the Court of the Lord. ||3||
The world is false and polluted; only the True One is Pure. Contemplate Him through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Those who have God's spiritual wisdom within, are known to be very rare. ||4||
They endure the unendurable, and the Nectar of the Lord, the Embodiment of Bliss, trickles into them continuously.
O Nanak, the fish is in love with the water; if it pleases You, Lord, please enshrine such love within me. ||5||13||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Songs, sounds, pleasures and clever tricks;
joy, love and the power to command;
fine clothes and food - these have no place in one's consciousness.
True intuitive peace and poise rest in the Naam. ||1||
What do I know about what God does?
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, nothing makes my body feel good. ||1||Pause||
Yoga, thrills, delicious flavors and ecstasy;
wisdom, truth and love all come from devotion to the Lord of the Universe.
My own occupation is to work to praise the Lord.
Deep within, I dwell on the Lord of the sun and the moon. ||2||
I have lovingly enshrined the love of my Beloved within my heart.
My Husband Lord, the Lord of the World, is the Master of the meek and the poor.
Night and day, the Naam is my giving in charity and fasting.
The waves have subsided, contemplating the essence of reality. ||3||
What power do I have to speak the Unspoken?
I worship You with devotion; You inspire me to do so.
You dwell deep within; my egotism is dispelled.
So whom should I serve? There is no other than You. ||4||
The Word of the Guru's Shabad is utterly sweet and sublime.
Such is the Ambrosial Nectar I see deep within.
Those who taste this, attain the state of perfection.
O Nanak, they are satisfied, and their bodies are at peace. ||5||14||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Deep within, I see the Shabad, the Word of God; my mind is pleased and appeased. Nothing else can touch and imbue me.
Day and night, God watches over and cares for His beings and creatures; He is the Ruler of all. ||1||
My God is dyed in the most beautiful and glorious color.
Merciful to the meek and the poor, my Beloved is the Enticer of the mind; He is so very sweet, imbued with the deep crimson color of His Love. ||1||Pause||
The Well is high up in the Tenth Gate; the Ambrosial Nectar flows, and I drink it in.
The creation is His; He alone knows its ways and means. The Gurmukh contemplates spiritual wisdom. ||2||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 006

The rays of light spread out, and the heart-lotus joyfully blossoms forth; the sun enters into the house of the moon.
I have conquered death; the desires of the mind are destroyed. By Guru's Grace, I have found God. ||3||
I am dyed in the deep crimson color of His Love. I am not colored by any other color.
O Nanak, my tongue is saturated with the taste of God, who is permeating and pervading everywhere. ||4||15||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
The Yogis are divided into twelve schools, the Sannyaasees into ten.
The Yogis and those wearing religious robes, and the Jains with their all hair plucked out - without the Word of the Shabad, the noose is around their necks. ||1||
Those who are imbued with the Shabad are the perfectly detached renunciates.
They beg to receive charity in the hands of their hearts, embracing love and affection for the One. ||1||Pause||
The Brahmins study and argue about the scriptures; they perform ceremonial rituals, and lead others in these rituals.
Without true understanding, those self-willed manmukhs understand nothing. Separated from God, they suffer in pain. ||2||
Those who receive the Shabad are sanctified and pure; they are approved in the True Court.
Night and day, they remain lovingly attuned to the Naam; throughout the ages, they are merged in the True One. ||3||
Good deeds, righteousness and Dharmic faith, purification, austere self-discipline, chanting, intense meditation and pilgrimages to sacred shrines - all these abide in the Shabad.
O Nanak, united in union with the True Guru, suffering, sin and death run away. ||4||16||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
The dust of the feet of the Saints, the Company of the Holy, and the Praises of the Lord carry us across to the other side.
What can the wretched, terrified Messenger of Death do to the Gurmukhs? The Lord abides in their hearts. ||1||
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, life might just as well be burnt down.
The Gurmukh chants and meditates on the Lord, chanting the chant on the mala; the Flavor of the Lord comes into the mind. ||1||Pause||
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings find true peace - how can I even describe the glory of such a person?
The Gurmukh seeks and finds the gems and jewels, diamonds, rubies and treasures. ||2||
So center yourself on the treasures of spiritual wisdom and meditation; remain lovingly attuned to the One True Lord, and the Word of His Shabad.
Remain absorbed in the Primal State of the Fearless, Immaculate, Independent, Self-sufficient Lord. ||3||
The seven seas are overflowing with the Immaculate Water; the inverted boat floats across.
The mind which wandered in external distractions is restrained and held in check; the Gurmukh is intuitively absorbed in God. ||4||
He is a householder, he is a renunciate and God's slave, who, as Gurmukh, realizes his own self.
Says Nanak, his mind is pleased and appeased by the True Word of the Shabad; there is no other at all. ||5||17||
Raag Prabhaatee, Third Mehl, Chau-Padas:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Those who become Gurmukh and understand are very rare; God is permeating and pervading through the Word of His Shabad.
Those who are imbued with the Naam, the Name of the Lord, find everlasting peace; they remain lovingly attuned to the True One. ||1||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 007

Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O Siblings of Destiny.
By Guru's Grace, the mind becomes steady and stable; night and day, it remains satisfied with the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Night and day, perform devotional worship service to the Lord, day and night; this is the profit to be obtained in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, O Siblings of Destiny.
The humble beings are forever immaculate; no filth ever sticks to them. They focus their consciousness on the True Name. ||2||
The True Guru has revealed the ornamentation of peace; the Glorious Greatness of the Naam is Great!
The Inexhaustible Treasures are overflowing; they are never exhausted. So serve the Lord forever, O Siblings of Destiny. ||3||
The Creator comes to abide in the minds of those whom He Himself has blessed.
O Nanak, meditate forever on the Naam, which the True Guru has revealed. ||4||1||
Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
I am unworthy; please forgive me and bless me, O my Lord and Master, and unite me with Yourself.
You are Endless; no one can find Your limits. Through the Word of Your Shabad, You bestow understanding. ||1||
O Dear Lord, I am a sacrifice to You.
I dedicate my mind and body and place them in offering before You; I shall remain in Your Sanctuary forever. ||1||Pause||
Please keep me forever under Your Will, O my Lord and Master; please bless me with the Glorious Greatness of Your Name.
Through the Perfect Guru, God's Will is revealed; night and day, remain absorbed in peace and poise. ||2||
Those devotees who accept Your Will are pleasing to You, Lord; You Yourself forgive them, and unite them with Yourself.
Accepting Your Will, I have found everlasting peace; the Guru has extinguished the fire of desire. ||3||
Whatever You do comes to pass, O Creator; nothing else can be done.
O Nanak, nothing is as great as the Blessing of the Name; it is obtained through the Perfect Guru. ||4||2||
Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
The Gurmukhs praise the Lord; praising the Lord, they know Him.
Doubt and duality are gone from within; they realize the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||1||
O Dear Lord, You are my One and Only.
I meditate on You and praise You; salvation and wisdom come from You. ||1||Pause||
The Gurmukhs praise You; they receive the most excellent and sweet Ambrosial Nectar.
This Nectar is forever sweet; it never loses its taste. Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2||
He makes it seem so sweet to me; I am a sacrifice to Him.
Through the Shabad, I praise the Giver of peace forever. I have eradicated self-conceit from within. ||3||
My True Guru is forever the Giver. I receive whatever fruits and rewards I desire.
O Nanak, through the Naam, glorious greatness is obtained; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the True One is found. ||4||3||
Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
Those who enter Your Sanctuary, Dear Lord, are saved by Your Protective Power.
I cannot even conceive of any other as Great as You. There never was, and there never shall be. ||1||
O Dear Lord, I shall remain in Your Sanctuary forever.
As it pleases You, You save me, O my Lord and Master; this is Your Glorious Greatness. ||1||Pause||
O Dear Lord, You cherish and sustain those who seek Your Sanctuary.

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 008

O Dear Lord, the Messenger of Death cannot even touch those whom You, in Your Mercy, protect. ||2||
True Is Your Sanctuary, O Dear Lord; it never diminishes or goes away.
Those who abandon the Lord, and become attached to the love of duality, shall continue to die and be reborn. ||3||
Those who seek Your Sanctuary, Dear Lord, shall never suffer in pain or hunger for anything.
O Nanak, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord forever, and merge in the True Word of the Shabad. ||4||4||
Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
As Gurmukh, meditate on the Dear Lord forever, as long as there is the breath of life.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the mind becomes immaculate, and egotistical pride is expelled from the mind.
Fruitful and prosperous is the life of that mortal being, who is absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||1||
O my mind, listen to the Teachings of the Guru.
The Name of the Lord is the Giver of peace forever. With intuitive ease, drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Those who understand their own origin dwell within the home of their inner being, in intuitive peace and poise.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the heart-lotus blossoms forth, and egotism and evil-mindedness are eradicated.
The One True Lord is pervading amongst all; those who realize this are very rare. ||2||
Through the Guru's Teachings, the mind becomes immaculate, speaking the Ambrosial Essence.
The Name of the Lord dwells in the mind forever; within the mind, the mind is pleased and appeased.
I am forever a sacrifice to my Guru, through whom I have realized the Lord, the Supreme Soul. ||3||
Those human beings who do not serve the True Guru - their lives are uselessly wasted.
When God bestows His Glance of Grace, then we meet the True Guru, merging in intuitive peace and poise.
O Nanak, by great good fortune, the Naam is bestowed; by perfect destiny, meditate. ||4||5||
Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
God Himself fashioned the many forms and colors; He created the Universe and staged the play.
Creating the creation, He watches over it. He acts, and causes all to act; He gives sustenance to all beings. ||1||
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Lord is All-pervading.
The One God is pervading and permeating each and every heart; the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is revealed to the Gurmukh. ||1||Pause||
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is hidden, but it is pervasive in the Dark Age. The Lord is totally pervading and permeating each and every heart.
The Jewel of the Naam is revealed within the hearts of those who hurry to the Sanctuary of the Guru. ||2||
Whoever overpowers the five sense organs, is blessed with forgiveness, patience and contentment, through the Guru's Teachings.
Blessed, blessed, perfect and great is that humble servant of the Lord, who is inspired by the Fear of God and detached love, to sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||3||
If someone turns his face away from the Guru, and does not enshrine the Guru's Words in his consciousness
\- he may perform all sorts of rituals and accumulate wealth, but in the end, he will fall into hell. ||4||
The One Shabad, the Word of the One God, is prevailing everywhere. All the creation came from the One Lord.
O Nanak, the Gurmukh is united in union. When the Gurmukh goes, he blends into the Lord, Har, Har. ||5||6||
Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
O my mind, praise your Guru.

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 009

Perfect destiny is inscribed upon your forehead and face; sing the Praises of the Lord forever. ||1||Pause||
The Lord bestows the Ambrosial Food of the Naam.
Out of millions, only a rare few receive it
\- only those who are blessed by God's Glance of Grace. ||1||
Whoever enshrines the Guru's Feet within his mind,
is rid of pain and darkness from within.
The True Lord unites him with Himself. ||2||
So embrace love for the Word of the Guru's Bani.
Here and hereafter, this is your only Support.
The Creator Lord Himself bestows it. ||3||
One whom the Lord inspires to accept His Will,
is a wise and knowing devotee.
Nanak is forever a sacrifice to him. ||4||7||17||7||24||
Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl, Bibhaas:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Through the Guru's Teachings, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord with joyous love and delight; I am enraptured, lovingly attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I drink in the Ambrosial Essence; I am a sacrifice to the Naam. ||1||
The Lord, the Life of the World, is my Breath of Life.
The Lofty and Exalted Lord became pleasing to my heart and my inner being, when the Guru breathed the Mantra of the Lord into my ears. ||1||Pause||
Come, O Saints: let us join together, O Siblings of Destiny; let us meet and chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
How am I to find my God? Please bless me with the Gift of the Lord's Teachings. ||2||
The Lord, Har, Har, abides in the Society of the Saints; joining this Sangat, the Lord's Glories are known.
By great good fortune, the Society of the Saints is found. Through the Guru, the True Guru, I receive the Touch of the Lord God. ||3||
I sing the Glorious Praises of God, my Inaccessible Lord and Master; singing His Praises, I am enraptured.
The Guru has showered His Mercy on servant Nanak; in an instant, He blessed him with the Gift of the Lord's Name. ||4||1||
Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:
With the rising of the sun, the Gurmukh speaks of the Lord. All through the night, he dwells upon the Sermon of the Lord.
My God has infused this longing within me; I seek my Lord God. ||1||
My mind is the dust of the feet of the Holy.
The Guru has implanted the Sweet Name of the Lord, Har, Har, within me. I dust the Guru's Feet with my hair. ||1||Pause||
Dark are the days and nights of the faithless cynics; they are caught in the trap of attachment to Maya.
The Lord God does not dwell in their hearts, even for an instant; every hair of their heads is totally tied up in debts. ||2||
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, wisdom and understanding are obtained, and one is released from the traps of egotism and possessiveness.
The Lord's Name, and the Lord, seem sweet to me. Through the Word of His Shabad, the Guru has made me happy. ||3||
I am just a child; the Guru is the Unfathomable Lord of the World. In His Mercy, He cherishes and sustains me.
I am drowning in the ocean of poison; O God, Guru, Lord of the World, please save Your child, Nanak. ||4||2||
Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:
The Lord God showered me with His Mercy for an instant; I sing His Glorious Praises with joyous love and delight.

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 010

Both the singer and the listener are liberated, when, as Gurmukh, they drink in the Lord's Name, even for an instant. ||1||
The Sublime Essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is enshrined within my mind.
As Gurmukh, I have obtained the cooling, soothing Water of the Naam. I eagerly drink in the sublime essence of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||
Those whose hearts are imbued with the Love of the Lord have the mark of radiant purity upon their foreheads.
The Glory of the Lord's humble servant is manifest throughout the world, like the moon among the stars. ||2||
Those whose hearts are not filled with the Lord's Name - all their affairs are worthless and insipid.
They may adorn and decorate their bodies, but without the Naam, they look like their noses have been cut off. ||3||
The Sovereign Lord permeates each and every heart; the One Lord is all-pervading everywhere.
The Lord has showered His Mercy upon servant Nanak; through the Word of the Guru's Teachings, I have meditated on the Lord in an instant. ||4||3||
Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:
God, the Inaccessible and Merciful, has showered me with His Mercy; I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, with my mouth.
I meditate on the Name of the Lord, the Purifier of sinners; I am rid of all my sins and mistakes. ||1||
O mind, chant the Name of the All-pervading Lord.
I sing the Praises of the Lord, Merciful to the meek, Destroyer of pain. Following the Guru's Teachings, I gather in the Wealth of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
The Lord abides in the body-village; through the Wisdom of the Guru's Teachings, the Lord, Har, Har, is revealed.
In the lake of the body, the Lord's Name has been revealed. Within my own home and mansion, I have obtained the Lord God. ||2||
Those beings who wander in the wilderness of doubt - those faithless cynics are foolish, and are plundered.
They are like the deer: the scent of musk comes from its own navel, but it wanders and roams around, searching for it in the bushes. ||3||
You are Great and Unfathomable; Your Wisdom, God, is Profound and Incomprehensible. Please bless me with that wisdom, by which I might attain You, O Lord God.
The Guru has placed His Hand upon servant Nanak; he chants the Name of the Lord. ||4||4||
Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:
My mind is in love with the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; I meditate on the Great Lord God.
The Word of the True Guru has become pleasing to my heart. The Lord God has showered me with His Grace. ||1||
O my mind, vibrate and meditate on the Lord's Name every instant.
The Perfect Guru has blessed me with the gift of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. The Lord's Name abides in my mind and body. ||1||Pause||
The Lord abides in the body-village, in my home and mansion. As Gurmukh, I meditate on His Glory.
Here and hereafter, the Lord's humble servants are embellished and exalted; their faces are radiant; as Gurmukh, they are carried across. ||2||
I am lovingly attuned to the Fearless Lord, Har, Har, Har; through the Guru, I have enshrined the Lord within my heart in an instant.
Millions upon millions of the faults and mistakes of the Lord's humble servant are all taken away in an instant. ||3||
Your humble servants are known only through You, God; knowing You, they becomes supreme.
The Lord, Har, Har, has enshrined Himself within His humble servant. O Nanak, the Lord God and His servant are one and the same. ||4||5||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 011

Prabhaatee, Fourth Mehl:
The Guru, the True Guru, has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord within me. I was dead, but chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I have been brought back to life.
Blessed, blessed is the Guru, the Guru, the Perfect True Guru; He reached out to me with His Arm, and pulled me up and out of the ocean of poison. ||1||
O mind, meditate and worship the Lord's Name.
God is never found, even by making all sorts of new efforts. The Lord God is obtained only through the Perfect Guru. ||1||Pause||
The Sublime Essence of the Lord's Name is the source of nectar and bliss; drinking in this Sublime Essence, following the Guru's Teachings, I have become happy.
Even iron slag is transformed into gold, joining the Lord's Congregation. Through the Guru, the Lord's Light is enshrined within the heart. ||2||
Those who are continually lured by greed, egotism and corruption, who are lured away by emotional attachment to their children and spouse
\- they never serve at the feet of the Saints; those self-willed manmukhs are filled with ashes. ||3||
O God, You alone know Your Glorious Virtues; I have grown weary - I seek Your Sanctuary.
As You know best, You preserve and protect me, O my Lord and Master; servant Nanak is Your slave. ||4||6||
First Set Of Six||
Prabhaatee, Bibhaas, Partaal, Fourth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
O mind, meditate on the Treasure of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
You shall be honored in the Court of the Lord.
Those who chant and meditate shall be carried across to the other shore. ||1||Pause||
Listen, O mind: meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Listen, O mind: the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises is equal to bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
Listen, O mind: as Gurmukh, you shall be blessed with honor. ||1||
O mind, chant and meditate on the Supreme Transcendent Lord God.
Millions of sins shall be destroyed in an instant.
O Nanak, you shall meet with the Lord God. ||2||1||7||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Bibhaas:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The Lord created the mind, and fashioned the entire body.
From the five elements, He formed it, and infused His Light within it.
He made the earth its bed, and water for it to use.
Do not forget Him for an instant; serve the Lord of the World. ||1||
O mind, serve the True Guru, and obtain the supreme status.
If you remain unattached and unaffected by sorrow and joy, then you shall find the Lord of Life. ||1||Pause||
He makes all the various pleasures, clothes and foods for you to enjoy.
He made your mother, father and all relatives.
He provides sustenance to all, in the water and on the land, O friend.
So serve the Lord, forever and ever. ||2||
He shall be your Helper and Support there, where no one else can help you.
He washes away millions of sins in an instant.
He bestows His Gifts, and never regrets them.
He forgives, once and for all, and never asks for one's account again. ||3||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 012

By pre-ordained destiny, I have searched and found God.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, the Lord of the World abides.
Meeting with the Guru, I have come to Your Door.
O Lord, please bless servant Nanak with the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||4||1||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
Serving God, His humble servant is glorified.
Unfulfilled sexual desire, unresolved anger and unsatisfied greed are eradicated.
Your Name is the treasure of Your humble servant.
Singing His Praises, I am in love with the Blessed Vision of God's Darshan. ||1||
You are known, O God, by Your devotees.
Breaking their bonds, You emancipate them. ||1||Pause||
Those humble beings who are imbued with God's Love
find peace in God's Congregation.
They alone understand this, to whom this subtle essence comes.
Beholding it, and gazing upon it, in their minds they are wonderstruck. ||2||
They are at peace, the most exalted of all,
within whose hearts God dwells.
They are stable and unchanging; they do not come and go in reincarnation.
Night and day, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord God. ||3||
All bow down in humble respect to those
whose minds are filled with the Formless Lord.
Show mercy unto me, O my Divine Lord and Master.
May Nanak be saved, by serving these humble beings. ||4||2||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
Singing His Glorious Praises, the mind is in ecstasy.
Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate in remembrance on God.
Remembering Him in meditation, the sins go away.
I fall at the Feet of that Guru. ||1||
O beloved Saints, please bless me with wisdom;
let me meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and be emancipated. ||1||Pause||
The Guru has shown me the straight path;
I have abandoned everything else. I am enraptured with the Name of the Lord.
I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru;
I meditate in remembrance on the Lord, through the Guru. ||2||
The Guru carries those mortal beings across, and saves them from drowning.
By His Grace, they are not enticed by Maya;
in this world and the next, they are embellished and exalted by the Guru.
I am forever a sacrifice to that Guru. ||3||
From the most ignorant, I have been made spiritually wise,
through the Unspoken Speech of the Perfect Guru.
The Divine Guru, O Nanak, is the Supreme Lord God.
By great good fortune, I serve the Lord. ||4||3||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
Eradicating all my pains, He has blessed me with peace, and inspired me to chant His Name.
In His Mercy, He has enjoined me to His service, and has purged me of all my sins. ||1||
I am only a child; I seek the Sanctuary of God the Merciful.
Erasing my demerits and faults, God has made me His Own. My Guru, the Lord of the World, protects me. ||1||Pause||
My sicknesses and sins were erased in an instant, when the Lord of the World became merciful.
With each and very breath, I worship and adore the Supreme Lord God; I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||2||
My Lord and Master is Inaccessible, Unfathomable and Infinite. His limits cannot be found.
We earn the profit, and become wealthy, meditating on our God. ||3||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 013

Twenty-four hours a day, I meditate on the Supreme Lord God; I sing His Glorious Praises forever and ever.
Says Nanak, my desires have been fulfilled; I have found my Guru, the Supreme Lord God. ||4||4||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
Meditating in rememberance on the Naam, all my sins have been erased.
The Guru has blessed me with the Capital of the True Name.
God's servants are embellished and exalted in His Court;
serving Him, they look beauteous forever. ||1||
Chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, O my Siblings of Destiny.
All sickness and sin shall be erased; your mind shall be rid of the darkness of ignorance. ||1||Pause||
The Guru has saved me from death and rebirth, O friend;
I am in love with the Name of the Lord.
The suffering of millions of incarnations is gone;
whatever pleases Him is good. ||2||
I am forever a sacrifice to the Guru;
by His Grace, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
By great good fortune, such a Guru is found;
meeting Him, one is lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||3||
Please be merciful, O Supreme Lord God, O Lord and Master,
Inner-knower, Searcher of Hearts.
Twenty-four hours a day, I am lovingly attuned to You.
Servant Nanak has come to the Sanctuary of God. ||4||5||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
In His Mercy, God has made me His Own.
He has blessed me with the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Twenty-four hours a day, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
Fear is dispelled, and all anxiety has been alleviated. ||1||
I have been saved, touching the Feet of the True Guru.
Whatever the Guru says is good and sweet to me. I have renounced the intellectual wisdom of my mind. ||1||Pause||
That Lord God abides within my mind and body.
There are no conflicts, pains or obstacles.
Forever and ever, God is with my soul.
Filth and pollution are washed away by the Love of the Name. ||2||
I am in love with the Lotus Feet of the Lord;
I am no longer consumed by sexual desire, anger and egotism.
Now, I know the way to meet God.
Through loving devotional worship, my mind is pleased and appeased with the Lord. ||3||
Listen, O friends, Saints, my exalted companions.
The Jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is unfathomable and immeasurable.
Forever and ever, sing the Glories of God, the Treasure of Virtue.
Says Nanak, by great good fortune, He is found. ||4||6||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
They are wealthy, and they are the true merchants,
who have the credit of the Naam in the Court of the Lord. ||1||
So chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, in your mind, my friends.
The Perfect Guru is found by great good fortune, and then one's lifestyle becomes perfect and immaculate. ||1||Pause||
They earn the profit, and the congratulations pour in;
by the Grace of the Saints, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
Their lives are fruitful and prosperous, and their birth is approved;
by Guru's Grace, they enjoy the Love of the Lord. ||3||
Sexuality, anger and egotism are wiped away;
O Nanak, as Gurmukh, they are carried across to the other shore. ||4||7||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
The Guru is Perfect, and Perfect is His Power.

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 014

The Word of the Guru's Shabad is unchanging, forever and ever.
All pains and afflictions run away from those, whose minds are filled with the Word of the Guru's Bani. ||1||
Imbued with the Lord's Love, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
They are liberated, bathing in the dust of the feet of the Holy. ||1||Pause||
By Guru's Grace, they are carried across to the other shore;
they are rid of fear, doubt and corruption.
The Guru's Feet abide deep within their minds and bodies.
The Holy are fearless; they take to the Sanctuary of the Lord. ||2||
They are blessed with abundant bliss, happiness, pleasure and peace.
Enemies and pains do not even approach them.
The Perfect Guru makes them His Own, and protects them.
Chanting the Lord's Name, they are rid of all their sins. ||3||
The Saints, spiritual companions and Sikhs are exalted and uplifted.
The Perfect Guru leads them to meet God.
The painful noose of death and rebirth is snapped.
Says Nanak, the Guru covers their faults. ||4||8||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
The Perfect True Guru has bestowed the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
I am blessed with bliss and happiness, emancipation and eternal peace. All my affairs have been resolved. ||1||Pause||
The Lotus Feet of the Guru abide within my mind.
I am rid of pain, suffering, doubt and fraud. ||1||
Rise early, and sing the Glorious Word of God's Bani.
Twenty-four hours a day, meditate in remembrance on the Lord, O mortal. ||2||
Inwardly and outwardly, God is everywhere.
Wherever I go, He is always with me, my Helper and Support. ||3||
With my palms pressed together, I offer this prayer.
O Nanak, I meditate forever on the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue. ||4||9||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
The Supreme Lord God is All-wise and All-knowing.
The Perfect Guru is found by great good fortune. I am a sacrifice to the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||1||Pause||
My sins are cut away, through the Word of the Shabad, and I have found contentment.
I have become worthy of worshipping the Naam in adoration.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I have been enlightened.
The Lord's Lotus Feet abide within my mind. ||1||
The One who made us, protects and preserves us.
God is Perfect, the Master of the masterless.
Those, upon whom He showers His Mercy
\- they have perfect karma and conduct. ||2||
They sing the Glories of God, continually, continuously, forever fresh and new.
They do not wander in the 8.4 million incarnations.
Here and hereafter, they worship the Lord's Feet.
Their faces are radiant, and they are honored in the Court of the Lord. ||3||
That person, upon whose forehead the Guru places His Hand
\- out of millions, how rare is that slave.
He sees God pervading and permeating the water, the land and the sky.
Nanak is saved by the dust of the feet of such a humble being. ||4||10||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
I am a sacrifice to my Perfect Guru.
By His Grace, I chant and meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||Pause||
Listening to the Ambrosial Word of His Bani, I am exalted and enraptured.
My corrupt and poisonous entanglements are gone. ||1||
I am in love with the True Word of His Shabad.
The Lord God has come into my consciousness. ||2||
Chanting the Naam, I am enlightened.

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 015

The Word of the Guru's Shabad has come to dwell within my heart. ||3||
The Guru is All-powerful and Merciful forever.
Chanting and meditating on the Lord, Nanak is exalted and enraptured. ||4||11||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
Chanting Guru, Guru, I have found eternal peace.
God, Merciful to the meek, has become kind and compassionate; He has inspired me to chant His Name. ||1||Pause||
Joining the Society of the Saints, I am illumined and enlightened.
Chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, my hopes have been fulfilled. ||1||
I am blessed with total salvation, and my mind is filled with peace.
I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; O Nanak, the Guru has been gracious to me. ||2||12||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Second House, Bibhaas:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
There is no other place of rest,
none at all, without the Lord's Name.
There is total success and salvation,
and all affairs are perfectly resolved. ||1||
Constantly chant the Name of the Lord.
Sexuality, anger and egotism are wiped away; let yourself fall in love with the One Lord. ||1||Pause||
Attached to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, pain runs away. In His Sanctuary, He cherishes and sustains us.
Whoever has such pre-ordained destiny meets with the True Guru; the Messenger of Death cannot grab him. ||2||
Night and day, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har; abandon the doubts of your mind.
One who has perfect karma joins the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and meets the Lord. ||3||
The sins of countless lifetimes are erased, and one is protected by the Lord Himself.
He is our Mother, Father, Friend and Sibling; O servant Nanak, meditate on the Lord, Har, Har. ||4||1||13||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Bibhaas, Partaal:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Chant the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, Raam.
Conflict, suffering, greed and emotional attachment shall be dispelled, and the fever of egotism shall be relieved. ||1||Pause||
Renounce your selfishness, and grasp the feet of the Saints; your mind shall be sanctified, and your sins shall be taken away. ||1||
Nanak, the child, does not know anything at all. O God, please protect me; You are my Mother and Father. ||2||1||14||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
I have taken the Shelter and Support of the Lord's Lotus Feet.
You are Lofty and Exalted, Grand and Infinite, O my Lord and Master; You alone are above all. ||1||Pause||
He is the Support of the breath of life, the Destroyer of pain, the Giver of discriminating understanding. ||1||
So bow down in respect to the Savior Lord; worship and adore the One God.
Bathing in the dust of the feet of the Saints, Nanak is blessed with countless comforts. ||2||2||15||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 016

Prabhaatee, Ashtapadees, First Mehl, Bibhaas:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The insanity of duality has driven the mind insane.
In false greed, life is wasting away.
Duality clings to the mind; it cannot be restrained.
The True Guru saves us, implanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord within. ||1||
Without subduing the mind, Maya cannot be subdued.
The One who created this, He alone understands. Contemplating the Word of the Shabad, one is carried across the terrifying world-ocean. ||1||Pause||
Gathering the wealth of Maya, kings become proud and arrogant.
But this Maya that they love so much shall not go along with them in the end.
There are so many colors and flavors of attachment to Maya.
Except for the Name, no one has any friend or companion. ||2||
According to one's own mind, one sees the minds of others.
According to one's desires, one's condition is determined.
According to one's actions, one is focused and tuned in.
Seeking the advice of the True Guru, one finds the home of peace and poise. ||3||
In music and song, the mind is caught by the love of duality.
Filled with deception deep within, one suffers in terrible pain.
Meeting with the True Guru, one is blessed with clear understanding,
and remains lovingly attuned to the True Name. ||4||
Through the True Word of the Shabad, one practices Truth.
He sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord, through the True Word of His Bani.
He dwells in the home of his own heart deep within, and obtains the immortal status.
Then, he is blessed with honor in the Court of the True Lord. ||5||
Without serving the Guru, there is no devotional worship,
even though one may make all sorts of efforts.
If one eradicates egotism and selfishness through the Shabad,
the Immaculate Naam comes to abide in the mind. ||6||
In this world, the practice of the Shabad is the most excellent occupation.
Without the Shabad, everything else is the darkness of emotional attachment.
Through the Shabad, the Naam is enshrined within the heart.
Through the Shabad, one obtains clear understanding and the door of salvation. ||7||
There is no other Creator except the All-seeing Lord God.
The True Lord Himself is Infinite and Incomparably Beautiful.
Through the Lord's Name, one obtains the most sublime and exalted state.
O Nanak, how rare are those humble beings, who seek and find the Lord. ||8||1||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Emotional attachment to Maya is spread out all over the world.
Seeing a beautiful woman, the man is overcome with sexual desire.
His love for his children and gold steadily increases.
He sees everything as his own, but he does not own the One Lord. ||1||
I meditate as I chant on such a mala,
that I rise above pleasure and pain; I attain the most wondrous devotional worship of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
O Treasure of Virtue, Your limits cannot be found.
Through the True Word of the Shabad, I am absorbed into You.
You Yourself created the comings and goings of reincarnation.
They alone are devotees, who focus their consciousness on You. ||2||
Spiritual wisdom and meditation on the Lord, the Lord of Nirvaanaa
\- without meeting the True Guru, no one knows this.
The Lord's Light fills the sacred pools of all beings.
I am a sacrifice to the Embodiment of Bliss. ||3||
Through the Guru's Teachings, one achieves loving devotional worship.
The Shabad burns away egotism from within.

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 017

The wandering mind is restrained and held in its place.
The True Name is enshrined in the mind. ||4||
The exciting and intoxicating worldly plays come to an end,
for those who accept the Guru's Teachings, and become lovingly attuned to the One Lord.
Seeing this, the fire in the water is extinguished.
They alone realize this, who are blessed by great good fortune. ||5||
Serving the True Guru, doubt is dispelled.
Those who are lovingly attuned to the True Lord remain awake and aware night and day.
They know the One Lord, and no other.
Serving the Giver of peace, they become immaculate. ||6||
Selfless service and intuitive awareness come by reflecting upon the Word of the Shabad.
Chanting, intensive meditation and austere self-discipline come by subduing the ego.
One becomes Jivan-mukta - liberated while yet alive, by listening to the Shabad.
Living a truthful way of life, one finds true peace. ||7||
The Giver of peace is the Eradicator of pain.
I cannot conceive of serving any other.
I place my body, mind and wealth in offering before Him.
Says Nanak, I have tasted the supreme, sublime Essence of the Lord. ||8||2||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
You may perform exercises of inner purification, and fire up the furnace of the Kundalini, inhaling and exhaling and holding the breath.
Without the True Guru, you will not understand; deluded by doubt, you shall drown and die.
The spiritually blind are filled with filth and pollution; they may wash, but the filth within shall never depart.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all their actions are useless, like the magician who deceives through illuions. ||1||
The merits of the six religious rituals are obtained through the Immaculate Naam.
You, O Lord, are the Ocean of virtue; I am so unworthy. ||1||Pause||
Running around chasing the entanglements of Maya is an evil-minded act of corruption.
The fool makes a show of his self-conceit; he does not know how to behave.
The self-willed manmukh is enticed by his desires for Maya; his words are useless and empty.
The ritual cleansings of the sinner are fradulent; his rituals and decorations are useless and empty. ||2||
False is the wisdom of the mind; its actions inspire useless disputes.
The false are filled with egotism; they do not obtain the sublime taste of their Lord and Master.
Without the Name, whatever else they do is tasteless and insipid.
Associating with their enemies, they are plundered and ruined. Their speech is poison, and their lives are useless. ||3||
Do not be deluded by doubt; do not invite your own death.
Serve the True Guru, and you shall be at peace forever.
Without the True Guru, no one is liberated.
They come and go in reincarnation; they die, only to be reborn and die again. ||4||
This body wanders, caught in the three dispositions.
It is afflicted by sorrow and suffering.
So serve the One who has no mother or father.
Desire and selfishness shall depart from within. ||5||
Wherever I look, I see Him.
Without meeting the True Guru, no one is liberated.
Enshrine the True One in your heart; this is the most excellent action.
All other hypocritical actions and devotions bring only ruin. ||6||
When one is rid of duality, then he realizes the Word of the Shabad.
Inside and out, he knows the One Lord.
This is the most Excellent Wisdom of the Shabad.
Ashes fall on the heads of those who are in duality. ||7||
To praise the Lord through the Guru's Teachings is the most excellent action.
In the Society of the Saints, contemplate the Glories of God and His spiritual wisdom.
Whoever subdues his mind, knows the state of being dead while yet alive.
O Nanak, by His Grace, the Gracious Lord is realized. ||8||3||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 018

Prabhaatee, First Mehl, Dakhnee:
Ahalyaa was the wife of Gautam the seer. Seeing her, Indra was enticed.
When he received a thousand marks of disgrace on his body, then he felt regret in his mind. ||1||
O Siblings of Destiny, no one knowingly makes mistakes.
He alone is mistaken, whom the Lord Himself makes so. He alone understands, whom the Lord causes to understand. ||1||Pause||
Harichand, the king and ruler of his land, did not appreciate the value of his pre-ordained destiny.
If he had known that it was a mistake, he would not have made such a show of giving in charity, and he would not have been sold in the market. ||2||
The Lord took the form of a dwarf, and asked for some land.
If Bal the king has recognized Him, he would not have been deceived, and sent to the underworld. ||3||
Vyaas taught and warned the king Janmayjaa not to do three things.
But he performed the sacred feast and killed eighteen Brahmins; the record of one's past deeds cannot be erased. ||4||
I do not try to calculate the account; I accept the Hukam of God's Command. I speak with intuitive love and respect.
No matter what happens, I will praise the Lord. It is all Your Glorious Greatness, O Lord. ||5||
The Gurmukh remains detached; filth never attaches itself to him. He remains forever in God's Sanctuary.
The foolish self-willed manmukh does not think of the future; he is overtaken by pain, and then he regrets. ||6||
The Creator who created this creation acts, and causes all to act.
O Lord, egotistical pride does not depart from the soul. Falling into egotistical pride, one is ruined. ||7||
Everyone makes mistakes; only the Creator does not make mistakes.
O Nanak, salvation comes through the True Name. By Guru's Grace, one is released. ||8||4||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
To chant and listen to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is my Support.
Worthless entanglements are ended and gone.
The self-willed manmukh, caught in duality, loses his honor.
Except for the Name, I have no other at all. ||1||
Listen, O blind, foolish, idiotic mind.
Aren't you ashamed of your comings and goings in reincarnation? Without the Guru, you shall drown, over and over again. ||1||Pause||
This mind is ruined by its attachment to Maya.
The Command of the Primal Lord is pre-ordained. Before whom should I cry?
Only a few, as Gurmukh, understand this.
Without the Naam, no one is liberated. ||2||
People wander lost, staggering and stumbling through 8.4 million incarnations.
Without knowing the Guru, they cannot escape the noose of Death.
This mind, from one moment to the next, goes from the heavens to the underworld.
The Gurmukh contemplates the Naam, and is released. ||3||
When God sends His Summons, there is no time to delay.
When one dies in the Word of the Shabad, he lives in peace.
Without the Guru, no one understands.
The Lord Himself acts, and inspires all to act. ||4||
Inner conflict comes to an end, singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Through the Perfect True Guru, one is intuitively absorbed into the Lord.
This wobbling, unsteady mind is stabilized,
and one lives the lifestyle of true actions. ||5||
If someone is false within his own self, then how can he be pure?
How rare are those who wash with the Shabad.
How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, live the Truth.
Their comings and goings in reincarnation are over and done. ||6||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 019

Those who eat and drink the Fear of God, find the most excellent peace.
Associating with the humble servants of the Lord, they are carried across.
They speak the Truth, and lovingly inspire others to speak it as well.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad is the most excellent occupation. ||7||
Those who take the Lord's Praises as their karma and Dharma, their honor and worship service
\- their sexual desire and anger are burnt off in the fire.
They taste the sublime essence of the Lord, and their minds are drenched with it.
Prays Nanak, there is no other at all. ||8||5||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Chant the Lord's Name, and worship Him deep within your being.
Contemplate the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and no other. ||1||
The One is pervading all places.
I do not see any other; unto whom should I offer worship? ||1||Pause||
I place my mind and body in offering before You; I dedicate my soul to You.
As it pleases You, You save me, Lord; this is my prayer. ||2||
True is that tongue which is delighted by the sublime essence of the Lord.
Following the Guru's Teachings, one is saved in the Sanctuary of God. ||3||
My God created religious rituals.
He placed the glory of the Naam above these rituals. ||4||
The four great blessings are under the control of the True Guru.
When the first three are put aside, one is blessed with the fourth. ||5||
Those whom the True Guru blesses with liberation and meditation
realize the Lord's State, and become sublime. ||6||
Their minds and bodies are cooled and soothed; the Guru imparts this understanding.
Who can estimate the value of those whom God has exalted? ||7||
Says Nanak, the Guru has imparted this understanding;
without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, no one is emancipated. ||8||6||
Prabhaatee, First Mehl:
Some are forgiven by the Primal Lord God; the Perfect Guru makes the true making.
Those who are attuned to the Love of the Lord are imbued with Truth forever; their pains are dispelled, and they obtain honor. ||1||
False are the clever tricks of the evil-minded.
They shall disappear in no time at all. ||1||Pause||
Pain and suffering afflict the self-willed manmukh. The pains of the self-willed manmukh shall never depart.
The Gurmukh recognizes the Giver of pleasure and pain. He merges in His Sanctuary. ||2||
The self-willed manmukhs do not know loving devotional worship; they are insane, rotting away in their egotism.
This mind flies in an instant from the heavens to the underworld, as long as it does not know the Word of the Shabad. ||3||
The world has become hungry and thirsty; without the True Guru, it is not satisfied.
Merging intuitively in the Celestial Lord, peace is obtained, and one goes to the Lord's Court wearing robes of honor. ||4||
The Lord in His Court is Himself the Knower and Seer; the Word of the Guru's Bani is Immaculate.
He Himself is the Awareness of Truth; He Himself understands the state of nirvaanaa. ||5||
He made the waves of water, the fire and the air, and then joined the three together to form the world.
He blessed these elements with such power, that they remain subject to His Command. ||6||
How rare are those humble beings in this world, whom the Lord tests and places in His Treasury.
They rise above social status and color, and rid themselves of possessiveness and greed. ||7||
Attuned to the Naam, the Name of the Lord, they are like immaculate sacred shrines; they are rid of the pain and pollution of egotism.
Nanak washes the feet of those who, as Gurmukh, love the True Lord. ||8||7||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 020

Prabhaatee, Third Mehl, Bibhaas:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
By Guru's Grace, see that the Temple of the Lord is within you.
The Temple of the Lord is found through the Word of the Shabad; contemplate the Lord's Name. ||1||
O my mind, be joyfully attuned to the Shabad.
True is devotional worship, and True is the Temple of the Lord; True is His Manifest Glory. ||1||Pause||
This body is the Temple of the Lord, in which the jewel of spiritual wisdom is revealed.
The self-willed manmukhs do not know anything at all; they do not believe that the Lord's Temple is within. ||2||
The Dear Lord created the Temple of the Lord; He adorns it by His Will.
All act according to their pre-ordained destiny; no one can erase it. ||3||
Contemplating the Shabad, peace is obtained, loving the True Name.
The Temple of the Lord is embellished with the Shabad; it is an Infinite Fortress of God. ||4||
This world is the Temple of the Lord; without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
The blind and foolish self-willed manmukhs worship in the love of duality. ||5||
One's body and social status do not go along to that place, where all are called to account.
Those who are attuned to Truth are saved; those in the love of duality are miserable. ||6||
The treasure of the Naam is within the Temple of the Lord. The idiotic fools do not realize this.
By Guru's Grace, I have realized this. I keep the Lord enshrined within my heart. ||7||
Those who are attuned to the love of the Shabad know the Guru, through the Word of the Guru's Bani.
Sacred, pure and immaculate are those humble beings who are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||8||
The Temple of the Lord is the Lord's Shop; He embellishes it with the Word of His Shabad.
In that shop is the merchandise of the One Name; the Gurmukhs adorn themselves with it. ||9||
The mind is like iron slag, within the Temple of the Lord; it is lured by the love of duality.
Meeting with the Guru, the Philosopher's Stone, the mind is transformed into gold. Its value cannot be described. ||10||
The Lord abides within the Temple of the Lord. He is pervading in all.
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs trade in the merchandise of Truth. ||11||1||
Prabhaatee, Third Mehl:
Those who remain awake and aware in the Love and Fear of God, rid themselves of the filth and pollution of egotism.
They remain awake and aware forever, and protect their homes, by beating and driving out the five thieves. ||1||
O my mind, as Gurmukh, meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
O mind, do only those deeds which will lead you to the Path of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
The celestial melody wells up in the Gurmukh, and the pains of egotism are taken away.
The Name of the Lord abides in the mind, as one intuitively sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings - their faces are radiant and beautiful. They keep the Lord enshrined in their hearts.
Here and hereafter, they find absolute peace; chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, they are carried across to the other shore. ||3||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 021

In egotism, one cannot remain awake and aware, and one's devotional worship of the Lord is not accepted.
The self-willed manmukhs find no place in the Court of the Lord; they do their deeds in the love of duality. ||4||
Cursed is the food, and cursed are the clothes, of those who are attached to the love of duality.
They are like maggots in manure, sinking into manure. In death and rebirth, they are wasted away to ruin. ||5||
I am a sacrifice to those who meet with the True Guru.
I shall continue to associate with them; devoted to Truth, I am absorbed in Truth. ||6||
By perfect destiny, the Guru is found. He cannot be found by any efforts.
Through the True Guru, intuitive wisdom wells up; through the Word of the Shabad, egotism is burnt away. ||7||
O my mind, hurry to the Sanctuary of the Lord; He is Potent to do everything.
O Nanak, never forget the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Whatever He does, comes to pass. ||8||2||7||2||9||
Bibhaas, Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl, Ashtapadees:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Mother, father, siblings, children and spouse
\- involved with them, people eat the food of bliss.
The mind is entangled in sweet emotional attachment.
Those who seek God's Glorious Virtues are the support of my breath of life. ||1||
My One Lord is the Inner-Knower, the Searcher of hearts.
He alone is my Support; He is my only Protection. My Great Lord and Master is over and above the heads of kings. ||1||Pause||
I have broken my ties to that deceitful serpent.
The Guru has told me that it is false and fraudulent.
Its face is sweet, but it tastes very bitter.
My mind remains satisfied with the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||2||
I have broken my ties with greed and emotional attachment.
The Merciful Guru has rescued me from them.
These cheating thieves have plundered so many homes.
The Merciful Guru has protected and saved me. ||3||
I have no dealings whatsoever with sexual desire and anger.
I listen to the Guru's Teachings.
Wherever I look, I see the most horrible goblins.
My Guru, the Lord of the World, has saved me from them. ||4||
I have made widows of the ten sensory organs.
The Guru has told me that these pleasures are the fires of corruption.
Those who associate with them go to hell.
The Guru has saved me; I am lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||5||
I have forsaken the advice of my ego.
The Guru has told me that this is foolish stubbornness.
This ego is homeless; it shall never find a home.
The Guru has saved me; I am lovingly attuned to the Lord. ||6||
I have become alienated from these people.
We cannot both live together in one home.
Grasping the hem of the Guru's Robe, I have come to God.
Please be fair with me, All-knowing Lord God. ||7||
God smiled at me and spoke, passing judgement.
He made all the demons perform service for me.
You are my Lord and Master; all this home belongs to You.
Says Nanak, the Guru has passed judgement. ||8||1||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 022

Within the mind dwell anger and massive ego.
Worship services are performed with great pomp and ceremony.
Ritual cleansing baths are taken, and sacred marks are applied to the body.
But still, the filth and pollution within never depart. ||1||
No one has ever found God in this way.
The sacred mudras - ritualistic hand gestures - are made, but the mind remains enticed by Maya. ||1||Pause||
They commit sins, under the influence of the five thieves.
They bathe at sacred shrines, and claim that everything has been washed off.
Then they commit them again, without fear of the consequences.
The sinners are bound and gagged, and taken to the City of Death. ||2||
The ankle-bells shake and the cymbals vibrate,
but those who have deception within wander lost like demons.
By destroying its hole, the snake is not killed.
God, who created you, knows everything. ||3||
You worship fire and wear saffron colored robes.
Stung by your misfortune, you abandon your home.
Leaving your own country, you wander in foreign lands.
But you bring the five rejects with you. ||4||
You have split your ears, and now you steal crumbs.
You beg from door to door, but you fail to be satisfied.
You have abandoned your own wife, but now you sneak glances at other women.
God is not found by wearing religious robes; you are utterly miserable! ||5||
He does not speak; he is on silence.
But he is filled with desire; he is made to wander in reincarnation.
Abstaining from food, his body suffers in pain.
He does not realize the Hukam of the Lord's Command; he is afflicted by possessiveness. ||6||
Without the True Guru, no one has attained the supreme status.
Go ahead and ask all the Vedas and the Simritees.
The self-willed manmukhs do useless deeds.
They are like a house of sand, which cannot stand. ||7||
One unto whom the Lord of the Universe becomes Merciful,
sews the Word of the Guru's Shabad into his robes.
Out of millions, it is rare that such a Saint is seen.
O Nanak, with him, we are carried across. ||8||
If one has such good destiny, then the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is obtained.
He saves himself, and carries across all his family as well. ||1||SECOND PAUSE||2||
Prabhaatee, Fifth Mehl:
Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, all the sins are erased.
The accounts held by the Righteous Judge of Dharma are torn up.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
I have found the Sublime Essence of the Lord. The Supreme Lord God has melted into my heart. ||1||
Dwelling on the Lord, Har, Har, I have found peace.
Your slaves seek the Sanctuary of Your Feet. ||1||Pause||
The cycle of reincarnation is ended, and darkness is dispelled.
The Guru has revealed the door of liberation.
My mind and body are forever imbued with loving devotion to the Lord.
Now I know God, because He has made me know Him. ||2||
He is contained in each and every heart.
Without Him, there is no one at all.
Hatred, conflict, fear and doubt have been eliminated.
God, the Soul of Pure Goodness, has manifested His Righteousness. ||3||
He has rescued me from the most dangerous waves.
Separated from Him for countless lifetimes, I am united with Him once again.
Chanting, intense meditation and strict self-discipline are the contemplation of the Naam.
My Lord and Master has blessed me with His Glance of Grace. ||4||
Bliss, peace and salvation are found in that place,

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 023

where the servants of the Lord of the World abide.
God, the Lord of the World, is pleased and satisfied with me.
My disharmony with Him of so many lifetimes is ended. ||5||
Burnt offerings, sacred feasts, intense meditations with the body upside-down, worship services
and taking millions of cleansing baths at sacred shrines of pilgrimage
\- the merits of all these are obtained by enshrining the Lord's Lotus Feet within the heart, even for an instant.
Meditating on the Lord of the Universe, all one's affairs are resolved. ||6||
God's Place is the highest of the high.
The Lord's humble servants intuitively focus their meditation on Him.
I long for the dust of the slaves of the Lord's slaves.
My Beloved Lord is overflowing with all powers. ||7||
My Beloved Lord, my Mother and Father, is always near.
O my Friend and Companion, You are my Trusted Support.
God takes His slaves by the hand, and makes them His Own.
Nanak lives by meditating on the Lord, the Treasure of Virtue. ||8||3||2||7||12||
Bibhaas, Prabhaatee, The Word Of Devotee Kabeer Jee:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
My anxious fears of death and rebirth have been taken away.
The Celestial Lord has shown His Love for me. ||1||
The Divine Light has dawned, and darkness has been dispelled.
Contemplating the Lord, I have obtained the Jewel of His Name. ||1||Pause||
Pain runs far away from that place where there is bliss.
The jewel of the mind is focused and attuned to the essence of reality. ||2||
Whatever happens is by the Pleasure of Your Will.
Whoever understands this, is intuitively merged in the Lord. ||3||
Says Kabeer, my sins have been obliterated.
My mind has merged into the Lord, the Life of the World. ||4||1||
PRABHAATEE:
If the Lord Allah lives only in the mosque, then to whom does the rest of the world belong?
According to the Hindus, the Lord's Name abides in the idol, but there is no truth in either of these claims. ||1||
O Allah, O Raam, I live by Your Name.
Please show mercy to me, O Master. ||1||Pause||
The God of the Hindus lives in the southern lands, and the God of the Muslims lives in the west.
So search in your heart - look deep into your heart of hearts; this is the home and the place where God lives. ||2||
The Brahmins observe twenty-four fasts during the year, and the Muslims fast during the month of Ramadaan.
The Muslims set aside eleven months, and claim that the treasure is only in the one month. ||3||
What is the use of bathing at Orissa? Why do the Muslims bow their heads in the mosque?
If someone has deception in his heart, what good is it for him to utter prayers? And what good is it for him to go on pilgrimage to Mecca? ||4||
You fashioned all these men and women, Lord. All these are Your Forms.
Kabeer is the child of God, Allah, Raam. All the Gurus and prophets are mine. ||5||
Says Kabeer, listen, O men and women: seek the Sanctuary of the One.
Chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O mortals, and you shall surely be carried across. ||6||2||
PRABHAATEE:
First, Allah created the Light; then, by His Creative Power, He made all mortal beings.
From the One Light, the entire universe welled up. So who is good, and who is bad? ||1||

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 024

O people, O Siblings of Destiny, do not wander deluded by doubt.
The Creation is in the Creator, and the Creator is in the Creation, totally pervading and permeating all places. ||1||Pause||
The clay is the same, but the Fashioner has fashioned it in various ways.
There is nothing wrong with the pot of clay - there is nothing wrong with the Potter. ||2||
The One True Lord abides in all; by His making, everything is made.
Whoever realizes the Hukam of His Command, knows the One Lord. He alone is said to be the Lord's slave. ||3||
The Lord Allah is Unseen; He cannot be seen. The Guru has blessed me with this sweet molasses.
Says Kabeer, my anxiety and fear have been taken away; I see the Immaculate Lord pervading everywhere. ||4||3||
PRABHAATEE:
Do not say that the Vedas, the Bible and the Koran are false. Those who do not contemplate them are false.
You say that the One Lord is in all, so why do you kill chickens? ||1||
O Mullah, tell me: is this God's Justice?
The doubts of your mind have not been dispelled. ||1||Pause||
You seize a living creature, and then bring it home and kill its body; you have killed only the clay.
The light of the soul passes into another form. So tell me, what have you killed? ||2||
And what good are your purifications? Why do you bother to wash your face? And why do you bother to bow your head in the mosque?
Your heart is full of hypocrisy; what good are your prayers or your pilgrimage to Mecca? ||3||
You are impure; you do not understand the Pure Lord. You do not know His Mystery.
Says Kabeer, you have missed out on paradise; your mind is set on hell. ||4||4||
PRABHAATEE:
Hear my prayer, Lord; You are the Divine Light of the Divine, the Primal, All-pervading Master.
The Siddhas in Samaadhi have not found Your limits. They hold tight to the Protection of Your Sanctuary. ||1||
Worship and adoration of the Pure, Primal Lord comes by worshipping the True Guru, O Siblings of Destiny.
Standing at His Door, Brahma studies the Vedas, but he cannot see the Unseen Lord. ||1||Pause||
With the oil of knowledge about the essence of reality, and the wick of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, this lamp illluminates my body.
I have applied the Light of the Lord of the Universe, and lit this lamp. God the Knower knows. ||2||
The Unstruck Melody of the Panch Shabad, the Five Primal Sounds, vibrates and resounds. I dwell with the Lord of the World.
Kabeer, Your slave, performs this Aartee, this lamp-lit worship service for You, O Formless Lord of Nirvaanaa. ||3||5||
Prabhaatee, The Word Of Devotee Naam Dayv Jee:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
The mind alone knows the state of the mind; I tell it to the Knowing Lord.
I chant the Name of the Lord, the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts - why should I be afraid? ||1||
My mind is pierced through by the love of the Lord of the World.
My God is All-pervading everywhere. ||1||Pause||
The mind is the shop, the mind is the town, and the mind is the shopkeeper.
The mind abides in various forms, wandering all across the world. ||2||
This mind is imbued with the Word of the Guru's Shabad, and duality is easily overcome.

## Section 34 - Raag Prabhaatee - Part 025

He Himself is the Commander; all are under His Command. The Fearless Lord looks on all alike. ||3||
That humble being who knows, and meditates on the Supreme Primal Being - his word becomes eternal.
Says Naam Dayv, I have found the Invisible, Wondrous Lord, the Life of the World, within my heart. ||4||1||
PRABHAATEE:
He existed in the beginning, in the primeval age, and all throughout the ages; His limits cannot be known.
The Lord is pervading and permeating amongst all; this is how His Form can be described. ||1||
The Lord of the Universe appears when the Word of His Shabad is chanted.
My Lord is the Embodiment of Bliss. ||1||Pause||
The beautiful fragrance of sandalwood emanates from the sandalwood tree, and attaches to the other trees of the forest.
God, the Primal Source of everything, is like the sandalwood tree; He transforms us woody trees into fragrant sandalwood. ||2||
You, O Lord, are the Philosopher's Stone, and I am iron; associating with You, I am transformed into gold.
You are Merciful; You are the gem and the jewel. Naam Dayv is absorbed in the Truth. ||3||2||
PRABHAATEE:
The Primal Being has no ancestry; He has staged this play.
God is hidden deep within each and every heart. ||1||
No one knows the Light of the soul.
Whatever I do, is known to You, Lord. ||1||Pause||
Just as the pitcher is made from clay,
everything is made from the Beloved Divine Creator Himself. ||2||
The mortal's actions hold the soul in the bondage of karma.
Whatever he does, he does on his own. ||3||
Prays Naam Dayv, whatever this soul wants, it obtains.
Whoever abides in the Lord, becomes immortal. ||4||3||
Prabhaatee, The Word Of Devotee Baynee Jee:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
You rub your body with sandalwood oil, and place basil leaves on your forehead.
But you hold a knife in the hand of your heart.
You look like a thug; pretending to meditate, you pose like a crane.
You try to look like a Vaishnaav, but the breath of life escapes through your mouth. ||1||
You pray for hours to God the Beautiful.
But your gaze is evil, and your nights are wasted in conflict. ||1||Pause||
You perform daily cleansing rituals,
wear two loin-cloths, perform religious rituals and put only milk in your mouth.
But in your heart, you have drawn out the sword.
You routinely steal the property of others. ||2||
You worship the stone idol, and paint ceremonial marks of Ganesha.
You remain awake throughout the night, pretending to worship God.
You dance, but your consciousness is filled with evil.
You are lewd and depraved - this is such an unrighteous dance! ||3||
You sit on a deer-skin, and chant on your mala.
You put the sacred mark, the tilak, on your forehead.
You wear the rosary beads of Shiva around your neck, but your heart is filled with falsehood.
You are lewd and depraved - you do not chant God's Name. ||4||
Whoever does not realize the essence of the soul
\- all his religious actions are hollow and false.
Says Baynee, as Gurmukh, meditate.
Without the True Guru, you shall not find the Way. ||5||1||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/33">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">33. Raag Kalyaan</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/35">
          <span class="pr-2">35. Raag Jaijaavantee</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
