---
title: "36. Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl & Fifth Mehl"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/35">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">35. Raag Jaijaavantee</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/37">
          <span class="pr-2">37. Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl & Fifth Mehl - Part 001

You believed that this body was permanent, but it shall turn to dust.
Why don't you chant the Name of the Lord, you shameless fool? ||1||
Let devotional worship of the Lord enter into your heart, and abandon the intellectualism of your mind.
O Servant Nanak, this is the way to live in the world. ||2||4||
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl:
You study the scriptures, say your prayers and argue;
you worship stones and sit like a crane, pretending to meditate.
You speak lies and well-ornamented falsehood,
and recite your daily prayers three times a day.
The mala is around your neck, and the sacred tilak mark is on your forehead.
You wear two loin cloths, and keep your head covered.
If you know God and the nature of karma,
you know that all these rituals and beliefs are useless.
Says Nanak, meditate on the Lord with faith.
Without the True Guru, no one finds the Way. ||1||
The mortal's life is fruitless, as long as he does not know God.
Only a few, by Guru's Grace, cross over the world-ocean.
The Creator, the Cause of causes, is All-powerful. Thus speaks Nanak, after deep deliberation.
The Creation is under the control of the Creator. By His Power, He sustains and supports it. ||2||
The Shabad is Yoga, the Shabad is spiritual wisdom; the Shabad is the Vedas for the Brahmin.
The Shabad is heroic bravery for the Khshaatriya; the Shabad is service to others for the Soodra.
The Shabad for all is the Shabad, the Word of the One God, for one who knows this secret.
Nanak is the slave of the Divine, Immaculate Lord. ||3||
The One Lord is the Divinity of all divinities. He is the Divinity of the soul.
Nanak is the slave of that one who knows the Secrets of the soul and the Supreme Lord God. He is the Divine Immaculate Lord Himself. ||4||
Shalok Sehskritee , Fifth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying. Beyond Birth. Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
Who is the mother, and who is the father? Who is the son, and what is the pleasure of marriage?
Who is the brother, friend, companion and relative? Who is emotionally attached to the family?
Who is restlessly attached to beauty? It leaves, as soon as we see it.
Only the meditative remembrance of God remains with us. O Nanak, it brings the blessings of the Saints, the sons of the Imperishable Lord. ||1||

## Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl & Fifth Mehl - Part 002

Cursed is loving attachment to one's mother and father; cursed is loving attachment to one's siblings and relatives.
Cursed is attachment to the joys of family life with one's spouse and children.
Cursed is attachment to household affairs.
Only loving attachment to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is True. Nanak dwells there in peace. ||2||
The body is false; its power is temporary.
It grows old; its love for Maya increases greatly.
The human is only a temporary guest in the home of the body, but he has high hopes.
The Righteous Judge of Dharma is relentless; he counts each and every breath.
The human body, so difficult to obtain, has fallen into the deep dark pit of emotional attachment. O Nanak, its only support is God, the Essence of Reality.
O God, Lord of the World, Lord of the Universe, Master of the Universe, please be kind to me. ||3||
This fragile body-fortress is made up of water, plastered with blood and wrapped in skin.
It has nine gates, but no doors; it is supported by pillars of wind, the channels of the breath.
The ignorant person does not meditate in remembrance on the Lord of the Universe; he thinks that this body is permanent.
This precious body is saved and redeemed in the Sanctuary of the Holy, O Nanak,
chanting the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, Har, Har, Har, Haray. ||4||
O Glorious, Eternal and Imperishable, Perfect and Abundantly Compassionate,
Profound and Unfathomable, Lofty and Exalted, All-knowing and Infinite Lord God.
O Lover of Your devoted servants, Your Feet are a Sanctuary of Peace.
O Master of the masterless, Helper of the helpless, Nanak seeks Your Sanctuary. ||5||
Seeing the deer, the hunter aims his weapons.
But if one is protected by the Lord of the World, O Nanak, not a hair on his head will be touched. ||6||
He may be surrounded on all four sides by servants and powerful warriors;
he may dwell in a lofty place, difficult to approach, and never even think of death.
But when the Order comes from the Primal Lord God, O Nanak, even an ant can take away his breath of life. ||7||
To be imbued and attuned to the Word of the Shabad; to be kind and compassionate; to sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises - these are the most worthwhile actions in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
In this way, one's inner doubts and emotional attachments are dispelled.
God is pervading and permeating all places.
So obtain the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; He dwells upon the tongues of the Holy.
O Nanak, meditate and chant the Name of the Beloved Lord, Har, Har, Har, Haray. ||8||
Beauty fades away, islands fade away, the sun, moon, stars and sky fade away.
The earth, mountains, forests and lands fade away.
One's spouse, children, siblings and loved friends fade away.
Gold and jewels and the incomparable beauty of Maya fade away.
Only the Eternal, Unchanging Lord does not fade away.
O Nanak, only the humble Saints are steady and stable forever. ||9||
Do not delay in practicing righteousness; delay in committing sins.
Implant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within yourself, and abandon greed.
In the Sanctuary of the Saints, the sins are erased. The character of righteousness is received by that person,
O Nanak, with whom the Lord is pleased and satisfied. ||10||
The person of shallow understanding is dying in emotional attachment; he is engrossed in pursuits of pleasure with his wife.
With youthful beauty and golden earrings,
wondrous mansions, decorations and clothes - this is how Maya clings to him.
O Eternal, Unchanging, Benevolent Lord God, O Sanctuary of the Saints, Nanak humbly bows to You. ||11||
If there is birth, then there is death. If there is pleasure, then there is pain. If there is enjoyment, then there is disease.
If there is high, then there is low. If there is small, then there is great.

## Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl & Fifth Mehl - Part 003

If there is power, then there is pride. If there is egotistical pride, then there will be a fall.
Engrossed in worldly ways, one is ruined.
Meditating and vibrating on the Lord of the Universe in the Company of the Holy, you shall become steady and stable. Nanak vibrates and meditates on the Lord God. ||12||
By the Grace of God, genuine understanding comes to the mind.
The intellect blossoms forth, and one finds a place in the realm of celestial bliss.
The senses are brought under control, and pride is abandoned.
The heart is cooled and soothed, and the wisdom of the Saints is implanted within.
Reincarnation is ended, and the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan is obtained.
O Nanak, the musical instrument of the Word of the Shabad vibrates and resounds within. ||13||
The Vedas preach and recount God's Glories; people hear them by various ways and means.
The Merciful Lord, Har, Har, implants spiritual wisdom within.
Nanak begs for the Gift of the Naam, the Name of the Lord. The Guru is the Great Giver, the Lord of the World. ||14||
Do not worry so much about your mother, father and siblings. Do not worry so much about other people.
Do not worry about your spouse, children and friends. You are obsessed with your involvements in Maya.
The One Lord God is Kind and Compassionate, O Nanak. He is the Cherisher and Nurturer of all living beings. ||15||
Wealth is temporary; conscious existence is temporary; hopes of all sorts are temporary.
The bonds of love, attachment, egotism, doubt, Maya and the pollution of corruption are temporary.
The mortal passes through the fire of the womb of reincarnation countless times. He does not remember the Lord in meditation; his understanding is polluted.
O Lord of the Universe, when You grant Your Grace, even sinners are saved. Nanak dwells in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||16||
You may drop down from the mountains, and fall into the nether regions of the underworld, or be burnt in the blazing fire,
or swept away by the unfathomable waves of water; but the worst pain of all is household anxiety, which is the source of the cycle of death and rebirth.
No matter what you do, you cannot break its bonds, O Nanak. Man's only Support, Anchor and Mainstay is the Word of the Shabad, and the Holy, Friendly Saints. ||17||
Excruciating pain, countless killings, reincarnation, poverty and terrible misery
are all destroyed by meditating in remembrance on the Lord's Name, O Nanak, just as fire reduces piles of wood to ashes. ||18||
Meditating in remembrance on the Lord, the darkness is illuminated. Dwelling on His Glorious Praises, the ugly sins are destroyed.
Enshrining the Lord deep within the heart, and with the immaculate karma of doing good deeds, one strikes fear into the demons.
The cycle of coming and going in reincarnation is ended, absolute peace is obtained, and the Fruitful Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
He is Potent to give Protection, He is the Lover of His Saints. O Nanak, the Lord God blesses all with bliss. ||19||
Those who were left behind - the Lord brings them to the front. He fulfills the hopes of the hopeless.
He makes the poor rich, and cures the illnesses of the ill.
He blesses His devotees with devotion. They sing the Kirtan of the Praises of the Lord's Name.
O Nanak, those who serve the Guru find the Supreme Lord God, the Great Giver||20||
He gives Support to the unsupported. The Name of the Lord is the Wealth of the poor.
The Lord of the Universe is the Master of the masterless; the Beautiful-haired Lord is the Power of the weak.
The Lord is Merciful to all beings, Eternal and Unchanging, the Family of the meek and humble.
The All-knowing, Perfect, Primal Lord God is the Lover of His devotees, the Embodiment of Mercy.

## Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl & Fifth Mehl - Part 004

The Supreme Lord God, the Transcendent, Luminous Lord, dwells in each and every heart.
Nanak begs for this blessing from the Merciful Lord, that he may never forget Him, never forget Him. ||21||
I have no power; I do not serve You, and I do not love You, O Supreme Sublime Lord God.
By Your Grace, Nanak meditates on the Naam, the Name of the Merciful Lord, Har, Har. ||22||
The Lord feeds and sustains all living beings; He blesses them gifts of restful peace and fine clothes.
He created the jewel of human life, with all its cleverness and intelligence.
By His Grace, mortals abide in peace and bliss.
O Nanak, meditating in remembrance on the Lord, Har, Har, Haray,
the mortal is released from attachment to the world. ||23||
The kings of the earth are eating up the blessings of the good karma of their past lives.
Those cruel-minded rulers who oppress the people, O Nanak, shall suffer in pain for a very long time. ||24||
Those who meditate in remembrance on the Lord in their hearts, look upon even pain as God's Grace.
The healthy person is very sick, if he does not remember the Lord, the Embodiment of Mercy. ||25||
To sing the Kirtan of God's Praises is the righteous duty incurred by taking birth in this human body.
The Naam, the Name of the Lord, is Ambrosial Nectar, O Nanak. The Saints drink it in, and never have enough of it. ||26||
The Saints are tolerant and good-natured; friends and enemies are the same to them.
O Nanak, it is all the same to them, whether someone offers them all sorts of foods, or slanders them, or draws weapons to kill them. ||27||
They pay no attention to dishonor or disrespect.
They are not bothered by gossip; the miseries of the world do not touch them.
Those who join the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, and chant the Name of the Lord of the Universe - O Nanak, those mortals abide in peace. ||28||
The Holy people are an invincible army of spiritual warriors; their bodies are protected by the armor of humility.
Their weapons are the Glorious Praises of the Lord which they chant; their Shelter and Shield is the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
The horses, chariots and elephants they ride are their way to realize God's Path.
They walk fearlessly through the armies of their enemies; they attack them with the Kirtan of God's Praises.
They conquer the entire world, O Nanak, and overpower the five thieves. ||29||
Misled by evil-mindedness, mortals are engrossed in the mirage of the illusory world, like the passing shade of a tree.
Emotional attachment to family is false, so Nanak meditates in remembrance on the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam. ||30||
I do not possess the treasure of the wisdom of the Vedas, nor do I possess the merits of the Praises of the Naam.
I do not have a beautiful voice to sing jewelled melodies; I am not clever, wise or shrewd.
By destiny and hard work, the wealth of Maya is obtained. O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, even fools become religious scholars. ||31||
The mala around my neck is the chanting of the Lord's Name. The Love of the Lord is my silent chanting.
Chanting this most Sublime Word brings salvation and joy to the eyes. ||32||
That mortal who lacks the Guru's Mantra - cursed and contaminated is his life.
That blockhead is just a dog, a pig, a jackass, a crow, a snake. ||33||
Whoever contemplates the Lord's Lotus Feet, and enshrines His Name within the heart,

## Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl & Fifth Mehl - Part 005

and sings the Kirtan of His Praises in the Saadh Sangat, O Nanak, shall never see the Messenger of Death. ||34||
Wealth and beauty are not so difficult to obtain. Paradise and royal power are not so difficult to obtain.
Foods and delicacies are not so difficult to obtain. Elegant clothes are not so difficuilt to obtain.
Children, friends, siblings and relatives are not so difficult to obtain. The pleasures of woman are not so difficult to obtain.
Knowledge and wisdom are not so difficult to obtain. Cleverness and trickery are not so difficult to obtain.
Only the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is difficult to obtain. O Nanak, it is only obtained by God's Grace, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||35||
Wherever I look, I see the Lord, whether in this world, in paradise, or the nether regions of the underworld.
The Lord of the Universe is All-pervading everywhere. O Nanak, no blame or stain sticks to Him. ||36||
Poison is transformed into nectar, and enemies into friends and companions.
Pain is changed into pleasure, and the fearful become fearless.
Those who have no home or place find their place of rest in the Naam, O Nanak, when the Guru, the Lord, becomes Merciful. ||37||
He blesses all with humility; He has blessed me with humility as well. He purifies all, and He has purified me as well.
The Creator of all is the Creator of me as well. O Nanak, no blame or stain sticks to Him. ||38||
The moon-god is not cool and calm, nor is the white sandalwood tree.
The winter season is not cool; O Nanak, only the Holy friends, the Saints, are cool and calm. ||39||
Through the Mantra of the Name of the Lord, Raam, Raam, one meditates on the All-pervading Lord.
Those who have the wisdom to look alike upon pleasure and pain, live the immaculate lifestyle, free of vengeance.
They are kind to all beings; they have overpowered the five thieves.
They take the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise as their food; they remain untouched by Maya, like the lotus in the water.
They share the Teachings with friend and enemy alike; they love the devotional worship of God.
They do not listen to slander; renouncing self-conceit, they become the dust of all.
Whoever has these six qualities, O Nanak, is called a Holy friend. ||40||
The goat enjoys eating fruits and roots, but if it lives near a tiger, it is always anxious.
This is the condition of the world, O Nanak; it is afflicted by pleasure and pain. ||41||
Fraud, false accusations, millions of diseases, sins and the filthy residues of evil mistakes;
doubt, emotional attachment, pride, dishonor and intoxication with Maya
\- these lead mortals to death and rebirth, wandering lost in hell. In spite of all sorts of efforts, salvation is not found.
Chanting and meditating on the Name of the Lord in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, mortals become immaculate and pure.
They continually dwell upon the Glorious Praises of God. ||42||
In the Sanctuary of the Kind-hearted Lord, our Transcendent Lord and Master, we are carried across.
God is the Perfect, All-powerful Cause of causes; He is the Giver of gifts.
He gives hope to the hopeless. He is the Source of all riches.
Nanak meditates in remembrance on the Treasure of Virtue; we are all beggars, begging at His Door. ||43||
The most difficult place becomes easy, and the worst pain turns into pleasure.
Evil words, differences and doubts are obliterated, and even faithless cynics and malicious gossips become good people.
They become steady and stable, whether happy or sad; their fears are taken away, and they are fearless.

## Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl & Fifth Mehl - Part 006

The dreadful woods become a well-populated city; such are the merits of the righteous life of Dharma, given by God's Grace.
Chanting the Lord's Name in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, the Lotus Feet of the Merciful Lord are found. ||44||
O emotional attachment, you are the invincible warrior of the battlefield of life; you totally crush and destroy even the most powerful.
You entice and fascinate even the heavenly heralds, celestial singers, gods, mortals, beasts and birds.
Nanak bows in humble surrender to the Lord; he seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord of the Universe. ||45||
O sexual desire, you lead the mortals to hell; you make them wander in reincarnation through countless species.
You cheat the consciousness, and pervade the three worlds. You destroy meditation, penance and virtue.
But you give only shallow pleasure, while you make the mortals weak and unsteady; you pervade the high and the low.
Your fear is dispelled in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, through the Protection and Support of the Lord. ||46||
O anger, you are the root of conflict; compassion never rises up in you.
You take the corrupt, sinful beings in your power, and make them dance like monkeys.
Associating with you, mortals are debased and punished by the Messenger of Death in so many ways.
O Destroyer of the pains of the poor, O Merciful God, Nanak prays for You to protect all begins from such anger. ||47||
O greed, you cling to even the great, assaulting them with countless waves.
You cause them to run around wildly in all directions, wobbling and wavering unsteadily.
You have no respect for friends, ideals, relations, mother or father.
You make them do what they should not do. You make them eat what they should not eat. You make them accomplish what they should not accomplish.
Save me, save me - I have come to Your Sanctuary, O my Lord and Master; Nanak prays to the Lord. ||48||
O egotism, you are the root of birth and death and the cycle of reincarnation; you are the very soul of sin.
You forsake friends, and hold tight to enemies. You spread out countless illusions of Maya.
You cause the living beings to come and go until they are exhausted. You lead them to experience pain and pleasure.
You lead them to wander lost in the terrible wilderness of doubt; you lead them to contract the most horrible, incurable diseases.
The only Physician is the Supreme Lord, the Transcendent Lord God. Nanak worships and adores the Lord, Har, Har, Haray. ||49||
O Lord of the Universe, Master of the Breath of life, Treasure of Mercy, Guru of the World.
O Destroyer of the fever of the world, Embodiment of Compassion, please take away all my pain.
O Merciful Lord, Potent to give Sanctuary, Master of the meek and humble, please be kind to me.
Whether his body is healthy or sick, let Nanak meditate in remembrance on You, Lord. ||50||
I have come to the Sanctuary of the Lord's Lotus Feet, where I sing the Kirtan of His Praises.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, Nanak is carried across the utterly terrifying, difficult world-ocean. ||51||
The Supreme Lord God has procted my head and forehead; the Transcendent Lord has protected my hands and body.
God, my Lord and Master, has saved my soul; the Lord of the Universe has saved my wealth and feet.
The Merciful Guru has protected everything, and destroyed my fear and suffering.
God is the Lover of His devotees, the Master of the masterless. Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Imperishable Primal Lord God. ||52||
His Power supports the sky, and locks fire within wood.
His Power supports the moon, the sun and the stars, and infuses light and breath into the body.

## Section 36 - Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl & Fifth Mehl - Part 007

His Power provides nourishment in the womb of the mother, and does not let disease strike.
His Power holds back the ocean, O Nanak, and does not allow the waves of water to destroy the land. ||53||
The Lord of the World is Supremely Beautiful; His Meditation is the Life of all.
In the Society of the Saints, O Nanak, He is found on the path of devotional worship of the Lord. ||54||
The mosquito pierces the stone, the ant crosses the swamp,
the cripple crosses the ocean, and the blind sees in the darkness,
meditating on the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat. Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Lord, Har, Har, Haray. ||55||
Like a Brahmin without a sacred mark on his forehead, or a king without the power of command,
or a warrior without weapons, so is the devotee of God without Dharmic Faith. ||56||
God has no conch-shell, no religious mark, no paraphernalia; he does not have blue skin.
His Form is Wondrous and Amazing. He is beyond incarnation.
The Vedas say that He is not this, and not that.
The Lord of the Universe is Lofty and High, Great and Infinite.
The Imperishable Lord abides in the hearts of the Holy. He is understood, O Nanak, by those who are very fortunate. ||57||
Living in the world, it is like a wild jungle. One's relatives are like dogs, jackals and donkeys.
In this difficult place, the mind is intoxicated with the wine of emotional attachment; the five unconquered thieves lurk there.
The mortals wander lost in love and emotional attachment, fear and doubt; they are caught in the sharp, strong noose of egotism.
The ocean of fire is terrifying and impassable. The distant shore is so far away; it cannot be reached.
Vibrate and meditate on the Lord of the World, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; O Nanak, by His Grace, we are saved at the Lotus Feet of the Lord. ||58||
When the Lord of the Universe grants His Grace, all illnesses are cured.
Nanak chants His Glorious Praises in the Saadh Sangat, in the Sanctuary of the Perfect Transcendent Lord God. ||59||
The mortal is beautiful and speaks sweet words, but in the farm of his heart, he harbors cruel vengeance.
He pretends to bow in worship, but he is false. Beware of him, O friendly Saints. ||60||
The thoughtless fool does not know that each day, his breaths are being used up.
His most beautiful body is wearing away; old age, the daughter of death, has seized it.
He is engrossed in family play; placing his hopes in transitory things, he indulges in corrupt pleasures.
Wandering lost in countless incarnations, he is exhausted. Nanak seeks the Sanctuary of the Embodiment of Mercy. ||61||
O tongue, you love to enjoy the sweet delicacies.
You are dead to the Truth, and involved in great disputes. Instead, repeat the holy words:
Gobind, Daamodar, Maadhav. ||62||
Those who are proud, and intoxicated with the pleasures of sex,
and asserting their power over others,
never contemplate the Lord's Lotus Feet. Their lives are cursed, and as worthless as straw.
You are as tiny and insignificant as an ant, but you shall become great, by the Wealth of the Lord's Meditation.
Nanak bows in humble worship, countless times, over and over again. ||63||
The blade of grass becomes a mountain, and the barren land becomes green.
The drowning one swims across, and the empty is filled to overflowing.
Millions of suns illuminate the darkness,
prays Nanak, when the Guru, the Lord, becomes Merciful. ||64||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/35">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">35. Raag Jaijaavantee</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/37">
          <span class="pr-2">37. Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
