---
title: "37. Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/36">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">36. Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl & Fifth Mehl</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/38">
          <span class="pr-2">38. Phunhay, Fifth Mehl</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 37 - Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa - Part 001

Associating with the Brahmin, one is saved, if his actions are perfect and God-like.
Those whose souls are imbued with the world - O Nanak, their lives are fruitless. ||65||
The mortal steals the wealth of others, and makes all sorts of problems; his preaching is only for his own livelihood.
His desire for this and that is not satisfied; his mind is caught in Maya, and he is acting like a pig. ||66||
Those who are intoxicated and absorbed in the Lord's Lotus Feet are saved from the terrifying world-ocean.
Countless sins are destroyed, O Nanak, in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; there is no doubt about this. ||67||4||
Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Camphor, flowers and perfume become contaminated, by coming into contact with the human body.
O Nanak, the ignorant one is proud of his foul-smelling marrow, blood and bones. ||1||
Even if the mortal could reduce himself to the size of an atom, and shoot through the ethers, worlds and realms in the blink of an eye, O Nanak, without the Holy Saint, he shall not be saved. ||2||
Know for sure that death will come; whatever is seen is false.
So chant the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy; this alone shall go along with you in the end. ||3||
The consciousness wanders lost in Maya, attached to friends and relatives.
Vibrating and meditating on the Lord of the Universe in the Saadh Sangat, O Nanak, the eternal place of rest is found. ||4||
The lowly nim tree, growing near the sandalwood tree, becomes just like the sandalwood tree.
But the bamboo tree, also growing near it, does not pick up its fragrance; it is too tall and proud. ||5||
In this Gaat'haa, the Lord's Sermon is woven; listening to it, pride is crushed.
The five enemies are killed, O Nanak, by shooting the Arrow of the Lord. ||6||
The Words of the Holy are the path of peace. They are obtained by good karma.
The cycle of birth and death is ended, O Nanak, singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||7||
When the leaves wither and fall, they cannot be attached to the branch again.
Without the Naam, the Name of the Lord, O Nanak, there is misery and suffering. The mortal wanders in reincarnation day and night. ||8||
One is blessed with love for the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, by great good fortune.
Whoever sings the Glorious Praises of the Lord's Name, O Nanak, is not affected by the world-ocean. ||9||
This Gaat'haa is profound and infinite; how rare are those who understand it.
They forsake sexual desire and worldly love, O Nanak, and praise the Lord in the Saadh Sangat. ||10||
The Words of the Holy are the most sublime Mantra. They eradicate millions of sinful mistakes.
Meditating on the Lotus Feet of the Lord, O Nanak, all one's generations are saved. ||11||
That palace is beautiful, in which the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises are sung.
Those who dwell on the Lord of the Universe are liberated. O Nanak, only the most fortunate are so blessed. ||12||
I have found the Lord, my Friend, my very Best Friend.
He shall never break my heart.
His dwelling is eternal; His weight cannot be weighed.
Nanak has made Him the Friend of his soul. ||13||
One's bad reputation is erased by a true son,
who meditates in his heart on the Guru's Mantra.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/36">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">36. Shalok Sehskritee, First Mehl & Fifth Mehl</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/38">
          <span class="pr-2">38. Phunhay, Fifth Mehl</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
