---
title: "38. Phunhay, Fifth Mehl"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/37">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">37. Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/39">
          <span class="pr-2">39. Chaubolas, Fifth Mehl</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 38 - Phunhay, Fifth Mehl - Part 001

The Beloved Eternal Lord God,
O Nanak, carries us across the world-ocean. ||14||
It is death to forget the Lord of the Universe.
It is life to meditate on the Name of the Lord.
The Lord is found in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy,
O Nanak, by pre-ordained destiny. ||15||
The snake-charmer, by his spell, neutralizes the poison and leaves the snake without fangs.
Just so, the Saints remove suffering;
O Nanak, they are found by good karma. ||16||
The Lord is All-pervading everywhere; He gives Sanctuary to all living beings.
The mind is touched by His Love, O Nanak,
by Guru's Grace, and the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||17||
My mind is pierced through by the Lord's Lotus Feet.
I am blessed with total happiness.
Holy people have been singing this Gaat'haa, O Nanak, since the very beginning of time. ||18||
Chanting and singing the Sublime Word of God in the Saadh Sangat, mortals are saved from the world-ocean. O Nanak, they shall never again be consigned to reincarnation. ||19||
People contemplate the Vedas, Puraanas and Shaastras.
But by enshrining in their hearts the Naam, the Name of the One and Only Creator of the Universe,
everyone can be saved.
By great good fortune, O Nanak, a few cross over like this. ||20||
Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, the Name of Lord of the Universe, all one's generations are saved.
It is obtained in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. O Nanak, by great good fortune, the Blessed Vision of His Darshan is seen. ||21||
Abandon all your evil habits, and implant all Dharmic faith within.
The Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, is obtained, O Nanak, by those who have such destiny written upon their foreheads. ||22||
God was, is, and shall always be. He sustains and destroys all.
Know that these Holy people are true, O Nanak; they are in love with the Lord. ||23||
The mortal is engrossed in sweet words and transitory pleasures which shall soon fade away.
Disease, sorrow and separation afflict him; O Nanak, he never finds peace, even in dreams. ||24||
Phunhay, Fifth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
With Pen in Hand, the Unfathomable Lord writes the mortal's destiny upon his forehead.
The Incomparably Beautiful Lord is involved with all.
I cannot utter Your Praises with my mouth.
Nanak is fascinated, gazing upon the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. I am a sacrifice to You. ||1||
Seated in the Society of the Saints, I chant the Lord's Praises.
I dedicate all my adornments to Him, and give all this soul to Him.
With hopeful yearning for Him, I have made the bed for my Husband.
O Lord! If such good destiny is inscribed upon my forehead, then I shall find my Friend. ||2||
O my companion, I have prepared everything: make-up, garlands and betel-leaves.
I have embellished myself with the sixteen decorations, and applied the mascara to my eyes.
If my Husband Lord comes to my home, then I obtain everything.
O Lord! Without my Husband, all these adornments are useless. ||3||
Very fortunate is she, within whose home the Husband Lord abides.
She is totally adorned and decorated; she is a happy soul-bride.
I sleep in peace, without anxiety; the hopes of my mind have been fulfilled.
O Lord! When my Husband came into the home of my heart, I obtained everything. ||4||

## Section 38 - Phunhay, Fifth Mehl - Part 002

My hope is so intense, that this hope alone should fulfill my hopes.
When the True Guru becomes merciful, then I attain the Perfect Lord.
My body is filled with so many demerits; I am covered with faults and demerits.
O Lord! When the True Guru becomes Merciful, then the mind is held in place. ||5||
Says Nanak, I have meditated on the Lord, Infinite and Endless.
This world-ocean is so difficult to cross; the True Guru has carried me across.
My comings and goings in reincarnation ended, when I met the Perfect Lord.
O Lord! I have obtained the Ambrosial Nectar of the Name of the Lord from the True Guru. ||6||
The lotus is in my hand; in the courtyard of my heart I abide in peace.
O my companion, the Jewel is around my neck; beholding it, sorrow is taken away.
I abide with the Lord of the World, the Treasury of Total Peace. O Lord!
All wealth, spiritual perfection and the nine treasures are in His Hand. ||7||
Those men who go out to enjoy other men's women shall suffer in shame.
Those who steal the wealth of others - how can their guilt be concealed?
Those who chant the Sacred Praises of the Lord save and redeem all their generations.
O Lord! Those who listen and contemplate the Supreme Lord God become pure and holy. ||8||
The sky above looks lovely, and the earth below is beautiful.
Lightning flashes in the ten directions; I behold the Face of my Beloved.
If I go searching in foreign lands, how can I find my Beloved?
O Lord! If such destiny is inscribed upon my forehead, I am absorbed in the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. ||9||
I have seen all places, but none can compare to You.
The Primal Lord, the Architect of Destiny, has established You; thus You are adorned and embellished.
Ramdaspur is prosperous and thickly populated, and incomparably beautiful.
O Lord! Bathing in the Sacred Pool of Raam Daas, the sins are washed away, O Nanak. ||10||
The rainbird is very smart; in its consciousness, it longs for the friendly rain.
It longs for that, to which its breath of life is attached.
It wanders depressed, from forest to forest, for the sake of a drop of water.
O Lord! In just the same way, the humble servant of the Lord begs for the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Nanak is a sacrifice to him. ||11||
The Consciousness of my Friend is incomparably beautiful. Its mystery cannot be known.
One who purchases the priceless virtues realizes the essence of reality.
When the consciousness is absorbed in the supreme consciousness, great joy and bliss are found.
O Lord! When the fickle thieves are overcome, the true wealth is obtained. ||12||
In a dream, I was lifted up; why didn't I grasp the hem of His Robe?
Gazing upon the Beautiful Lord relaxing there, my mind was charmed and fascinated.
I am searching for His Feet - tell me, where can I find Him?
O Lord! Tell me how I can find my Beloved, O my companion. ||13||
The eyes which do not see the Holy - those eyes are miserable.
The ears which do not hear the Sound-current of the Naad - those ears might just as well be plugged.
The tongue which does not chant the Naam ought to be cut out, bit by bit.
O Lord! When the mortal forgets the Lord of the Universe, the Sovereign Lord King, he grows weaker day by day. ||14||
The wings of the bumble bee are caught in the intoxicating fragrant petals of the lotus.
With its limbs entangled in the petals, it loses its senses.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/37">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">37. Fifth Mehl, Gaat'haa</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/39">
          <span class="pr-2">39. Chaubolas, Fifth Mehl</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
