---
title: "44. Shalok, Ninth Mehl"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/43">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">43. Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/45">
          <span class="pr-2">45. Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl & Raag Maalaa</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 44 - Shalok, Ninth Mehl - Part 001

Those whom He saves, meditate in remembrance on the Creator Lord. ||15||
Forsake duality and the ways of evil; focus your consciousness on the One Lord.
In the love of duality, O Nanak, the mortals are being washed downstream. ||16||
In the markets and bazaars of the three qualities, the merchants make their deals.
Those who load the true merchandise are the true traders. ||17||
Those who do not know the way of love are foolish; they wander lost and confused.
O Nanak, forgetting the Lord, they fall into the deep, dark pit of hell. ||18||
In his mind, the mortal does not forget Maya; he begs for more and more wealth.
That God does not even come into his consciousness; O Nanak, it is not in his karma. ||19||
The mortal does not run out of capital, as long as the Lord Himself is merciful.
The Word of the Shabad is Guru Nanak's inexhaustible treasure; this wealth and capital never runs out, no matter how much it is spent and consumed. ||20||
If I could find wings for sale, I would buy them with an equal weight of my flesh.
I would attach them to my body, and seek out and find my Friend. ||21||
My Friend is the True Supreme King, the King over the heads of kings.
Sitting by His side, we are exalted and beautified; He is the Support of all. ||22||
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Shalok, Ninth Mehl:
If you do not sing the Praises of the Lord, your life is rendered useless.
Says Nanak, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord; immerse your mind in Him, like the fish in the water. ||1||
Why are you engrossed in sin and corruption? You are not detached, even for a moment!
Says Nanak, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord, and you shall not be caught in the noose of death. ||2||
Your youth has passed away like this, and old age has overtaken your body.
Says Nanak, meditate, vibrate upon the Lord; your life is fleeting away! ||3||
You have become old, and you do not understand that death is overtaking you.
Says Nanak, you are insane! Why do you not remember and meditate on God? ||4||
Your wealth, spouse, and all the possessions which you claim as your own
\- none of these shall go along with you in the end. O Nanak, know this as true. ||5||
He is the Saving Grace of sinners, the Destroyer of fear, the Master of the masterless.
Says Nanak, realize and know Him, who is always with you. ||6||
He has given you your body and wealth, but you are not in love with Him.
Says Nanak, you are insane! Why do you now shake and tremble so helplessly? ||7||
He has given you your body, wealth, property, peace and beautiful mansions.
Says Nanak, listen, mind: why don't you remember the Lord in meditation? ||8||
The Lord is the Giver of all peace and comfort. There is no other at all.
Says Nanak, listen, mind: meditating in remembrance on Him, salvation is attained. ||9||

## Section 44 - Shalok, Ninth Mehl - Part 002

Remembering Him in meditation, salvation is attained; vibrate and meditate on Him, O my friend.
Says Nanak, listen, mind: your life is passing away! ||10||
Your body is made up of the five elements; you are clever and wise - know this well.
Believe it - you shall merge once again into the One, O Nanak, from whom you originated. ||11||
The Dear Lord abides in each and every heart; the Saints proclaim this as true.
Says Nanak, meditate and vibrate upon Him, and you shall cross over the terrifying world-ocean. ||12||
One who is not touched by pleasure or pain, greed, emotional attachment and egotistical pride
\- says Nanak, listen, mind: he is the very image of God. ||13||
One who is beyond praise and slander, who looks upon gold and iron alike
\- says Nanak, listen, mind: know that such a person is liberated. ||14||
One who is not affected by pleasure or pain, who looks upon friend and enemy alike
\- says Nanak, listen, mind: know that such a person is liberated. ||15||
One who does not frighten anyone, and who is not afraid of anyone else
\- says Nanak, listen, mind: call him spiritually wise. ||16||
One who has forsaken all sin and corruption, who wears the robes of neutral detachment
\- says Nanak, listen, mind: good destiny is written on his forehead. ||17||
One who renounces Maya and possessiveness and is detached from everything
\- says Nanak, listen, mind: God abides in his heart. ||18||
That mortal, who forsakes egotism, and realizes the Creator Lord
\- says Nanak, that person is liberated; O mind, know this as true. ||19||
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Name of the Lord is the Destroyer of fear, the Eradicator of evil-mindedness.
Night and day, O Nanak, whoever vibrates and meditates on the Lord's Name, sees all of his works brought to fruition. ||20||
Vibrate with your tongue the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe; with your ears, hear the Lord's Name.
Says Nanak, listen, man: you shall not have to go to the house of Death. ||21||
That mortal who renounces possessiveness, greed, emotional attachment and egotism
\- says Nanak, he himself is saved, and he saves many others as well. ||22||
Like a dream and a show, so is this world, you must know.
None of this is true, O Nanak, without God. ||23||
Night and day, for the sake of Maya, the mortal wanders constantly.
Among millions, O Nanak, there is scarcely anyone, who keeps the Lord in his consciousness. ||24||
As the bubbles in the water well up and disappear again,
so is the universe created; says Nanak, listen, O my friend! ||25||
The mortal does not remember the Lord, even for a moment; he is blinded by the wine of Maya.
Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, he is caught by the noose of Death. ||26||
If you yearn for eternal peace, then seek the Sanctuary of the Lord.
Says Nanak, listen, mind: this human body is difficult to obtain. ||27||
For the sake of Maya, the fools and ignorant people run all around.
Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, life passes away uselessly. ||28||
That mortal who meditates and vibrates upon the Lord night and day - know him to be the embodiment of the Lord.

## Section 44 - Shalok, Ninth Mehl - Part 003

There is no difference between the Lord and the humble servant of the Lord; O Nanak, know this as true. ||29||
The mortal is entangled in Maya; he has forgotten the Name of the Lord of the Universe.
Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, what is the use of this human life? ||30||
The mortal does not think of the Lord; he is blinded by the wine of Maya.
Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, he is caught in the noose of Death. ||31||
In good times, there are many companions around, but in bad times, there is no one at all.
Says Nanak, vibrate, and meditate on the Lord; He shall be your only Help and Support in the end. ||32||
Mortals wander lost and confused through countless lifetimes; their fear of death is never removed.
Says Nanak, vibrate and meditate on the Lord, and you shall dwell in the Fearless Lord. ||33||
I have tried so many things, but the pride of my mind has not been dispelled.
I am engrossed in evil-mindedness, Nanak. O God, please save me! ||34||
Childhood, youth and old age - know these as the three stages of life.
Says Nanak, without meditating on the Lord, everything is useless; you must appreciate this. ||35||
You have not done what you should have done; you are entangled in the web of greed.
Nanak, your time is past and gone; why are you crying now, you blind fool? ||36||
The mind is absorbed in Maya - it cannot escape it, my friend.
Nanak, it is like a picture painted on the wall - it cannot leave it. ||37||
The man wishes for something, but something different happens.
He plots to deceive others, O Nanak, but he places the noose around his own neck instead. ||38||
People make all sorts of efforts to find peace and pleasure, but no one tries to earn pain.
Says Nanak, listen, mind: whatever pleases God comes to pass. ||39||
The world wanders around begging, but the Lord is the Giver of all.
Says Nanak, meditate in remembrance on Him, and all your works will be successful. ||40||
Why do you take such false pride in yourself? You must know that the world is just a dream.
None of this is yours; Nanak proclaims this truth. ||41||
You are so proud of your body; it shall perish in an instant, my friend.
That mortal who chants the Praises of the Lord, O Nanak, conquers the world. ||42||
That person, who meditates in remembrance on the Lord in his heart, is liberated - know this well.
There is no difference between that person and the Lord: O Nanak, accept this as the Truth. ||43||
That person, who does not feel devotion to God in his mind
\- O Nanak, know that his body is like that of a pig, or a dog. ||44||
A dog never abandons the home of his master.
O Nanak, in just the same way, vibrate, and meditate on the Lord, single-mindedly, with one-pointed consciousness. ||45||
Those who make pilgrimages to sacred shrines, observe ritualistic fasts and make donations to charity while still taking pride in their minds
\- O Nanak, their actions are useless, like the elephant, who takes a bath, and then rolls in the dust. ||46||
The head shakes, the feet stagger, and the eyes become dull and weak.
Says Nanak, this is your condition. And even now, you have not savored the sublime essence of the Lord. ||47||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/43">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">43. Shaloks In Addition To The Vaars</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/45">
          <span class="pr-2">45. Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl & Raag Maalaa</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
