---
title: "45. Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl & Raag Maalaa"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/44">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">44. Shalok, Ninth Mehl</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 45 - Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl & Raag Maalaa - Part 001

I had looked upon the world as my own, but no one belongs to anyone else.
O Nanak, only devotional worship of the Lord is permanent; enshrine this in your mind. ||48||
The world and its affairs are totally false; know this well, my friend.
Says Nanak, it is like a wall of sand; it shall not endure. ||49||
Raam Chand passed away, as did Raawan, even though he had lots of relatives.
Says Nanak, nothing lasts forever; the world is like a dream. ||50||
People become anxious, when something unexpected happens.
This is the way of the world, O Nanak; nothing is stable or permanent. ||51||
Whatever has been created shall be destroyed; everyone shall perish, today or tomorrow.
O Nanak, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and give up all other entanglements. ||52||
DOHRAA:
My strength is exhausted, and I am in bondage; I cannot do anything at all.
Says Nanak, now, the Lord is my Support; He will help me, as He did the elephant. ||53||
My strength has been restored, and my bonds have been broken; now, I can do everything.
Nanak: everything is in Your hands, Lord; You are my Helper and Support. ||54||
My associates and companions have all deserted me; no one remains with me.
Says Nanak, in this tragedy, the Lord alone is my Support. ||55||
The Naam remains; the Holy Saints remain; the Guru, the Lord of the Universe, remains.
Says Nanak, how rare are those who chant the Guru's Mantra in this world. ||56||
I have enshrined the Lord's Name within my heart; there is nothing equal to it.
Meditating in remembrance on it, my troubles are taken away; I have received the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan. ||57||1||
Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl:
Upon this Plate, three things have been placed: Truth, Contentment and Contemplation.
The Ambrosial Nectar of the Naam, the Name of our Lord and Master, has been placed upon it as well; it is the Support of all.
One who eats it and enjoys it shall be saved.
This thing can never be forsaken; keep this always and forever in your mind.
The dark world-ocean is crossed over, by grasping the Feet of the Lord; O Nanak, it is all the extension of God. ||1||
Shalok, Fifth Mehl:
I have not appreciated what You have done for me, Lord; only You can make me worthy.
I am unworthy - I have no worth or virtues at all. You have taken pity on me.
You took pity on me, and blessed me with Your Mercy, and I have met the True Guru, my Friend.
O Nanak, if I am blessed with the Naam, I live, and my body and mind blossom forth. ||1||
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Raag Maalaa:
Each Raga has five wives,
and eight sons, who emit distinctive notes.
In the first place is Raag Bhairao.

## Section 45 - Mundaavanee, Fifth Mehl & Raag Maalaa - Part 002

It is accompanied by the voices of its five Raaginis:
First come Bhairavee, and Bilaavalee;
then the songs of Punni-aakee and Bangalee;
and then Asalaykhee.
These are the five consorts of Bhairao.
The sounds of Pancham, Harakh and Disaakh;
the songs of Bangaalam, Madh and Maadhav. ||1||
Lalat and Bilaaval - each gives out its own melody.
when these eight sons of Bhairao are sung by accomplished musicians. ||1||
In the second family is Maalakausak,
who brings his five Raaginis:
Gondakaree and Dayv Gandhaaree,
the voices of Gandhaaree and Seehutee,
and the fifth song of Dhanaasaree.
This chain of Maalakausak brings along :
Maaroo, Masta-ang and Mayvaaraa,
Prabal, Chandakausak,
Khau, Khat and Bauraanad singing.
These are the eight sons of Maalakausak. ||1||
Then comes Hindol with his five wives and eight sons;
it rises in waves when the sweet-voiced chorus sings. ||1||
There come Taylangee and Darvakaree;
Basantee and Sandoor follow;
then Aheeree, the finest of women.
These five wives come together.
The sons: Surmaanand and Bhaaskar come,
Chandrabinb and Mangalan follow.
Sarasbaan and Binodaa then come,
and the thrilling songs of Basant and Kamodaa.
These are the eight sons I have listed.
Then comes the turn of Deepak. ||1||
Kachhaylee, Patamanjaree and Todee are sung;
Kaamodee and Goojaree accompany Deepak. ||1||
Kaalankaa, Kuntal and Raamaa,
Kamalakusam and Champak are their names;
Gauraa, Kaanaraa and Kaylaanaa;
these are the eight sons of Deepak. ||1||
All join together and sing Siree Raag,
which is accompanied by its five wives.:
Bairaaree and Karnaatee,
the songs of Gawree and Aasaavaree;
then follows Sindhavee.
These are the five wives of Siree Raag. ||1||
Saaloo, Saarang, Saagaraa, Gond and Gambheer
\- the eight sons of Siree Raag include Gund, Kumb and Hameer. ||1||
In the sixth place, Maygh Raag is sung,
with its five wives in accompaniment:
Sorat'h, Gond, and the melody of Malaaree;
then the harmonies of Aasaa are sung.
And finally comes the high tone Soohau.
These are the five with Maygh Raag. ||1||
Bairaadhar, Gajadhar, Kaydaaraa,
Jabaleedhar, Nat and Jaladhaaraa.
Then come the songs of Shankar and Shi-aamaa.
These are the names of the sons of Maygh Raag. ||1||
So all together, they sing the six Raagas and the thirty Raaginis,
and all the forty-eight sons of the Raagas. ||1||1||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/44">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">44. Shalok, Ninth Mehl</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
