---
title: "6. Raag Maajh"
description: "Shri Guru Granth Sahib, The sacred text of the Sikhs"
published: true
date: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
tags: Sikhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-12T12:7:52Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">5. Siree Raag</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/7">
          <span class="pr-2">7. Raag Gauree</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 001

Raag Maajh, Chau-Padas, First House, Fourth Mehl:
One Universal Creator God. The Name Is Truth. Creative Being Personified. No Fear. No Hatred. Image Of The Undying, Beyond Birth, Self-Existent. By Guru's Grace:
The Name of the Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind.
By great good fortune, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
The Perfect Guru has attained spiritual perfection in the Name of the Lord. How rare are those who follow the Guru's Teachings. ||1||
I have loaded my pack with the provisions of the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
The Companion of my breath of life shall always be with me.
The Perfect Guru has implanted the Lord's Name within me. I have the Imperishable Treasure of the Lord in my lap. ||2||
The Lord, Har, Har, is my Best Friend; He is my Beloved Lord King.
If only someone would come and introduce me to Him, the Rejuvenator of my breath of life.
I cannot survive without seeing my Beloved. My eyes are welling up with tears. ||3||
My Friend, the True Guru, has been my Best Friend since I was very young.
I cannot survive without seeing Him, O my mother!
O Dear Lord, please show Mercy to me, that I may meet the Guru. Servant Nanak gathers the Wealth of the Lord's Name in his lap. ||4||1||
Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
The Lord is my mind, body and breath of life.
I do not know any other than the Lord.
If only I could have the good fortune to meet some friendly Saint; he might show me the Way to my Beloved Lord God. ||1||
I have searched my mind and body, through and through.
How can I meet my Darling Beloved, O my mother?
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I ask about the Path to God. In that Congregation, the Lord God abides. ||2||
My Darling Beloved True Guru is my Protector.
I am a helpless child-please cherish me.
The Guru, the Perfect True Guru, is my Mother and Father. Obtaining the Water of the Guru, the lotus of my heart blossoms forth. ||3||
Without seeing my Guru, sleep does not come.
My mind and body are afflicted with the pain of separation from the Guru.
O Lord, Har, Har, show mercy to me, that I may meet my Guru. Meeting the Guru, servant Nanak blossoms forth. ||4||2||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 002

Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
Read of the Lord's Glories and reflect upon the Lord's Glories.
Listen continually to the Sermon of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, you shall cross over the treacherous and terrifying world-ocean. ||1||
Come, friends, let us meet our Lord.
Bring me a message from my Beloved.
He alone is a friend, companion, beloved and brother of mine, who shows me the way to the Lord, the Lord of all. ||2||
My illness is known only to the Lord and the Perfect Guru.
I cannot continue living without chanting the Naam.
So give me the medicine, the Mantra of the Perfect Guru. Through the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, I am saved. ||3||
I am just a poor song-bird, in the Sanctuary of the True Guru,
who has placed the Drop of Water, the Lord's Name, Har, Har, in my mouth.
The Lord is the Treasure of Water; I am just a fish in that water. Without this Water, servant Nanak would die. ||4||3||
Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
O servants of the Lord, O Saints, O my Siblings of Destiny, let us join together!
Show me the way to my Lord God-I am so hungry for Him!
Please reward my faith, O Life of the World, O Great Giver. Obtaining the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan, my mind is fulfilled. ||1||
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I chant the Bani of the Lord's Word.
The Sermon of the Lord, Har, Har, is pleasing to my mind.
The Ambrosial Nectar of the Lord's Name, Har, Har, is so sweet to my mind. Meeting the True Guru, I drink in this Ambrosial Nectar. ||2||
By great good fortune, the Lord's Congregation is found,
while the unfortunate ones wander around in doubt, enduring painful beatings.
Without good fortune, the Sat Sangat is not found; without this Sangat, people are stained with filth and pollution. ||3||
Come and meet me, O Life of the World, my Beloved.
Please bless me with Your Mercy, and enshrine Your Name, Har, Har, within my mind.
Through the Guru's Teachings, the Sweet Name has become pleasing to my mind. Servant Nanak's mind is drenched and delighted with the Naam. ||4||4||
Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
Through the Guru, I have obtained the Lord's spiritual wisdom. I have obtained the Sublime Essence of the Lord.
My mind is imbued with the Love of the Lord; I drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord.
With my mouth, I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; my mind is filled to overflowing with the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||1||
Come, O Saints, and lead me to my Lord's Embrace.
Recite to me the Sermon of my Beloved.
I dedicate my mind to those Saints of the Lord, who chant the Word of the Guru's Bani with their mouths. ||2||
By great good fortune, the Lord has led me to meet His Saint.
The Perfect Guru has placed the Sublime Essence of the Lord into my mouth.
The unfortunate ones do not find the True Guru; the self-willed manmukhs continually endure reincarnation through the womb. ||3||
God, the Merciful, has Himself bestowed His Mercy.
He has totally removed the poisonous pollution of egotism.
O Nanak, in the shops of the city of the human body, the Gurmukhs buy the merchandise of the Lord's Name. ||4||5||
Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
I meditate on the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe, and the Name of the Lord.
Joining the Sangat, the Holy Congregation, the Name comes to dwell in the mind.
The Lord God is our Lord and Master, Inaccessible and Unfathomable. Meeting the True Guru, I enjoy the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||1||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 003

Blessed, blessed are the humble servants of the Lord, who know the Lord God.
I go and ask those humble servants about the Mysteries of the Lord.
I wash and massage their feet; joining with the humble servants of the Lord, I drink in the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||2||
The True Guru, the Giver, has implanted the Naam, the Name of the Lord, within me.
By great good fortune, I have obtained the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan.
The True Essence is Ambrosial Nectar; through the Ambrosial Words of the Perfect Guru, this Amrit is obtained. ||3||
O Lord, lead me to the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, and the true beings.
Joining the Sat Sangat, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
O Nanak, I listen and chant the Lord's Sermon; through the Guru's Teachings, I am fulfilled by the Name of the Lord. ||4||6||
Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
Come, dear sisters-let us join together.
I am a sacrifice to the one who tells me of my Beloved.
Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, I have found the Lord, my Best Friend. I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||1||
Wherever I look, there I see my Lord and Master.
You are permeating each and every heart, O Lord, Inner-knower, Searcher of Hearts.
The Perfect Guru has shown me that the Lord is always with me. I am forever a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||2||
There is only one breath; all are made of the same clay; the light within all is the same.
The One Light pervades all the many and various beings. This Light intermingles with them, but it is not diluted or obscured.
By Guru's Grace, I have come to see the One. I am a sacrifice to the True Guru. ||3||
Servant Nanak speaks the Ambrosial Bani of the Word.
It is dear and pleasing to the minds of the GurSikhs.
The Guru, the Perfect True Guru, shares the Teachings. The Guru, the True Guru, is Generous to all. ||4||7||
Seven Chau-Padas Of The Fourth Mehl. ||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl, Chau-Padas, First House:
My mind longs for the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan.
It cries out like the thirsty song-bird.
My thirst is not quenched, and I can find no peace, without the Blessed Vision of the Beloved Saint. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to the Blessed Vision of the Beloved Saint Guru. ||1||Pause||
Your Face is so Beautiful, and the Sound of Your Words imparts intuitive wisdom.
It is so long since this rainbird has had even a glimpse of water.
Blessed is that land where You dwell, O my Friend and Intimate Divine Guru. ||2||
I am a sacrifice, I am forever a sacrifice, to my Friend and Intimate Divine Guru. ||1||Pause||
When I could not be with You for just one moment, the Dark Age of Kali Yuga dawned for me.
When will I meet You, O my Beloved Lord?

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 004

I cannot endure the night, and sleep does not come, without the Sight of the Beloved Guru's Court. ||3||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to that True Court of the Beloved Guru. ||1||Pause||
By good fortune, I have met the Saint Guru.
I have found the Immortal Lord within the home of my own self.
I will now serve You forever, and I shall never be separated from You, even for an instant. Servant Nanak is Your slave, O Beloved Master. ||4||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice; servant Nanak is Your slave, Lord. ||Pause||1||8||
Raag Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Sweet is that season when I remember You.
Sublime is that work which is done for You.
Blessed is that heart in which You dwell, O Giver of all. ||1||
You are the Universal Father of all, O my Lord and Master.
Your nine treasures are an inexhaustible storehouse.
Those unto whom You give are satisfied and fulfilled; they become Your devotees, Lord. ||2||
All place their hopes in You.
You dwell deep within each and every heart.
All share in Your Grace; none are beyond You. ||3||
You Yourself liberate the Gurmukhs;
You Yourself consign the self-willed manmukhs to wander in reincarnation.
Slave Nanak is a sacrifice to You; Your Entire Play is self-evident, Lord. ||4||2||9||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
The Unstruck Melody resounds and resonates in peaceful ease.
I rejoice in the eternal bliss of the Word of the Shabad.
In the cave of intuitive wisdom I sit, absorbed in the silent trance of the Primal Void. I have obtained my seat in the heavens. ||1||
After wandering through many other homes and houses, I have returned to my own home,
and I have found what I was longing for.
I am satisfied and fulfilled; O Saints, the Guru has shown me the Fearless Lord God. ||2||
He Himself is the King, and He Himself is the people.
He Himself is in Nirvaanaa, and He Himself indulges in pleasures.
He Himself sits on the throne of true justice, answering the cries and prayers of all. ||3||
As I have seen Him, so have I described Him.
This Sublime Essence comes only to one who knows the Mystery of the Lord.
His light merges into the Light, and he finds peace. O servant Nanak, this is all the Extension of the One. ||4||3||10||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
That house, in which the soul-bride has married her Husband Lord
\-in that house, O my companions, sing the songs of rejoicing.
Joy and celebrations decorate that house, in which the Husband Lord has adorned His soul-bride. ||1||
She is virtuous, and she is very fortunate;
she is blessed with sons and tender-hearted. The happy soul-bride is loved by her Husband.
She is beautiful, wise, and clever. That soul-bride is the beloved of her Husband Lord. ||2||
She is well-mannered, noble and distinguished.
She is decorated and adorned with wisdom.
She is from a most respected family; she is the queen, adorned with the Love of her Husband Lord. ||3||
Her glory cannot be described;
she melts in the Embrace of her Husband Lord.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 005

Her marriage is eternal; her Husband is Inaccessible and Incomprehensible. O Servant Nanak, His Love is her only Support. ||4||4||11||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
I have searched and searched, seeking the Blessed Vision of His Darshan.
I travelled through all sorts of woods and forests.
My Lord, Har, Har, is both absolute and related, unmanifest and manifest; is there anyone who can come and unite me with Him? ||1||
People recite from memory the wisdom of the six schools of philosophy;
they perform worship services, wear ceremonial religious marks on their foreheads, and take ritual cleansing baths at sacred shrines of pilgrimage.
They perform the inner cleansing practice with water and adopt the eighty-four Yogic postures; but still, they find no peace in any of these. ||2||
They chant and meditate, practicing austere self-discipline for years and years;
they wander on journeys all over the earth;
and yet, their hearts are not at peace, even for an instant. The Yogi rises up and goes out, over and over again. ||3||
By His Mercy, I have met the Holy Saint.
My mind and body have been cooled and soothed; I have been blessed with patience and composure.
The Immortal Lord God has come to dwell within my heart. Nanak sings the songs of joy to the Lord. ||4||5||12||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
The Supreme Lord God is Infinite and Divine;
He is Inaccessible, Incomprehensible, Invisible and Inscrutable.
Merciful to the meek, Sustainer of the World, Lord of the Universe-meditating on the Lord, the Gurmukhs find salvation. ||1||
The Gurmukhs are emancipated by the Lord.
The Lord Krishna becomes the Gurmukh's Companion.
The Gurmukh finds the Merciful Lord. He is not found any other way. ||2||
He does not need to eat; His Hair is Wondrous and Beautiful; He is free of hate.
Millions of people worship His Feet.
He alone is a devotee, who becomes Gurmukh, whose heart is filled with the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||
Forever fruitful is the Blessed Vision of His Darshan; He is Infinite and Incomparable.
He is Awesome and All-powerful; He is forever the Great Giver.
As Gurmukh, chant the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and you shall be carried across. O Nanak, rare are those who know this state! ||4||6||13||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
As You command, I obey; as You give, I receive.
You are the Pride of the meek and the poor.
You are everything; You are my Beloved. I am a sacrifice to Your Creative Power. ||1||
By Your Will, we wander in the wilderness; by Your Will, we find the path.
By Your Will, we become Gurmukh and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
By Your Will, we wander in doubt through countless lifetimes. Everything happens by Your Will. ||2||
No one is foolish, and no one is clever.
Your Will determines everything;
You are Inaccessible, Incomprehensible, Infinite and Unfathomable. Your Value cannot be expressed. ||3||
Please bless me with the dust of the Saints, O my Beloved.
I have come and fallen at Your Door, O Lord.
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, my mind is fulfilled. O Nanak, with natural ease, I merge into Him. ||4||7||14||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
They forget the Lord, and they suffer in pain.
Afflicted with hunger, they run around in all directions.
Meditating in remembrance on the Naam, they are happy forever. The Lord, Merciful to the meek, bestows it upon them. ||1||
My True Guru is absolutely All-powerful.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 006

When I dwell upon Him in my soul, all my sorrows depart.
The sickness of anxiety and the disease of ego are cured; He Himself cherishes me. ||2||
Like a child, I ask for everything.
God is Bountiful and Beautiful; He never comes up empty.
Again and again, I fall at His Feet. He is Merciful to the meek, the Sustainer of the World. ||3||
I am a sacrifice to the Perfect True Guru,
who has shattered all my bonds.
With the Naam, the Name of the Lord, in my heart, I have been purified. O Nanak, His Love has imbued me with nectar. ||4||8||15||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
O my Love, Sustainer of the World, Merciful, Loving Lord,
Profoundly Deep, Infinite Lord of the Universe,
Highest of the High, Unfathomable, Infinite Lord and Master: continually remembering You in deep meditation, I live. ||1||
O Destroyer of pain, Priceless Treasure,
Fearless, free of hate, Unfathomable, Immeasurable,
of Undying Form, Unborn, Self-illumined: remembering You in meditation, my mind is filled with a deep and profound peace. ||2||
The Joyous Lord, the Sustainer of the World, is my constant Companion.
He cherishes the high and the low.
The Nectar of the Name satisfies my mind. As Gurmukh, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar. ||3||
In suffering and in comfort, I meditate on You, O Beloved.
I have obtained this sublime understanding from the Guru.
You are Nanak's Support, O my Lord and Master; through Your Love, I swim across to the other side. ||4||9||16||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Blessed is that time when I meet the True Guru.
Gazing upon the Fruitful Vision of His Darshan, I have been saved.
Blessed are the hours, the minutes and the seconds-blessed is that Union with Him. ||1||
Making the effort, my mind has become pure.
Walking on the Lord's Path, my doubts have all been cast out.
The True Guru has inspired me to hear the Treasure of the Naam; all my illness has been dispelled. ||2||
The Word of Your Bani is inside and outside as well.
You Yourself chant it, and You Yourself speak it.
The Guru has said that He is One-All is the One. There shall never be any other. ||3||
I drink in the Lord's Ambrosial Essence from the Guru;
the Lord's Name has become my clothing and food.
The Name is my delight, the Name is my play and entertainment. O Nanak, I have made the Name my enjoyment. ||4||10||17||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
I beg of all the Saints: please, give me the merchandise.
I offer my prayers-I have forsaken my pride.
I am a sacrifice, hundreds of thousands of times a sacrifice, and I pray: please, give me the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||1||
You are the Giver, You are the Architect of Destiny.
You are All-powerful, the Giver of Eternal Peace.
You bless everyone. Please bring my life to fulfillment. ||2||
The body-temple is sanctified by the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan,
and thus, the impregnable fort of the soul is conquered.
You are the Giver, You are the Architect of Destiny. There is no other warrior as great as You. ||3||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 007

I applied the dust of the feet of the Saints to my face.
My evil-mindedness disappeared, along with my misfortune and false-mindedness.
I sit in the true home of my self; I sing His Glorious Praises. O Nanak, my falsehood has vanished! ||4||11||18||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
I shall never forget You-You are such a Great Giver!
Please grant Your Grace, and imbue me with the love of devotional worship.
If it pleases You, let me meditate on You day and night; please, grant me this gift! ||1||
Into this blind clay, You have infused awareness.
Everything, everywhere which You have given is good.
Bliss, joyful celebrations, wondrous plays and entertainment-whatever pleases You, comes to pass. ||2||
Everything we receive is a gift from Him
\-the thirty-six delicious foods to eat,
cozy beds, cooling breezes, peaceful joy and the experience of pleasure. ||3||
Give me that state of mind, by which I may not forget You.
Give me that understanding, by which I may meditate on You.
I sing Your Glorious Praises with each and every breath. Nanak takes the Support of the Guru's Feet. ||4||12||19||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
To praise You is to follow Your Command and Your Will.
That which pleases You is spiritual wisdom and meditation.
That which pleases God is chanting and meditation; to be in harmony with His Will is perfect spiritual wisdom. ||1||
He alone sings Your Ambrosial Naam, who is pleasing to Your Mind, O my Lord and Master.
You belong to the Saints, and the Saints belong to You. The minds of the Saints are attuned to You, O my Lord and Master. ||2||
You cherish and nurture the Saints.
The Saints play with You, O Sustainer of the World.
Your Saints are very dear to You. You are the breath of life of the Saints. ||3||
My mind is a sacrifice to those Saints who know You,
and are pleasing to Your Mind.
In their company I have found a lasting peace. Nanak is satisfied and fulfilled with the Sublime Essence of the Lord. ||4||13||20||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl
: You are the Ocean of Water, and I am Your fish.
Your Name is the drop of water, and I am a thirsty rainbird.
You are my hope, and You are my thirst. My mind is absorbed in You. ||1||
Just as the baby is satisfied by drinking milk,
and the poor person is pleased by seeing wealth,
and the thirsty person is refreshed by drinking cool water, so is this mind drenched with delight in the Lord. ||2||
Just as the darkness is lit up by the lamp,
and the hopes of the wife are fulfilled by thinking about her husband,
and people are filled with bliss upon meeting their beloved, so is my mind imbued with the Lord's Love. ||3||
The Saints have set me upon the Lord's Path.
By the Grace of the Holy Saint, I have been attuned to the Lord.
The Lord is mine, and I am the slave of the Lord. O Nanak, the Guru has blessed me with the True Word of the Shabad. ||4||14||21||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is eternally pure.
The Lord is the Giver of Peace and the Dispeller of sorrow.
I have seen and tasted all other flavors, but to my mind, the Subtle Essence of the Lord is the sweetest of all. ||1||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 008

Whoever drinks this in, is satisfied.
Whoever obtains the Sublime Essence of the Naam becomes immortal.
The Treasure of the Naam is obtained by one whose mind is filled with the Word of the Guru's Shabad. ||2||
One who obtains the Sublime Essence of the Lord is satisfied and fulfilled.
One who obtains this Flavor of the Lord does not waver.
One who has this destiny written on his forehead obtains the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||3||
The Lord has come into the hands of the One, the Guru, who has blessed so many with good fortune.
Attached to Him, a great many have been liberated.
The Gurmukh obtains the Treasure of the Naam; says Nanak, those who see the Lord are very rare. ||4||15||22||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
My Lord, Har, Har, Har, is the nine treasures, the supernatural spiritual powers of the Siddhas, wealth and prosperity.
He is the Deep and Profound Treasure of Life.
Hundreds of thousands, even millions of pleasures and delights are enjoyed by one who falls at the Guru's Feet. ||1||
Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, all are sanctified,
and all family and friends are saved.
By Guru's Grace, I meditate on the Inaccessible and Unfathomable True Lord. ||2||
The One, the Guru, who is sought by all-only a few, by great good fortune, receive His Darshan.
His Place is lofty, infinite and unfathomable; the Guru has shown me that palace. ||3||
Your Ambrosial Name is deep and profound.
That person is liberated, in whose heart You dwell.
The Guru cuts away all his bonds; O Servant Nanak, he is absorbed in the poise of intuitive peace. ||4||16||23||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
By God's Grace, I meditate on the Lord, Har, Har.
By God's Kindness, I sing the songs of joy.
While standing and sitting, while sleeping and while awake, meditate on the Lord, all your life. ||1||
The Holy Saint has given me the Medicine of the Naam.
My sins have been cut out, and I have become pure.
I am filled with bliss, and all my pains have been taken away. All my suffering has been dispelled. ||2||
One who has my Beloved on his side, is liberated from the world-ocean.
One who recognizes the Guru practices Truth; why should he be afraid? ||3||
Since I found the Company of the Holy and met the Guru, the demon of pride has departed.
With each and every breath, Nanak sings the Lord's Praises. The True Guru has covered my sins. ||4||17||24||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Through and through, the Lord is intermingled with His servant.
God, the Giver of Peace, cherishes His servant.
I carry the water, wave the fan, and grind the grain for the servant of my Lord and Master. ||1||
God has cut the noose from around my neck; He has placed me in His Service.
The Lord and Master's Command is pleasing to the mind of His servant.
He does that which pleases his Lord and Master. Inwardly and outwardly, the servant knows his Lord. ||2||
You are the All-knowing Lord and Master; You know all ways and means.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 009

The servant of the Lord and Master enjoys the Love and Affection of the Lord.
That which belongs to the Lord and Master, belongs to His servant. The servant becomes distinguished in association with his Lord and Master. ||3||
He, whom the Lord and Master dresses in the robes of honor, is not called to answer for his account any longer.
Nanak is a sacrifice to that servant. He is the pearl of the deep and unfathomable Ocean of God. ||4||18||25||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Everything is within the home of the self; there is nothing beyond.
One who searches outside is deluded by doubt.
By Guru's Grace, one who has found the Lord within is happy, inwardly and outwardly. ||1||
Slowly, gently, drop by drop, the stream of nectar trickles down within.
The mind drinks it in, hearing and reflecting on the Word of the Shabad.
It enjoys bliss and ecstasy day and night, and plays with the Lord forever and ever. ||2||
I have now been united with the Lord after having been separated and cut off from Him for so many lifetimes;
by the Grace of the Holy Saint, the dried-up branches have blossomed forth again in their greenery.
I have obtained this sublime understanding, and I meditate on the Naam; as Gurmukh, I have met the Lord. ||3||
As the waves of water merge again with the water,
so does my light merge again into the Light.
Says Nanak, the veil of illusion has been cut away, and I shall not go out wandering any more. ||4||19||26||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
I am a sacrifice to those who have heard of You.
I am a sacrifice to those whose tongues speak of You.
Again and again, I am a sacrifice to those who meditate on You with mind and body. ||1||
I wash the feet of those who walk upon Your Path.
With my eyes, I long to behold those kind people.
I offer my mind to those friends, who have met the Guru and found God. ||2||
Very fortunate are those who know You.
In the midst of all, they remain detached and balanced in Nirvaanaa.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, they cross over the terrifying world-ocean, and conquer all their evil passions. ||3||
My mind has entered their Sanctuary.
I have renounced my pride in my own strength, and the darkness of emotional attachment.
Please bless Nanak with the Gift of the Naam, the Name of the Inaccessible and Unfathomable God. ||4||20||27||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
You are the tree; Your branches have blossomed forth.
From the very small and subtle, You have become huge and manifest.
You are the Ocean of Water, and You are the foam and the bubbles on its surface. I cannot see any other except You, Lord. ||1||
You are the thread, and You are also the beads.
You are the knot, and You are the primary bead of the maalaa.
In the beginning, in the middle and in the end, there is God. I cannot see any other except You, Lord. ||2||
You transcend all qualities, and You possess the supreme qualities. You are the Giver of peace.
You are detached in Nirvaanaa, and You are the Enjoyer, imbued with love.
You Yourself know Your Own Ways; You dwell upon Yourself. ||3||
You are the Master, and then again, You are the servant.
O God, You Yourself are the Manifest and the Unmanifest.
Slave Nanak sings Your Glorious Praises forever. Please, just for a moment, bless him with Your Glance of Grace. ||4||21||28||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 010

Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Blessed are those words, by which the Naam is chanted.
Rare are those who know this, by Guru's Grace.
Blessed is that time when one sings and hears the Lord's Name. Blessed and approved is the coming of such a one. ||1||
Those eyes which behold the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan are approved and accepted.
Those hands which write the Praises of the Lord are good.
Those feet which walk in the Lord's Way are beautiful. I am a sacrifice to that Congregation in which the Lord is recognized. ||2||
Listen, O my beloved friends and companions:
in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, you shall be saved in an instant.
Your sins will be cut out; your mind will be immaculate and pure. Your comings and goings shall cease. ||3||
With my palms pressed together, I offer this prayer:
please bless me with Your Mercy, and save this sinking stone.
God has become merciful to Nanak; God is pleasing to Nanak's mind. ||4||22||29||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
The Word of Your Bani, Lord, is Ambrosial Nectar.
Hearing it again and again, I am elevated to the supreme heights.
The burning within me has been extinguished, and my mind has been cooled and soothed, by the Blessed Vision of the True Guru. ||1||
Happiness is obtained, and sorrow runs far away,
when the Saints chant the Lord's Name.
The sea, the dry land, and the lakes are filled with the Water of the Lord's Name; no place is left empty. ||2||
The Creator has showered His Kindness;
He cherishes and nurtures all beings and creatures.
He is Merciful, Kind and Compassionate. All are satisfied and fulfilled through Him. ||3||
The woods, the meadows and the three worlds are rendered green.
The Doer of all did this in an instant.
As Gurmukh, Nanak meditates on the One who fulfills the desires of the mind. ||4||23||30||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
You are my Father, and You are my Mother.
You are my Relative, and You are my Brother.
You are my Protector everywhere; why should I feel any fear or anxiety? ||1||
By Your Grace, I recognize You.
You are my Shelter, and You are my Honor.
Without You, there is no other; the entire Universe is the Arena of Your Play. ||2||
You have created all beings and creatures.
As it pleases You, You assign tasks to one and all.
All things are Your Doing; we can do nothing ourselves. ||3||
Meditating on the Naam, I have found great peace.
Singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, my mind is cooled and soothed.
Through the Perfect Guru, congratulations are pouring in-Nanak is victorious on the arduous battlefield of life! ||4||24||31||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
God is the Breath of Life of my soul, the Support of my mind.
His devotees live by singing the Glorious Praises of the Infinite Lord.
The Ambrosial Name of the Lord is the Treasure of Excellence. Meditating, meditating on the Lord's Name, I have found peace. ||1||
One whose heart's desires lead him from his own home to the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, shall be rid of the cycle of birth and death.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 011

His hopes and desires are fulfilled, when he gains the Blessed Vision of the Guru's Darshan. ||2||
The limits of the Inaccessible and Unfathomable Lord cannot be known.
The seekers, the Siddhas, those beings of miraculous spiritual powers, and the spiritual teachers, all meditate on Him.
Thus, their egos are erased, and their doubts are dispelled. The Guru has enlightened their minds. ||3||
I chant the Name of the Lord, the Treasure of bliss, joy, salvation, intuitive peace and poise.
When my Lord and Master blessed me with His Mercy, O Nanak, then His Name entered the home of my mind. ||4||25||32||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Hearing of You, I live.
You are my Beloved, my Lord and Master, Utterly Great.
You alone know Your Ways; I grasp Your Support, Lord of the World. ||1||
Singing Your Glorious Praises, my mind is rejuvenated.
Hearing Your Sermon, all filth is removed.
Joining the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, I meditate forever on the Merciful Lord. ||2||
I dwell on my God with each and every breath.
This understanding has been implanted within my mind, by Guru's Grace.
By Your Grace, the Divine Light has dawned. The Merciful Lord cherishes everyone. ||3||
True, True, True is that God.
Forever, forever and ever, He Himself is.
Your Playful Ways are revealed, O my Beloved. Beholding them, Nanak is enraptured. ||4||26||33||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
By His Command, the rain begins to fall.
The Saints and friends have met to chant the Naam.
Serene tranquility and peaceful ease have come; God Himself has brought a deep and profound peace. ||1||
God has produced everything in great abundance.
Granting His Grace, God has satisfied all.
Bless us with Your Gifts, O my Great Giver. All beings and creatures are satisfied. ||2||
True is the Master, and True is His Name.
By Guru's Grace, I meditate forever on Him.
The fear of birth and death has been dispelled; emotional attachment, sorrow and suffering have been erased. ||3||
With each and every breath, Nanak praises the Lord.
Meditating in remembrance on the Name, all bonds are cut away.
One's hopes are fulfilled in an instant, chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, Har, Har, Har. ||4||27||34||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Come, dear friends, Saints and companions:
let us join together and sing the Glorious Praises of the Inaccessible and Infinite Lord.
Those who sing and hear these praises are liberated, so let us meditate on the One who created us. ||1||
The sins of countless incarnations depart,
and we receive the fruits of the mind's desires.
So meditate on that Lord, our True Lord and Master, who gives sustenance to all. ||2||
Chanting the Naam, all pleasures are obtained.
All fears are erased, meditating on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
One who serves the Lord swims across to the other side, and all his affairs are resolved. ||3||
I have come to Your Sanctuary;
if it pleases You, unite me with You.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 012

Shower Your Mercy upon me, God; let me be committed to devotional worship. Nanak drinks in the Ambrosial Nectar of Truth. ||4||28||35||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
The Lord of the Universe, the Support of the earth, has become Merciful;
the rain is falling everywhere.
He is Merciful to the meek, always Kind and Gentle; the Creator has brought cooling relief. ||1||
He cherishes all His beings and creatures,
as the mother cares for her children.
The Destroyer of pain, the Ocean of Peace, the Lord and Master gives sustenance to all. ||2||
The Merciful Lord is totally pervading and permeating the water and the land.
I am forever devoted, a sacrifice to Him.
Night and day, I always meditate on Him; in an instant, He saves all. ||3||
God Himself protects all;
He drives out all sorrow and suffering.
Chanting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the mind and body are rejuvenated. O Nanak, God has bestowed His Glance of Grace. ||4||29||36||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Where the Naam, the Name of God the Beloved is chanted
\-those barren places become mansions of gold.
Where the Naam, the Name of my Lord of the Universe is not chanted-those towns are like the barren wilderness. ||1||
One who meditates as he eats dry bread,
sees the Blessed Lord inwardly and outwardly.
Know this well, that one who eats and eats while practicing evil, is like a field of poisonous plants. ||2||
One who does not feel love for the Saints,
misbehaves in the company of the wicked shaaktas, the faithless cynics;
he wastes this human body, so difficult to obtain. In his ignorance, he tears up his own roots. ||3||
I seek Your Sanctuary, O my Lord, Merciful to the meek,
Ocean of Peace, my Guru, Sustainer of the world.
Shower Your Mercy upon Nanak, that he may sing Your Glorious Praises; please, preserve my honor. ||4||30||37||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
I cherish in my heart the Feet of my Lord and Master.
All my troubles and sufferings have run away.
The music of intuitive peace, poise and tranquility wells up within; I dwell in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy. ||1||
The bonds of love with the Lord are never broken.
The Lord is totally permeating and pervading inside and out.
Meditating, meditating, meditating in remembrance on Him, singing His Glorious Praises, the noose of death is cut away. ||2||
The Ambrosial Nectar, the Unstruck Melody of Gurbani rains down continually;
deep within my mind and body, peace and tranquility have come.
Your humble servants remain satisfied and fulfilled, and the True Guru blesses them with encouragement and comfort. ||3||
We are His, and from Him, we receive our rewards.
Showering His Mercy upon us, God has united us with Him.
Our comings and goings have ended, and through great good fortune, O Nanak, our hopes are fulfilled. ||4||31||38||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
The rain has fallen; I have found the Transcendent Lord God.
All beings and creatures dwell in peace.
Suffering has been dispelled, and true happiness has dawned, as we meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||1||
The One, to whom we belong, cherishes and nurtures us.
The Supreme Lord God has become our Protector.
My Lord and Master has heard my prayer; my efforts have been rewarded. ||2||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 013

He is the Giver of all souls.
By Guru's Grace, He blesses us with His Glance of Grace.
The beings in the water, on the land and in the sky are all satisfied; I wash the Feet of the Holy. ||3||
He is the Fulfiller of the desires of the mind.
Forever and ever, I am a sacrifice to Him.
O Nanak, the Destroyer of pain has given this Gift; I am imbued with the Love of the Delightful Lord. ||4||32||39||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Mind and body are Yours; all wealth is Yours.
You are my God, my Lord and Master.
Body and soul and all riches are Yours. Yours is the Power, O Lord of the World. ||1||
Forever and ever, You are the Giver of Peace.
I bow down and fall at Your Feet.
I act as it pleases You, as You cause me to act, Kind and Compassionate Dear Lord. ||2||
O God, from You I receive; You are my decoration.
Whatever You give me, brings me happiness.
Wherever You keep me, is heaven. You are the Cherisher of all. ||3||
Meditating, meditating in remembrance, Nanak has found peace.
Twenty-four hours a day, I sing Your Glorious Praises.
All my hopes and desires are fulfilled; I shall never again suffer sorrow. ||4||33||40||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
The Supreme Lord God has unleashed the rain clouds.
Over the sea and over the land-over all the earth's surface, in all directions, He has brought the rain.
Peace has come, and the thirst of all has been quenched; there is joy and ecstasy everywhere. ||1||
He is the Giver of Peace, the Destroyer of pain.
He gives and forgives all beings.
He Himself nurtures and cherishes His Creation. I fall at His Feet and surrender to Him. ||2||
Seeking His Sanctuary, salvation is obtained.
With each and every breath, I meditate on the Lord's Name.
Without Him, there is no other Lord and Master. All places belong to Him. ||3||
Yours is the Honor, God, and Yours is the Power.
You are the True Lord and Master, the Ocean of Excellence.
Servant Nanak utters this prayer: may I meditate on You twenty-four hours a day. ||4||34||41||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
All happiness comes, when God is pleased.
The Feet of the Perfect Guru dwell in my mind.
I am intuitively absorbed in the state of Samaadhi deep within. God alone knows this sweet pleasure. ||1||
My Lord and Master is Inaccessible and Unfathomable.
Deep within each and every heart, He dwells near and close at hand.
He is always detached; He is the Giver of souls. How rare is that person who understands his own self. ||2||
This is the sign of union with God:
in the mind, the Command of the True Lord is recognized.
Intuitive peace and poise, contentment, enduring satisfaction and bliss come through the Pleasure of the Master's Will. ||3||
God, the Great Giver, has given me His Hand.
He has erased all the sickness of birth and death.
O Nanak, those whom God has made His slaves, rejoice in the pleasure of singing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises. ||4||35||42||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 014

Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
The Life of the World, the Sustainer of the Earth, has showered His Mercy;
the Guru's Feet have come to dwell within my mind.
The Creator has made me His Own. He has destroyed the city of sorrow. ||1||
The True One abides within my mind and body;
no place seems difficult to me now.
All the evil-doers and enemies have now become my friends. I long only for my Lord and Master. ||2||
Whatever He does, He does all by Himself.
No one can know His Ways.
He Himself is the Helper and Support of His Saints. God has cast out my doubts and delusions. ||3||
His Lotus Feet are the Support of His humble servants.
Twenty-four hours a day, they deal in the Name of the Lord.
In peace and pleasure, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. O Nanak, God is permeating everywhere. ||4||36||43||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
True is that temple, within which one meditates on the True Lord.
Blessed is that heart, within which the Lord's Glorious Praises are sung.
Beautiful is that land, where the Lord's humble servants dwell. I am a sacrifice to the True Name. ||1||
The extent of the True Lord's Greatness cannot be known.
His Creative Power and His Bounties cannot be described.
Your humble servants live by meditating, meditating on You. Their minds treasure the True Word of the Shabad. ||2||
The Praises of the True One are obtained by great good fortune.
By Guru's Grace, the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung.
Those who are imbued with Your Love are pleasing to You. The True Name is their Banner and Insignia. ||3||
No one knows the limits of the True Lord.
In all places and interspaces, the True One is pervading.
O Nanak, meditate forever on the True One, the Searcher of hearts, the Knower of all. ||4||37||44||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Beautiful is the night, and beautiful is the day,
when one joins the Society of the Saints and chants the Ambrosial Naam.
If you remember the Lord in meditation for a moment, even for an instant, then your life will become fruitful and prosperous. ||1||
Remembering the Naam, the Name of the Lord, all sinful mistakes are erased.
Inwardly and outwardly, the Lord God is always with us.
Fear, dread and doubt have been dispelled by the Perfect Guru; now, I see God everywhere. ||2||
God is All-powerful, Vast, Lofty and Infinite.
The Naam is overflowing with the nine treasures.
In the beginning, in the middle, and in the end, there is God. Nothing else even comes close to Him. ||3||
Take pity on me, O my Lord, Merciful to the meek.
I am a beggar, begging for the dust of the feet of the Holy.
Servant Nanak begs for this gift: let me meditate on the Lord, forever and ever. ||4||38||45||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
You are here, and You are hereafter.
All beings and creatures were created by You.
Without You, there is no other, O Creator. You are my Support and my Protection. ||1||
The tongue lives by chanting and meditating on the Lord's Name.
The Supreme Lord God is the Inner-knower, the Searcher of hearts.
Those who serve the Lord find peace; they do not lose their lives in the gamble. ||2||
Your humble servant, who obtains the Medicine of the Naam,

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 015

is rid of the illnesses of countless lifetimes and incarnations.
So sing the Kirtan of the Lord's Praises, day and night. This is the most fruitful occupation. ||3||
Bestowing His Glance of Grace, He has adorned His slave.
Deep within each and every heart, the Supreme Lord is humbly worshipped.
Without the One, there is no other at all. O Baba Nanak, this is the most excellent wisdom. ||4||39||46||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
My mind and body are imbued with love for the Lord.
I sacrifice everything for Him.
Twenty-four hours a day, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe. Do not forget Him, for even one breath. ||1||
He is a companion, a friend, and a beloved of mine,
who reflects upon the Lord's Name, in the Company of the Holy.
In the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, cross over the world-ocean, and the noose of death shall be cut away. ||2||
The four cardinal blessings are obtained by serving the Lord.
The Elysian Tree, the source of all blessings, is meditation on the Unseen and Unknowable Lord.
The Guru has cut out the sinful mistakes of sexual desire and anger, and my hopes have been fulfilled. ||3||
That mortal who is blessed by perfect destiny meets the Lord, the Sustainer of the Universe, in the Company of the Holy.
O Nanak, if the Naam, the Name of the Lord, dwells within the mind, one is approved and accepted, whether he is a house-holder or a renunciate. ||4||40||47||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, my heart is filled with peace.
By His Grace, His devotees become famous and acclaimed.
Joining the Society of the Saints, I chant the Name of the Lord, Har, Har; the disease of laziness has disappeared. ||1||
O Siblings of Destiny, the nine treasures are found in the Home of the Lord;
He comes to meet those who deserve it by their past actions.
The Perfect Transcendent Lord is spiritual wisdom and meditation. God is All-powerful to do all things. ||2||
In an instant, He establishes and disestablishes.
He Himself is the One, and He Himself is the Many.
Filth does not stick to the Giver, the Life of the World. Gazing upon the Blessed Vision of His Darshan, the pain of separation departs. ||3||
Holding on to the hem of His Robe, the entire Universe is saved.
He Himself causes His Name to be chanted.
The Boat of the Guru is found by His Grace; O Nanak, such blessed destiny is pre-ordained. ||4||41||48||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
People do whatever the Lord inspires them to do.
Wherever He keeps us is a good place.
That person is clever and honorable, unto whom the Hukam of the Lord's Command seems sweet. ||1||
Everything is strung upon the One String of the Lord.
Those whom the Lord attaches, are attached to His Feet.
Those, whose inverted lotus of the crown chakra is illuminated, see the Immaculate Lord everywhere. ||2||
Only You Yourself know Your Glory.
You Yourself recognize Your Own Self.
I am a sacrifice to Your Saints, who have crushed their sexual desire, anger and greed. ||3||
You have no hatred or vengeance; Your Saints are immaculate and pure.
Seeing them, all sins depart.
Nanak lives by meditating, meditating on the Naam. His stubborn doubt and fear have departed. ||4||42||49||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 016

Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
One who asks for a false gift,
shall not take even an instant to die.
But one who continually serves the Supreme Lord God and meets the Guru, is said to be immortal. ||1||
One whose mind is dedicated to loving devotional worship
sings His Glorious Praises night and day, and remains forever awake and aware.
Taking him by the hand, the Lord and Master merges into Himself that person, upon whose forehead such destiny is written. ||2||
His Lotus Feet dwell in the minds of His devotees.
Without the Transcendent Lord, all are plundered.
I long for the dust of the feet of His humble servants. The Name of the True Lord is my decoration. ||3||
Standing up and sitting down, I sing the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
Meditating in remembrance on Him, I obtain my Eternal Husband Lord.
God has become merciful to Nanak. I cheerfully accept Your Will. ||4||43||50||
Raag Maajh, Ashtapadees: First Mehl, First House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
By His Command, all are attuned to the Word of the Shabad,
and all are called to the Mansion of His Presence, the True Court of the Lord.
O my True Lord and Master, Merciful to the meek, my mind is pleased and appeased by the Truth. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who are adorned with the Word of the Shabad.
The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, is forever the Giver of Peace. Through the Guru's Teachings, it dwells in the mind. ||1||Pause||
No one is mine, and I am no one else's.
The True Lord and Master of the three worlds is mine.
Acting in egotism, so very many have died. After making mistakes, they later repent and regret. ||2||
Those who recognize the Hukam of the Lord's Command chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are glorified with the Naam.
Everyone's account is kept in the True Court, and through the Beauty of the Naam, they are saved. ||3||
The self-willed manmukhs are deluded; they find no place of rest.
Bound and gagged at Death's Door, they are brutally beaten.
Without the Name, there are no companions or friends. Liberation comes only by meditating on the Naam. ||4||
The false shaaktas, the faithless cynics, do not like the Truth.
Bound by duality, they come and go in reincarnation.
No one can erase pre-recorded destiny; the Gurmukhs are liberated. ||5||
In this world of her parents' house, the young bride did not know her Husband.
Through falsehood, she has been separated from Him, and she cries out in misery.
Defrauded by demerits, she does not find the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. But through virtuous actions, her demerits are forgiven. ||6||
She, who knows her Beloved in her parents' house,
as Gurmukh, comes to understand the essence of reality; she contemplates her Lord.
Her comings and goings cease, and she is absorbed in the True Name. ||7||
The Gurmukhs understand and describe the Indescribable.
True is our Lord and Master; He loves the Truth.
Nanak offers this true prayer: singing His Glorious Praises, I merge with the True One. ||8||1||
Maajh, Third Mehl, First House:
By His Mercy, we meet the True Guru.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 017

Center your awareness on seva-selfless service-and focus your consciousness on the Word of the Shabad.
Subduing your ego, you shall find a lasting peace, and your emotional attachment to Maya will be dispelled. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, I am totally devoted to the True Guru.
Through the Guru's Teachings, the Divine Light has dawned; I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day. ||1||Pause||
Search your body and mind, and find the Name.
Restrain your wandering mind, and keep it in check.
Night and day, sing the Songs of the Guru's Bani; worship the Lord with intuitive devotion. ||2||
Within this body are countless objects.
The Gurmukh attains Truth, and comes to see them.
Beyond the nine gates, the Tenth Gate is found, and liberation is obtained. The Unstruck Melody of the Shabad vibrates. ||3||
True is the Master, and True is His Name.
By Guru's Grace, He comes to dwell within the mind.
Night and day, remain attuned to the Lord's Love forever, and you shall obtain understanding in the True Court. ||4||
Those who do not understand the nature of sin and virtue
are attached to duality; they wander around deluded.
The ignorant and blind people do not know the way; they come and go in reincarnation over and over again. ||5||
Serving the Guru, I have found eternal peace;
my ego has been silenced and subdued.
Through the Guru's Teachings, the darkness has been dispelled, and the heavy doors have been opened. ||6||
Subduing my ego, I have enshrined the Lord within my mind.
I focus my consciousness on the Guru's Feet forever.
By Guru's Grace, my mind and body are immaculate and pure; I meditate on the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||7||
From birth to death, everything is for You.
You bestow greatness upon those whom You have forgiven.
O Nanak, meditating forever on the Naam, you shall be blessed in both birth and death. ||8||1||2||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
My God is Immaculate, Inaccessible and Infinite.
Without a scale, He weighs the universe.
One who becomes Gurmukh, understands. Chanting His Glorious Praises, he is absorbed into the Lord of Virtue. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those whose minds are filled with the Name of the Lord.
Those who are committed to Truth remain awake and aware night and day. They are honored in the True Court. ||1||Pause||
He Himself hears, and He Himself sees.
Those, upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace, become acceptable.
They are attached, whom the Lord Himself attaches; as Gurmukh, they live the Truth. ||2||
Those whom the Lord Himself misleads-whose hand can they take?
That which is pre-ordained, cannot be erased.
Those who meet the True Guru are very fortunate and blessed; through perfect karma, He is met. ||3||
The young bride is fast asleep in her parents' home, night and day.
She has forgotten her Husband Lord; because of her faults and demerits, she is abandoned.
She wanders around continually, crying out, night and day. Without her Husband Lord, she cannot get any sleep. ||4||
In this world of her parents' home, she may come to know the Giver of peace,
if she subdues her ego, and recognizes the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Her bed is beautiful; she ravishes and enjoys her Husband Lord forever. She is adorned with the Decorations of Truth. ||5||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 018

He created the 8.4 million species of beings.
Those, upon whom He casts His Glance of Grace, come to meet the Guru.
Shedding their sins, His servants are forever pure; at the True Court, they are beautified by the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||6||
When they are called to settle their accounts, who will answer then?
There shall be no peace then, from counting out by twos and threes.
The True Lord God Himself forgives, and having forgiven, He unites them with Himself. ||7||
He Himself does, and He Himself causes all to be done.
Through the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru, He is met.
O Nanak, through the Naam, greatness is obtained. He Himself unites in His Union. ||8||2||3||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The One Lord Himself moves about imperceptibly.
As Gurmukh, I see Him, and then this mind is pleased and uplifted.
Renouncing desire, I have found intuitive peace and poise; I have enshrined the One within my mind. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who focus their consciousness on the One.
Through the Guru's Teachings, my mind has come to its only home; it is imbued with the True Color of the Lord's Love. ||1||Pause||
This world is deluded; You Yourself have deluded it.
Forgetting the One, it has become engrossed in duality.
Night and day, it wanders around endlessly, deluded by doubt; without the Name, it suffers in pain. ||2||
Those who are attuned to the Love of the Lord, the Architect of Destiny
\-by serving the Guru, they are known throughout the four ages.
Those, upon whom the Lord bestows greatness, are absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||3||
Being in love with Maya, they do not think of the Lord.
Bound and gagged in the City of Death, they suffer in terrible pain.
Blind and deaf, they see nothing at all; the self-willed manmukhs rot away in sin. ||4||
Those, whom You attach to Your Love, are attuned to Your Love.
Through loving devotional worship, they become pleasing to Your Mind.
They serve the True Guru, the Giver of eternal peace, and all their desires are fulfilled. ||5||
O Dear Lord, I seek Your Sanctuary forever.
You Yourself forgive us, and bless us with Glorious Greatness.
The Messenger of Death does not draw near those who meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har. ||6||
Night and day, they are attuned to His Love; they are pleasing to the Lord.
My God merges with them, and unites them in Union.
Forever and ever, O True Lord, I seek the Protection of Your Sanctuary; You Yourself inspire us to understand the Truth. ||7||
Those who know the Truth are absorbed in Truth.
They sing the Lord's Glorious Praises, and speak the Truth.
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam remain unattached and balanced; in the home of the inner self, they are absorbed in the primal trance of deep meditation. ||8||3||4||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
One who dies in the Word of the Shabad is truly dead.
Death does not crush him, and pain does not afflict him.
His light merges and is absorbed into the Light, when he hears and merges in the Truth. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to the Lord's Name, which brings us to glory.
One who serves the True Guru, and focuses his consciousness on Truth, following the Guru's Teachings, is absorbed in intuitive peace and poise. ||1||Pause||
This human body is transitory, and transitory are the garments it wears.
Attached to duality, no one attains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 019

Night and day, day and night, they burn. Without her Husband Lord, the soul-bride suffers in terrible pain. ||2||
Her body and her status shall not go with her to the world hereafter.
Where she is called to answer for her account, there, she shall be emancipated only by true actions.
Those who serve the True Guru shall prosper; here and hereafter, they are absorbed in the Naam. ||3||
She who adorns herself with the Love and the Fear of God,
by Guru's Grace, obtains the Mansion of the Lord's Presence as her home.
Night and day, day and night, she constantly ravishes and enjoys her Beloved. She is dyed in the permanent color of His Love. ||4||
The Husband Lord abides with everyone, always;
but how rare are those few who, by Guru's Grace, obtain His Glance of Grace.
My God is the Highest of the High; granting His Grace, He merges us into Himself. ||5||
This world is asleep in emotional attachment to Maya.
Forgetting the Naam, the Name of the Lord, it ultimately comes to ruin.
The One who put it to sleep shall also awaken it. Through the Guru's Teachings, understanding dawns. ||6||
One who drinks in this Nectar, shall have his delusions dispelled.
By Guru's Grace, the state of liberation is attained.
One who is imbued with devotion to the Lord, remains always balanced and detached. Subduing selfishness and conceit, he is united with the Lord. ||7||
He Himself creates, and He Himself assigns us to our tasks.
He Himself gives sustenance to the 8.4 million species of beings.
O Nanak, those who meditate on the Naam are atuned to Truth. They do that which is pleasing to His Will. ||8||4||5||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
Diamonds and rubies are produced deep within the self.
They are assayed and valued tthrough the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Those who have gathered Truth, speak Truth; they apply the Touch-stone of Truth. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Word of the Guru's Bani within their minds.
In the midst of the darkness of the world, they obtain the Immaculate One, and their light merges into the Light. ||1||Pause||
Within this body are countless vast vistas;
the Immaculate Naam is totally Inaccessible and Infinite.
He alone becomes Gurmukh and obtains it, whom the Lord forgives, and unites with Himself. ||2||
My Lord and Master implants the Truth.
By Guru's Grace, one's consciousness is attached to the Truth.
The Truest of the True is pervading everywhere; the true ones merge in Truth. ||3||
The True Carefree Lord is my Beloved.
He cuts out our sinful mistakes and evil actions;
with love and affection, meditate forever on Him. He implants the Fear of God and loving devotional worship within us. ||4||
Devotional worship is True, if it pleases the True Lord.
He Himself bestows it; He does not regret it later.
He alone is the Giver of all beings. The Lord kills with the Word of His Shabad, and then revives. ||5||
Other than You, Lord, nothing is mine.
I serve You, Lord, and I praise You.
You unite me with Yourself, O True God. Through perfect good karma You are obtained. ||6||
For me, there is no other like You.
By Your Glance of Grace, my body is blessed and sanctified.
Night and day, the Lord takes care of us and protects us. The Gurmukhs are absorbed in intuitive peace and poise. ||7||
For me, there is no other as Great as You.
You Yourself create, and You Yourself destroy.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 020

You Yourself create, destroy and adorn. O Nanak, we are adorned and embellished with the Naam. ||8||5||6||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
He is the Enjoyer of all hearts.
The Invisible, Inaccessible and Infinite is pervading everywhere.
Meditating on my Lord God, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I am intuitively absorbed in the Truth. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who implant the Word of the Guru's Shabad in their minds.
When someone understands the Shabad, then he wrestles with his own mind; subduing his desires, he merges with the Lord. ||1||Pause||
The five enemies are plundering the world.
The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not understand or appreciate this.
Those who become Gurmukh-their houses are protected. The five enemies are destroyed by the Shabad. ||2||
The Gurmukhs are forever imbued with love for the True One.
They serve God with intuitive ease. Night and day, they are intoxicated with His Love.
Meeting with their Beloved, they sing the Glorious Praises of the True one; they are honored in the Court of the Lord. ||3||
First, the One created Himself;
second, the sense of duality; third, the three-phased Maya.
The fourth state, the highest, is obtained by the Gurmukh, who practices Truth, and only Truth. ||4||
Everything which is pleasing to the True Lord is true.
Those who know the Truth merge in intuitive peace and poise.
The life-style of the Gurmukh is to serve the True Lord. He goes and blends with the True Lord. ||5||
Without the True One, there is no other at all.
Attached to duality, the world is distracted and distressed to death.
One who becomes Gurmukh knows only the One. Serving the One, peace is obtained. ||6||
All beings and creatures are in the Protection of Your Sanctuary.
You place the chessmen on the board; You see the imperfect and the perfect as well.
Night and day, You cause people to act; You unite them in Union with Yourself. ||7||
You Yourself unite, and You see Yourself close at hand.
You Yourself are totally pervading amongst all.
O Nanak, God Himself is pervading and permeating everywhere; only the Gurmukhs understand this. ||8||6||7||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The Nectar of the Guru's Bani is very sweet.
Rare are the Gurmukhs who see and taste it.
The Divine Light dawns within, and the supreme essence is found. In the True Court, the Word of the Shabad vibrates. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who focus their consciousness on the Guru's Feet.
The True Guru is the True Pool of Nectar; bathing in it, the mind is washed clean of all filth. ||1||Pause||
Your limits, O True Lord, are not known to anyone.
Rare are those who, by Guru's Grace, focus their consciousness on You.
Praising You, I am never satisfied; such is the hunger I feel for the True Name. ||2||
I see only the One, and no other.
By Guru's Grace, I drink in the Ambrosial Nectar.
My thirst is quenched by the Word of the Guru's Shabad; I am absorbed in intuitive peace and poise. ||3||
The Priceless Jewel is discarded like straw;
the blind self-willed manmukhs are attached to the love of duality.
As they plant, so do they harvest. They shall not obtain peace, even in their dreams. ||4||
Those who are blessed with His Mercy find the Lord.
The Word of the Guru's Shabad abides in the mind.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 021

Night and day, they remain in the Fear of God; conquering their fears, their doubts are dispelled. ||5||
Dispelling their doubts, they find a lasting peace.
By Guru's Grace, the supreme status is attained.
Deep within, they are pure, and their words are pure as well; intuitively, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||6||
They recite the Simritees, the Shaastras and the Vedas,
but deluded by doubt, they do not understand the essence of reality.
Without serving the True Guru, they find no peace; they earn only pain and misery. ||7||
The Lord Himself acts; unto whom should we complain?
How can anyone complain that the Lord has made a mistake?
O Nanak, the Lord Himself does, and causes things to be done; chanting the Naam, we are absorbed in the Naam. ||8||7||8||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
He Himself imbues us with His Love, with effortless ease.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we are dyed in the color of the Lord's Love.
This mind and body are so imbued, and this tongue is dyed in the deep crimson color of the poppy. Through the Love and the Fear of God, we are dyed in this color. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Fearless Lord within their minds.
By Guru's Grace, I meditate on the Fearless Lord; the Shabad has carried me across the poisonous world-ocean. ||1||Pause||
The idiotic self-willed manmukhs try to be clever,
but in spite of their bathing and washing, they shall not be acceptable.
As they came, so shall they go, regretting the mistakes they made. ||2||
The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not understand anything;
death was pre-ordained for them when they came into the world, but they do not understand.
The self-willed manmukhs may practice religious rituals, but they do not obtain the Name; without the Name, they lose this life in vain. ||3||
The practice of Truth is the essence of the Shabad.
Through the Perfect Guru, the gate of salvation is found.
So, night and day, listen to the Word of the Guru's Bani, and the Shabad. Let yourself be colored by this love. ||4||
The tongue, imbued with the Lord's Essence, delights in His Love.
My mind and body are enticed by the Lord's Sublime Love.
I have easily obtained my Darling Beloved; I am intuitively absorbed in celestial peace. ||5||
Those who have the Lord's Love within, sing His Glorious Praises;
through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are intuitively absorbed in celestial peace.
I am forever a sacrifice to those who dedicate their consciousness to the Guru's Service. ||6||
The True Lord is pleased with Truth, and only Truth.
By Guru's Grace, one's inner being is deeply imbued with His Love.
Sitting in that blessed place, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, who Himself inspires us to accept His Truth. ||7||
That one, upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, obtains it.
By Guru's Grace, egotism departs.
O Nanak, that one, within whose mind the Name dwells, is honored in the True Court. ||8||8||9||
Maajh Third Mehl:
Serving the True Guru is the greatest greatness.
The Dear Lord automatically comes to dwell in the mind.
The Dear Lord is the fruit-bearing tree; drinking in the Ambrosial Nectar, thirst is quenched. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to the one who leads me to join the True Congregation.
The Lord Himself unites me with the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||Pause||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 022

I serve the True Guru; the Word of His Shabad is beautiful.
Through it, the Name of the Lord comes to dwell within the mind.
The Pure Lord removes the filth of egotism, and we are honored in the True Court. ||2||
Without the Guru, the Naam cannot be obtained.
The Siddhas and the seekers lack it; they weep and wail.
Without serving the True Guru, peace is not obtained; through perfect destiny, the Guru is found. ||3||
This mind is a mirror; how rare are those who, as Gurmukh, see themselves in it.
Rust does not stick to those who burn their ego.
The Unstruck Melody of the Bani resounds through the Pure Word of the Shabad; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we are absorbed into the True One. ||4||
Without the True Guru, the Lord cannot be seen.
Granting His Grace, He Himself has allowed me to see Him.
All by Himself, He Himself is permeating and pervading; He is intuitively absorbed in celestial peace. ||5||
One who becomes Gurmukh embraces love for the One.
Doubt and duality are burned away by the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
Within his body, he deals and trades, and obtains the Treasure of the True Name. ||6||
The life-style of the Gurmukh is sublime; he sings the Praises of the Lord.
The Gurmukh finds the gate of salvation.
Night and day, he is imbued with the Lord's Love. He sings the Lord's Glorious Praises, and he is called to the Mansion of His Presence. ||7||
The True Guru, the Giver, is met when the Lord leads us to meet Him.
Through perfect destiny, the Shabad is enshrined in the mind.
O Nanak, the greatness of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is obtained by chanting the Glorious Praises of the True Lord. ||8||9||10||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
Those who lose their own selves obtain everything.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they enshrine Love for the True one.
They trade in Truth, they gather in Truth, and they deal only in Truth. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day.
I am Yours, You are my Lord and Master. You bestow greatness through the Word of Your Shabad. ||1||Pause||
That time, that moment is totally beautiful,
when the True One becomes pleasing to my mind.
Serving the True One, true greatness is obtained. By Guru's Grace, the True One is obtained. ||2||
The food of spiritual love is obtained when the True Guru is pleased.
Other essences are forgotten, when the Lord's Essence comes to dwell in the mind.
Truth, contentment and intuitive peace and poise are obtained from the Bani, the Word of the Perfect Guru. ||3||
The blind and ignorant fools do not serve the True Guru;
how will they find the gate of salvation?
They die and die, over and over again, only to be reborn, over and over again. They are struck down at Death's Door. ||4||
Those who know the essence of the Shabad, understand their own selves.
Immaculate is the speech of those who chant the Word of the Shabad.
Serving the True One, they find a lasting peace; they enshrine the nine treasures of the Naam within their minds. ||5||
Beautiful is that place, which is pleasing to the Lord's Mind.
There, sitting in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, the Glorious Praises of the Lord are sung.
Night and day, the True One is praised; the Immaculate Sound-current of the Naad resounds there. ||6||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 023

The wealth of the self-willed manmukhs is false, and false is their ostentatious display.
They practice falsehood, and suffer terrible pain.
Deluded by doubt, they wander day and night; through birth and death, they lose their lives. ||7||
My True Lord and Master is very dear to me.
The Shabad of the Perfect Guru is my Support.
O Nanak, one who obtains the Greatness of the Naam, looks upon pain and pleasure as one and the same. ||8||10||11||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The four sources of creation are Yours; the spoken word is Yours.
Without the Name, all are deluded by doubt.
Serving the Guru, the Lord's Name is obtained. Without the True Guru, no one can receive it. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who focus their consciousness on the Lord.
Through devotion to the Guru, the True One is found; He comes to abide in the mind, with intuitive ease. ||1||Pause||
Serving the True Guru, all things are obtained.
As are the desires one harbors, so are the rewards one receives.
The True Guru is the Giver of all things; through perfect destiny, He is met. ||2||
This mind is filthy and polluted; it does not meditate on the One.
Deep within, it is soiled and stained by the love of duality.
The egotists may go on pilgrimages to holy rivers, sacred shrines and foreign lands, but they only gather more of the dirt of egotism. ||3||
Serving the True Guru, filth and pollution are removed.
Those who focus their consciousness on the Lord remain dead while yet alive.
The True Lord is Pure; no filth sticks to Him. Those who are attached to the True One have their filth washed away. ||4||
Without the Guru, there is only pitch darkness.
The ignorant ones are blind-there is only utter darkness for them.
The maggots in manure do filthy deeds, and in filth they rot and putrefy. ||5||
Serving the Lord of Liberation, liberation is achieved.
The Word of the Shabad eradicates egotism and possessiveness.
So serve the Dear True Lord, night and day. By perfect good destiny, the Guru is found. ||6||
He Himself forgives and unites in His Union.
From the Perfect Guru, the Treasure of the Naam is obtained.
By the True Name, the mind is made true forever. Serving the True Lord, sorrow is driven out. ||7||
He is always close at hand-do not think that He is far away.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, recognize the Lord deep within your own being.
O Nanak, through the Naam, glorious greatness is received. Through the Perfect Guru, the Naam is obtained. ||8||11||12||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
Those who are True here, are True hereafter as well.
That mind is true, which is attuned to the True Shabad.
They serve the True One, and practice Truth; they earn Truth, and only Truth. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those whose minds are filled with the True Name.
They serve the True One, and are absorbed into the True One, singing the Glorious Praises of the True One. ||1||Pause||
The Pandits, the religious scholars read, but they do not taste the essence.
In love with duality and Maya, their minds wander, unfocused.
The love of Maya has displaced all their understanding; making mistakes, they live in regret. ||2||
But if they should meet the True Guru, then they obtain the essence of reality;
the Name of the Lord comes to dwell in their minds.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 024

Those who die in the Shabad and subdue their own minds, obtain the door of liberation. ||3||
They erase their sins, and eliminate their anger;
they keep the Guru's Shabad clasped tightly to their hearts.
Those who are attuned to Truth, remain balanced and detached forever. Subduing their egotism, they are united with the Lord. ||4||
Deep within the nucleus of the self is the jewel; we receive it only if the Lord inspires us to receive it.
The mind is bound by the three dispositions-the three modes of Maya.
Reading and reciting, the Pandits, the religious scholars, and the silent sages have grown weary, but they have not found the supreme essence of the fourth state. ||5||
The Lord Himself dyes us in the color of His Love.
Only those who are steeped in the Word of the Guru's Shabad are so imbued with His Love.
Imbued with the most beautiful color of the Lord's Love, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, with great pleasure and joy. ||6||
To the Gurmukh, the True Lord is wealth, miraculous spiritual powers and strict self-discipline.
Through the spiritual wisdom of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Gurmukh is liberated.
The Gurmukh practices Truth, and is absorbed in the Truest of the True. ||7||
The Gurmukh realizes that the Lord alone creates, and having created, He destroys.
To the Gurmukh, the Lord Himself is social class, status and all honor.
O Nanak, the Gurmukhs meditate on the Naam; through the Naam, they merge in the Naam. ||8||12||13||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
Creation and destruction happen through the Word of the Shabad.
Through the Shabad, creation happens again.
The Gurmukh knows that the True Lord is all-pervading. The Gurmukh understands creation and merger. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Perfect Guru within their minds.
From the Guru comes peace and tranquility; worship Him with devotion, day and night. Chanting His Glorious Praises, merge into the Glorious Lord. ||1||Pause||
The Gurmukh sees the Lord on the earth, and the Gurmukh sees Him in the water.
The Gurmukh sees Him in wind and fire; such is the wonder of His Play.
One who has no Guru, dies over and over again, only to be re-born. One who has no Guru continues coming and going in reincarnation. ||2||
The One Creator has set this play in motion.
In the frame of the human body, He has placed all things.
Those few who are pierced through by the Word of the Shabad, obtain the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. He calls them into His Wondrous Palace. ||3||
True is the Banker, and true are His traders.
They purchase Truth, with infinite love for the Guru.
They deal in Truth, and they practice Truth. They earn Truth, and only Truth. ||4||
Without investment capital, how can anyone acquire merchandise?
The self-willed manmukhs have all gone astray.
Without true wealth, everyone goes empty-handed; going empty-handed, they suffer in pain. ||5||
Some deal in Truth, through love of the Guru's Shabad.
They save themselves, and save all their ancestors as well.
Very auspicious is the coming of those who meet their Beloved and find peace. ||6||
Deep within the self is the secret, but the fool looks for it outside.
The blind self-willed manmukhs wander around like demons;
but where the secret is, there, they do not find it. The manmukhs are deluded by doubt. ||7||
He Himself calls us, and bestows the Word of the Shabad.
The soul-bride finds intuitive peace and poise in the Mansion of the Lord's Presence.
O Nanak, she obtains the glorious greatness of the Naam; she hears it again and again, and she meditates on it. ||8||13||14||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The True Guru has imparted the True Teachings.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 025

Think of the Lord, who shall be your Help and Support in the end.
The Lord is Inaccessible and Incomprehensible. He has no master, and He is not born. He is obtained through love of the True Guru. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who eliminate selfishness and conceit.
They eradicate selfishness and conceit, and then find the Lord; they are intuitively immersed in the Lord. ||1||Pause||
According to their pre-ordained destiny, they act out their karma.
Serving the True Guru, a lasting peace is found.
Without good fortune, the Guru is not found. Through the Word of the Shabad, they are united in the Lord's Union. ||2||
The Gurmukhs remain unaffected in the midst of the world.
The Guru is their cushion, and the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is their Support.
Who can oppress the Gurmukh? One who tries shall perish, writhing in pain. ||3||
The blind self-willed manmukhs have no understanding at all.
They are the assassins of the self, and the butchers of the world.
By continually slandering others, they carry a terrible load, and they carry the loads of others for nothing. ||4||
This world is a garden, and my Lord God is the Gardener.
He always takes care of it-nothing is exempt from His Care.
As is the fragrance which He bestows, so is the fragrant flower known. ||5||
The self-willed manmukhs are sick and diseased in the world.
They have forgotten the Giver of peace, the Unfathomable, the Infinite.
These miserable people wander endlessly, crying out in pain; without the Guru, they find no peace. ||6||
The One who created them, knows their condition.
And if He inspires them, then they realize the Hukam of His Command.
Whatever He places within them, that is what prevails, and so they outwardly appear. ||7||
I know of no other except the True One.
Those, whom the Lord attaches to Himself, become pure.
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within the heart of those, unto whom He has given it. ||8||14||15||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
Enshrining the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, in the mind,
all the pains of egotism, selfishness and conceit are eliminated.
By continually praising the Ambrosial Bani of the Word, I obtain the Amrit, the Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Ambrosial Bani of the Word within their minds.
Enshrining the Ambrosial Bani in their minds, they meditate on the Ambrosial Naam. ||1||Pause||
Those who continually chant the Ambrosial Words of Nectar see and behold this Amrit everywhere with their eyes.
They continually chant the Ambrosial Sermon day and night; chanting it, they cause others to hear it. ||2||
Imbued with the Ambrosial Love of the Lord, they lovingly focus their attention on Him.
By Guru's Grace, they receive this Amrit.
They chant the Ambrosial Name with their tongues day and night; their minds and bodies are satisfied by this Amrit. ||3||
That which God does is beyond anyone's consciousness;
no one can erase the Hukam of His Command.
By His Command, the Ambrosial Bani of the Word prevails, and by His Command, we drink in the Amrit. ||4||
The actions of the Creator Lord are marvellous and wonderful.
This mind is deluded, and goes around the wheel of reincarnation.
Those who focus their consciousness on the Ambrosial Bani of the Word, hear the vibrations of the Ambrosial Word of the Shabad. ||5||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 026

You Yourself created the counterfeit and the genuine.
You Yourself appraise all people.
You appraise the true, and place them in Your Treasury; You consign the false to wander in delusion. ||6||
How can I behold You? How can I praise You?
By Guru's Grace, I praise You through the Word of the Shabad.
In Your Sweet Will, the Amrit is found; by Your Will, You inspire us to drink in this Amrit. ||7||
The Shabad is Amrit; the Lord's Bani is Amrit.
Serving the True Guru, it permeates the heart.
O Nanak, the Ambrosial Naam is forever the Giver of peace; drinking in this Amrit, all hunger is satisfied. ||8||15||16||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The Ambrosial Nectar rains down, softly and gently.
How rare are those Gurmukhs who find it.
Those who drink it in are satisfied forever. Showering His Mercy upon them, the Lord quenches their thirst. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those Gurmukhs who drink in this Ambrosial Nectar.
The tongue tastes the essence, and remains forever imbued with the Lord's Love, intuitively singing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
By Guru's Grace, intuitive understanding is obtained;
subduing the sense of duality, they are in love with the One.
When He bestows His Glance of Grace, then they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord; by His Grace, they merge in Truth. ||2||
Above all is Your Glance of Grace, O God.
Upon some it is bestowed less, and upon others it is bestowed more.
Without You, nothing happens at all; the Gurmukhs understand this. ||3||
The Gurmukhs contemplate the essence of reality;
Your Treasures are overflowing with Ambrosial Nectar.
Without serving the True Guru, no one obtains it. It is obtained only by Guru's Grace. ||4||
Those who serve the True Guru are beautiful.
The Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, entices their inner minds.
Their minds and bodies are attuned to the Ambrosial Bani of the Word; this Ambrosial Nectar is intuitively heard. ||5||
The deluded, self-willed manmukhs are ruined through the love of duality.
They do not chant the Naam, and they die, eating poison.
Night and day, they continually sit in manure. Without selfless service, their lives are wasted away. ||6||
They alone drink in this Amrit, whom the Lord Himself inspires to do so.
By Guru's Grace, they intuitively enshrine love for the Lord.
The Perfect Lord is Himself perfectly pervading everywhere; through the Guru's Teachings, He is perceived. ||7||
He Himself is the Immaculate Lord.
He who has created, shall Himself destroy.
O Nanak, remember the Naam forever, and you shall merge into the True One with intuitive ease. ||8||16||17||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
Those who please You are linked to the Truth.
They serve the True One forever, with intuitive ease.
Through the True Word of the Shabad, they praise the True One, and they merge in the merging of Truth. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who praise the True One.
Those who meditate on the True One are attuned to Truth; they are absorbed into the Truest of the True. ||1||Pause||
The True One is everywhere, wherever I look.
By Guru's Grace, I enshrine Him in my mind.
True are the bodies of those whose tongues are attuned to Truth. They hear the Truth, and speak it with their mouths. ||2||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 027

Subduing their desires, they merge with the True One;
they see in their minds that everyone comes and goes in reincarnation.
Serving the True Guru, they become stable forever, and they obtain their dwelling in the home of the self. ||3||
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord is seen within one's own heart.
Through the Shabad, I have burned my emotional attachment to Maya.
I gaze upon the Truest of the True, and I praise Him. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, I obtain the True One. ||4||
Those who are attuned to Truth are blessed with the Love of the True One.
Those who praise the Lord's Name are very fortunate.
Through the Word of His Shabad, the True One blends with Himself, those who join the True Congregation and sing the Glorious Praises of the True One. ||5||
We could read the account of the Lord, if He were in any account.
He is Inaccessible and Incomprehensible; through the Shabad, understanding is obtained.
Night and day, praise the True Word of the Shabad. There is no other way to know His Worth. ||6||
People read and recite until they grow weary, but they do not find peace.
Consumed by desire, they have no understanding at all.
They purchase poison, and they are thirsty with their fascination for poison. Telling lies, they eat poison. ||7||
By Guru's Grace, I know the One.
Subduing my sense of duality, my mind is absorbed into the True One.
O Nanak, the One Name is pervading deep within my mind; by Guru's Grace, I receive it. ||8||17||18||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
In all colors and forms, You are pervading.
People die over and over again; they are re-born, and make their rounds on the wheel of reincarnation.
You alone are Eternal and Unchanging, Inaccessible and Infinite. Through the Guru's Teachings, understanding is imparted. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Lord's Name in their minds.
The Lord has no form, features or color. Through the Guru's Teachings, He inspires us to understand Him. ||1||Pause||
The One Light is all-pervading; only a few know this.
Serving the True Guru, this is revealed.
In the hidden and in the obvious, He is pervading all places. Our light merges into the Light. ||2||
The world is burning in the fire of desire,
in greed, arrogance and excessive ego.
People die over and over again; they are re-born, and lose their honor. They waste away their lives in vain. ||3||
Those who understand the Word of the Guru's Shabad are very rare.
Those who subdue their egotism, come to know the three worlds.
Then, they die, never to die again. They are intuitively absorbed in the True One. ||4||
They do not focus their consciousness on Maya again.
They remain absorbed forever in the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
They praise the True One, who is contained deep within all hearts. They are blessed and exalted by the Truest of the True. ||5||
Praise the True One, who is Ever-present.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is pervading everywhere.
By Guru's Grace, we come to behold the True One; from the True One, peace is obtained. ||6||
The True One permeates and pervades the mind within.
The True One is Eternal and Unchanging; He does not come and go in reincarnation.
Those who are attached to the True One are immaculate and pure. Through the Guru's Teachings, they merge in the True One. ||7||
Praise the True One, and no other.
Serving Him, eternal peace is obtained.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 028

O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam, reflect deeply on the Truth; they practice only Truth. ||8||18||19||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The Word of the Shabad is Immaculate and Pure; the Bani of the Word is Pure.
The Light which is pervading among all is Immaculate.
So praise the Immaculate Word of the Lord's Bani; chanting the Immaculate Name of the Lord, all filth is washed away. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Giver of peace within their minds.
Praise the Immaculate Lord, through the Word of the Guru's Shabad. Listen to the Shabad, and quench your thirst. ||1||Pause||
When the Immaculate Naam comes to dwell in the mind,
the mind and body become Immaculate, and emotional attachment to Maya departs.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Immaculate True Lord forever, and the Immaculate Sound-current of the Naad shall vibrate within. ||2||
The Immaculate Ambrosial Nectar is obtained from the Guru.
When selfishness and conceit are eradicated from within, then there is no attachment to Maya.
Immaculate is the spiritual wisdom, and utterly immaculate is the meditation, of those whose minds are filled with the Immaculate Bani of the Word. ||3||
One who serves the Immaculate Lord becomes immaculate.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the filth of egotism is washed away.
The Immaculate Bani and the Unstruck Melody of the Sound-current vibrate, and in the True Court, honor is obtained. ||4||
Through the Immaculate Lord, all become immaculate.
Immaculate is the mind which weaves the Word of the Lord's Shabad into itself.
Blessed and very fortunate are those who are committed to the Immaculate Name; through the Immaculate Name, they are blessed and beautified. ||5||
Immaculate is the one who is adorned with the Shabad.
The Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord, entices the mind and body.
No filth ever attaches itself to the True Name; one's face is made radiant by the True One. ||6||
The mind is polluted by the love of duality.
Filthy is that kitchen, and filthy is that dwelling;
eating filth, the self-willed manmukhs become even more filthy. Because of their filth, they suffer in pain. ||7||
The filthy, and the immaculate as well, are all subject to the Hukam of God's Command.
They alone are immaculate, who are pleasing to the True Lord.
O Nanak, the Naam abides deep within the minds of the Gurmukhs, who are cleansed of all their filth. ||8||19||20||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The Lord of the Universe is radiant, and radiant are His soul-swans.
Their minds and their speech are immaculate; they are my hope and ideal.
Their minds are radiant, and their faces are always beautiful; they meditate on the most radiant Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord of the Universe.
So chant Gobind, Gobind, the Lord of the Universe, day and night; sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord Gobind, through the Word of His Shabad. ||1||Pause||
Sing of the Lord Gobind with intuitive ease,
in the Fear of the Guru; you shall become radiant, and the filth of egotism shall depart.
Remain in bliss forever, and perform devotional worship, day and night. Hear and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord Gobind. ||2||
Channel your dancing mind in devotional worship,
and through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, merge your mind with the Supreme Mind.
Let your true and perfect tune be the subjugation of your love of Maya, and let yourself dance to the Shabad. ||3||
People shout out loud and move their bodies,
but if they are emotionally attached to Maya, then the Messenger of Death shall hunt them down.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 029

The love of Maya makes this mind dance, and the deceit within makes people suffer in pain. ||4||
When the Lord inspires one to become Gurmukh, and perform devotional worship,
then his body and mind are attuned to His Love with intuitive ease.
The Word of His Bani vibrates, and the Word of His Shabad resounds, for the Gurmukh whose devotional worship is accepted. ||5||
One may beat upon and play all sorts of instruments,
but no one will listen, and no one will enshrine it in the mind.
For the sake of Maya, they set the stage and dance, but they are in love with duality, and they obtain only sorrow. ||6||
Those whose inner beings are attached to the Lord's Love are liberated.
They control their sexual desires, and their lifestyle is the self-discipline of Truth.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they meditate forever on the Lord. This devotional worship is pleasing to the Lord. ||7||
To live as Gurmukh is devotional worship, throughout the four ages.
This devotional worship is not obtained by any other means.
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, is obtained only through devotion to the Guru. So focus your consciousness on the Guru's Feet. ||8||20||21||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
Serve the True One, and praise the True One.
With the True Name, pain shall never afflict you.
Those who serve the Giver of peace find peace. They enshrine the Guru's Teachings within their minds. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who intuitively enter into the peace of Samaadhi.
Those who serve the Lord are always beautiful. The glory of their intuitive awareness is beautiful. ||1||Pause||
All call themselves Your devotees,
but they alone are Your devotees, who are pleasing to Your mind.
Through the True Word of Your Bani, they praise You; attuned to Your Love, they worship You with devotion. ||2||
All are Yours, O Dear True Lord.
Meeting the Gurmukh, this cycle of reincarnation comes to an end.
When it pleases Your Will, then we merge in the Name. You Yourself inspire us to chant the Name. ||3||
Through the Guru's Teachings, I enshrine the Lord within my mind.
Pleasure and pain, and all emotional attachments are gone.
I am lovingly centered on the One Lord forever. I enshrine the Lord's Name within my mind. ||4||
Your devotees are attuned to Your Love; they are always joyful.
The nine treasures of the Naam come to dwell within their minds.
By perfect destiny, they find the True Guru, and through the Word of the Shabad, they are united in the Lord's Union. ||5||
You are Merciful, and always the Giver of peace.
You Yourself unite us; You are known only to the Gurmukhs.
You Yourself bestow the glorious greatness of the Naam; attuned to the Naam, we find peace. ||6||
Forever and ever, O True Lord, I praise You.
As Gurmukh, I know no other at all.
My mind remains immersed in the One Lord; my mind surrenders to Him, and in my mind I meet Him. ||7||
One who becomes Gurmukh, praises the Lord.
Our True Lord and Master is Carefree.
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within the mind; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, we merge with the Lord. ||8||21||22||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
Your devotees look beautiful in the True Court.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they are adorned with the Naam.
They are forever in bliss, day and night; chanting the Glorious Praises of the Lord, they merge with the Lord of Glory. ||1||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 030

I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who hear and enshrine the Naam within their minds.
The Dear Lord, the True One, the Highest of the High, subdues their ego and blends them with Himself. ||1||Pause||
True is the Dear Lord, and True is His Name.
By Guru's Grace, some merge with Him.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, those who merge with the Lord shall not be separated from Him again. They merge with intuitive ease into the True Lord. ||2||
There is nothing beyond You;
You are the One who does, sees, and knows.
The Creator Himself acts, and inspires others to act. Through the Guru's Teachings, He blends us into Himself. ||3||
The virtuous soul-bride finds the Lord;
she decorates herself with the Love and the Fear of God.
She who serves the True Guru is forever a happy soul-bride. She is absorbed in the true teachings. ||4||
Those who forget the Word of the Shabad have no home and no place of rest.
They are deluded by doubt, like a crow in a deserted house.
They forfeit both this world and the next, and they pass their lives suffering in pain and misery. ||5||
Writing on and on endlessly, they run out of paper and ink.
Through the love with duality, no one has found peace.
They write falsehood, and they practice falsehood; they are burnt to ashes by focusing their consciousness on falsehood. ||6||
The Gurmukhs write and reflect on Truth, and only Truth.
The true ones find the gate of salvation.
True is their paper, pen and ink; writing Truth, they are absorbed in the True One. ||7||
My God sits deep within the self; He watches over us.
Those who meet the Lord, by Guru's Grace, are acceptable.
O Nanak, glorious greatness is received through the Naam, which is obtained through the Perfect Guru. ||8||22||23||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The Divine Light of the Supreme Soul shines forth from the Guru.
The filth stuck to the ego is removed through the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
One who is imbued with devotional worship to the Lord night and day becomes pure. Worshipping the Lord, He is obtained. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who themselves worship the Lord, and inspire others to worship Him as well.
I humbly bow to those devotees who chant the Glorious Praises of the Lord, night and day. ||1||Pause||
The Creator Lord Himself is the Doer of deeds.
As He pleases, He applies us to our tasks.
Through perfect destiny, we serve the Guru; serving the Guru, peace is found. ||2||
Those who die, and remain dead while yet alive, obtain it.
By Guru's Grace, they enshrine the Lord within their minds.
Enshrining the Lord within their minds, they are liberated forever. With intuitive ease, they merge into the Lord. ||3||
They perform all sorts of rituals, but they do not obtain liberation through them.
They wander around the countryside, and in love with duality, they are ruined.
The deceitful lose their lives in vain; without the Word of the Shabad, they obtain only misery. ||4||
Those who restrain their wandering mind, keeping it steady and stable,
obtain the supreme status, by Guru's Grace.
The True Guru Himself unites us in Union with the Lord. Meeting the Beloved, peace is obtained. ||5||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 031

Some are stuck in falsehood, and false are the rewards they receive.
In love with duality, they waste away their lives in vain.
They drown themselves, and drown their entire family; speaking lies, they eat poison. ||6||
How rare are those who, as Gurmukh, look within their bodies, into their minds.
Through loving devotion, their ego evaporates.
The Siddhas, the seekers and the silent sages continually, lovingly focus their consciousness, but they have not seen the mind within the body. ||7||
The Creator Himself inspires us to work;
what can anyone else do? What can be done by our doing?
O Nanak, the Lord bestows His Name; we receive it, and enshrine it within the mind. ||8||23||24||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
Within this cave, there is an inexhaustible treasure.
Within this cave, the Invisible and Infinite Lord abides.
He Himself is hidden, and He Himself is revealed; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, selfishness and conceit are eliminated. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Ambrosial Naam, the Name of the Lord, within their minds.
The taste of the Ambrosial Naam is very sweet! Through the Guru's Teachings, drink in this Ambrosial Nectar. ||1||Pause||
Subduing egotism, the rigid doors are opened.
The Priceless Naam is obtained by Guru's Grace.
Without the Shabad, the Naam is not obtained. By Guru's Grace, it is implanted within the mind. ||2||
The Guru has applied the true ointment of spiritual wisdom to my eyes.
Deep within, the Divine Light has dawned, and the darkness of ignorance has been dispelled.
My light has merged into the Light; my mind has surrendered, and I am blessed with Glory in the Court of the Lord. ||3||
Those who look outside the body, searching for the Lord, shall not receive the Naam; they shall instead be forced to suffer the terrible pains of slavery.
The blind, self-willed manmukhs do not understand; but when they return once again to their own home, then, as Gurmukh, they find the genuine article. ||4||
By Guru's Grace, the True Lord is found.
Within your mind and body, see the Lord, and the filth of egotism shall depart.
Sitting in that place, sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord forever, and be absorbed in the True Word of the Shabad. ||5||
Those who close off the nine gates, and restrain the wandering mind,
come to dwell in the Home of the Tenth Gate.
There, the Unstruck Melody of the Shabad vibrates day and night. Through the Guru's Teachings, the Shabad is heard. ||6||
Without the Shabad, there is only darkness within.
The genuine article is not found, and the cycle of reincarnation does not end.
The key is in the hands of the True Guru; no one else can open this door. By perfect destiny, He is met. ||7||
You are the hidden and the revealed in all places.
Receiving Guru's Grace, this understanding is obtained.
O Nanak, praise the Naam forever; as Gurmukh, enshrine it within the mind. ||8||24||25||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The Gurmukhs meet the Lord, and inspire others to meet Him as well.
Death does not see them, and pain does not afflict them.
Subduing egotism, they break all their bonds; as Gurmukh, they are adorned with the Word of the Shabad. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who look beautiful in the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
The Gurmukhs sing, the Gurmukhs dance, and focus their consciousness on the Lord. ||1||Pause||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 032

The Gurmukhs are celebrated in life and death.
Their lives are not wasted; they realize the Word of the Shabad.
The Gurmukhs do not die; they are not consumed by death. The Gurmukhs are absorbed in the True Lord. ||2||
The Gurmukhs are honored in the Court of the Lord.
The Gurmukhs eradicate selfishness and conceit from within.
They save themselves, and save all their families and ancestors as well. The Gurmukhs redeem their lives. ||3||
The Gurmukhs never suffer bodily pain.
The Gurmukhs have the pain of egotism taken away.
The minds of the Gurmukhs are immaculate and pure; no filth ever sticks to them again. The Gurmukhs merge in celestial peace. ||4||
The Gurmukhs obtain the Greatness of the Naam.
The Gurmukhs sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and obtain honor.
They remain in bliss forever, day and night. The Gurmukhs practice the Word of the Shabad. ||5||
The Gurmukhs are attuned to the Shabad, night and day.
The Gurmukhs are known throughout the four ages.
The Gurmukhs always sing the Glorious Praises of the Immaculate Lord. Through the Shabad, they practice devotional worship. ||6||
Without the Guru, there is only pitch-black darkness.
Seized by the Messenger of Death, people cry out and scream.
Night and day, they are diseased, like maggots in manure, and in manure they endure agony. ||7||
The Gurmukhs know that the Lord alone acts, and causes others to act.
In the hearts of the Gurmukhs, the Lord Himself comes to dwell.
O Nanak, through the Naam, greatness is obtained. It is received from the Perfect Guru. ||8||25||26||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The One Light is the light of all bodies.
The Perfect True Guru reveals it through the Word of the Shabad.
He Himself instills the sense of separation within our hearts; He Himself created the Creation. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who sing the Glorious Praises of the True Lord.
Without the Guru, no one obtains intuitive wisdom; the Gurmukh is absorbed in intuitive peace. ||1||Pause||
You Yourself are Beautiful, and You Yourself entice the world.
You Yourself, by Your Kind Mercy, weave the thread of the world.
You Yourself bestow pain and pleasure, O Creator. The Lord reveals Himself to the Gurmukh. ||2||
The Creator Himself acts, and causes others to act.
Through Him, the Word of the Guru's Shabad is enshrined within the mind.
The Ambrosial Word of the Guru's Bani emanates from the Word of the Shabad. The Gurmukh speaks it and hears it. ||3||
He Himself is the Creator, and He Himself is the Enjoyer.
One who breaks out of bondage is liberated forever.
The True Lord is liberated forever. The Unseen Lord causes Himself to be seen. ||4||
He Himself is Maya, and He Himself is the Illusion.
He Himself has generated emotional attachment throughout the entire universe.
He Himself is the Giver of Virtue; He Himself sings the Lord's Glorious Praises. He chants them and causes them to be heard. ||5||
He Himself acts, and causes others to act.
He Himself establishes and disestablishes.
Without You, nothing can be done. You Yourself have engaged all in their tasks. ||6||
He Himself kills, and He Himself revives.
He Himself unites us, and unites us in Union with Himself.
Through selfless service, eternal peace is obtained. The Gurmukh is absorbed in intuitive peace. ||7||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 033

He Himself is the Highest of the High.
How rare are those who behold Him. He causes Himself to be seen.
O Nanak, the Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within the hearts of those who see the Lord themselves, and inspire others to see Him as well. ||8||26||27||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
My God is pervading and permeating all places.
By Guru's Grace, I have found Him within the home of my own heart.
I serve Him constantly, and I meditate on Him single-mindedly. As Gurmukh, I am absorbed in the True One. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Lord, the Life of the World, within their minds.
Through the Guru's Teachings, I merge with intuitive ease into the Lord, the Life of the World, the Fearless One, the Great Giver. ||1||Pause||
Within the home of the self is the earth, its support and the nether regions of the underworld.
Within the home of the self is the Eternally Young Beloved.
The Giver of peace is eternally blissful. Through the Guru's Teachings, we are absorbed in intuitive peace. ||2||
When the body is filled with ego and selfishness,
the cycle of birth and death does not end.
One who becomes Gurmukh subdues egotism, and meditates on the Truest of the True. ||3||
Within this body are the two brothers, sin and virtue.
When the two joined together, the Universe was produced.
Subduing both, and entering into the Home of the One, through the Guru's Teachings, we are absorbed in intuitive peace. ||4||
Within the home of the self is the darkness of the love of duality.
When the Divine Light dawns, ego and selfishness are dispelled.
The Giver of peace is revealed through the Shabad, meditating upon the Naam, night and day. ||5||
Deep within the self is the Light of God; It radiates throughout the expanse of His creation.
Through the Guru's Teachings, the darkness of spiritual ignorance is dispelled.
The heart-lotus blossoms forth, and eternal peace is obtained, as one's light merges into the Light. ||6||
Within the mansion is the treasure house, overflowing with jewels.
The Gurmukh obtains the Infinite Naam, the Name of the Lord.
The Gurmukh, the trader, always purchases the merchandise of the Naam, and always reaps profits. ||7||
The Lord Himself keeps this merchandise in stock, and He Himself distributes it.
Rare is that Gurmukh who trades in this.
O Nanak, those upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, obtain it. Through His Mercy, it is enshrined in the mind. ||8||27||28||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The Lord Himself leads us to merge with Him and serve Him.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the love of duality is eradicated.
The Immaculate Lord is the Bestower of eternal virtue. The Lord Himself leads us to merge in His Virtuous Goodness. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who enshrine the Truest of the True within their hearts.
The True Name is eternally pure and immaculate. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, it is enshrined within the mind. ||1||Pause||
The Guru Himself is the Giver, the Architect of Destiny.
The Gurmukh, the humble servant who serves the Lord, comes to know Him.
Those humble beings look beautiful forever in the Ambrosial Naam. Through the Guru's Teachings, they receive the sublime essence of the Lord. ||2||
Within the cave of this body, there is one beautiful place.
Through the Perfect Guru, ego and doubt are dispelled.
Night and day, praise the Naam, the Name of the Lord; imbued with the Lord's Love, by Guru's Grace, you shall find Him. ||3||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 034

Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, search this cave.
The Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within the self.
Sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord, and decorate yourself with the Shabad. Meeting with your Beloved, you shall find peace. ||4||
The Messenger of Death imposes his tax on those who are attached to duality.
He inflicts punishment on those who forget the Name.
They are called to account for each instant and each moment. Every grain, every particle, is weighed and counted. ||5||
One who does not remember her Husband Lord in this world is being cheated by duality; she shall weep bitterly in the end.
She is from an evil family; she is ugly and vile. Even in her dreams, she does not meet her Husband Lord. ||6||
She who enshrines her Husband Lord in her mind in this world
\-His Presence is revealed to her by the Perfect Guru.
That soul-bride keeps her Husband Lord clasped tightly to her heart, and through the Word of the Shabad, she enjoys her Husband Lord upon His Beautiful Bed. ||7||
The Lord Himself sends out the call, and He summons us to His Presence.
He enshrines His Name within our minds.
O Nanak, one who receives the greatness of the Naam night and day, constantly sings His Glorious Praises. ||8||28||29||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
Sublime is their birth, and the place where they dwell.
Those who serve the True Guru remain detached in the home of their own being.
They abide in the Lord's Love, and constantly imbued with His Love, their minds are satisfied and fulfilled with the Lord's Essence. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who read of the Lord, who understand and enshrine Him within their minds.
The Gurmukhs read and praise the Lord's Name; they are honored in the True Court. ||1||Pause||
The Unseen and Inscrutable Lord is permeating and pervading everywhere.
He cannot be obtained by any effort.
If the Lord grants His Grace, then we come to meet the True Guru. By His Kindness, we are united in His Union. ||2||
One who reads, while attached to duality, does not understand.
He yearns for the three-phased Maya.
The bonds of the three-phased Maya are broken by the Word of the Guru's Shabad. Through the Guru's Shabad, liberation is achieved. ||3||
This unstable mind cannot be held steady.
Attached to duality, it wanders in the ten directions.
It is a poisonous worm, drenched with poison, and in poison it rots away. ||4||
Practicing egotism and selfishness, they try to impress others by showing off.
They perform all sorts of rituals, but they gain no acceptance.
Without You, Lord, nothing happens at all. You forgive those who are adorned with the Word of Your Shabad. ||5||
They are born, and they die, but they do not understand the Lord.
Night and day, they wander, in love with duality.
The lives of the self-willed manmukhs are useless; in the end, they die, regretting and repenting. ||6||
The Husband is away, and the wife is getting dressed up.
This is what the blind, self-willed manmukhs are doing.
They are not honored in this world, and they shall find no shelter in the world hereafter. They are wasting their lives in vain. ||7||
How rare are those who know the Name of the Lord!
Through the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru, the Lord is realized.
Night and day, they perform the Lord's devotional service; day and night, they find intuitive peace. ||8||
That One Lord is pervading in all.
Only a few, as Gurmukh, understand this.
O Nanak, those who are attuned to the Naam are beautiful. Granting His Grace, God unites them with Himself. ||9||29||30||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 035

Maajh, Third Mehl:
The self-willed manmukhs read and recite; they are called Pandits-spiritual scholars.
But they are in love with duality, and they suffer in terrible pain.
Intoxicated with vice, they understand nothing at all. They are reincarnated, over and over again. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who subdue their ego, and unite with the Lord.
They serve the Guru, and the Lord dwells within their minds; they intuitively drink in the sublime essence of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
The Pandits read the Vedas, but they do not obtain the Lord's essence.
Intoxicated with Maya, they argue and debate.
The foolish intellectuals are forever in spiritual darkness. The Gurmukhs understand, and sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||2||
The Indescribable is described only through the beauteous Word of the Shabad.
Through the Guru's Teachings, the Truth becomes pleasing to the mind.
Those who speak of the truest of the true, day and night-their minds are imbued with the Truth. ||3||
Those who are attuned to Truth, love the Truth.
The Lord Himself bestows this gift; He shall not take it back.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the True Lord is known forever; meeting the True One, peace is found. ||4||
The filth of fraud and falsehood does not stick to those who, by Guru's Grace, remain awake and aware, night and day.
The Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord, abides deep within their hearts; their light merges into the Light. ||5||
They read about the three qualities, but they do not know the essential reality of the Lord.
They forget the Primal Lord, the Source of all, and they do not recognize the Word of the Guru's Shabad.
They are engrossed in emotional attachment; they do not understand anything at all. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, the Lord is found. ||6||
The Vedas proclaim that Maya is of three qualities.
The self-willed manmukhs, in love with duality, do not understand.
They read of the three qualities, but they do not know the One Lord. Without understanding, they obtain only pain and suffering. ||7||
When it pleases the Lord, He unites us with Himself.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, skepticism and suffering are dispelled.
O Nanak, True is the Greatness of the Name. Believing in the Name, peace is obtained. ||8||30||31||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The Lord Himself is Unmanifest and Unrelated; He is Manifest and Related as well.
Those who recognize this essential reality are the true Pandits, the spiritual scholars.
They save themselves, and save all their families and ancestors as well, when they enshrine the Lord's Name in the mind. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who taste the essence of the Lord, and savor its taste.
Those who taste this essence of the Lord are the pure, immaculate beings. They meditate on the Immaculate Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||1||Pause||
Those who reflect upon the Shabad are beyond karma.
They subdue their ego, and find the essence of wisdom, deep within their being.
They obtain the nine treasures of the wealth of the Naam. Rising above the three qualities, they merge into the Lord. ||2||
Those who act in ego do not go beyond karma.
It is only by Guru's Grace that one is rid of ego.
Those who have discriminating minds, continually examine their own selves. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they sing the Lord's Glorious Praises. ||3||
The Lord is the most pure and sublime Ocean. The Saintly Gurmukhs continually peck at the Naam, like swans pecking at pearls in the ocean.
They bathe in it continually, day and night, and the filth of ego is washed away. ||4||
The pure swans, with love and affection, dwell in the Ocean of the Lord, and subdue their ego.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 036

Day and night, they are in love with the True Word of the Shabad. They obtain their home in the Ocean of the Lord. ||5||
The self-willed manmukhs shall always be filthy cranes, smeared with the filth of ego.
They may bathe, but their filth is not removed.
One who dies while yet alive, and contemplates the Word of the Guru's Shabad, is rid of this filth of ego. ||6||
The Priceless Jewel is found, in the home of one's own being,
when one listens to the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect True Guru.
By Guru's Grace, the darkness of spiritual ignorance is dispelled; I have come to recognize the Divine Light within my own heart. ||7||
The Lord Himself creates, and He Himself beholds.
Serving the True Guru, one becomes acceptable.
O Nanak, the Naam dwells deep within the heart; by Guru's Grace, it is obtained. ||8||31||32||
Maajh, Third Mehl:
The whole world is engrossed in emotional attachment to Maya.
Those who are controlled by the three qualities are attached to Maya.
By Guru's Grace, a few come to understand; they center their consciousness in the fourth state. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who burn away their emotional attachment to Maya, through the Shabad.
Those who burn away this attachment to Maya, and focus their consciousness on the Lord are honored in the True Court, and the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||1||Pause||
The source, the root, of the gods and goddesses is Maya.
For them, the Simritees and the Shaastras were composed.
Sexual desire and anger are diffused throughout the universe. Coming and going, people suffer in pain. ||2||
The jewel of spiritual wisdom was placed within the universe.
By Guru's Grace, it is enshrined within the mind.
Celibacy, chastity, self-discipline and the practice of truthfulness are obtained from the Perfect Guru, by meditating on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. ||3||
In this world of her parents' home, the soul-bride has been deluded by doubt.
Attached to duality, she later comes to regret it.
She forfeits both this world and the next, and even in her dreams, she does not find peace. ||4||
The soul-bride who remembers her Husband Lord in this world,
by Guru's Grace, sees Him close at hand.
She remains intuitively attuned to the Love of her Beloved; she makes the Word of His Shabad her decoration. ||5||
Blessed and fruitful is the coming of those who find the True Guru;
through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they burn their love of duality.
The One Lord is permeating and pervading deep within the heart. Joining the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, they sing the Glorious Praises of the Lord. ||6||
Those who do not serve the True Guru-why did they even come into this world?
Cursed are their lives; they have uselessly wasted this human life.
The self-willed manmukhs do not remember the Naam. Without the Naam, they suffer in terrible pain. ||7||
The One who created the Universe, He alone knows it.
He unites with Himself those who realize the Shabad.
O Nanak, they alone receive the Naam, upon whose foreheads such pre-ordained destiny is recorded. ||8||1||32||33||
Maajh, Fourth Mehl:
The Primal Being is Himself remote and beyond.
He Himself establishes, and having established, He disestablishes.
The One Lord is pervading in all; those who become Gurmukh are honored. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Formless Lord.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 037

He has no form or shape; He is seen within each and every heart. The Gurmukh comes to know the unknowable. ||1||Pause||
You are God, Kind and Merciful.
Without You, there is no other at all.
When the Guru showers His Grace upon us, He blesses us with the Naam; through the Naam, we merge in the Naam. ||2||
You Yourself are the True Creator Lord.
Your treasures are overflowing with devotional worship.
The Gurmukhs obtain the Naam. Their minds are enraptured, and they easily and intuitively enter into Samaadhi. ||3||
Night and day, I sing Your Glorious Praises, God.
I praise You, O my Beloved.
Without You, there is no other for me to seek out. It is only by Guru's Grace that You are found. ||4||
The limits of the Inaccessible and Incomprehensible Lord cannot be found.
Bestowing Your Mercy, You merge us into Yourself.
Through the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru, we meditate on the Lord. Serving the Shabad, peace is found. ||5||
Praiseworthy is the tongue which sings the Lord's Glorious Praises.
Praising the Naam, one becomes pleasing to the True One.
The Gurmukh remains forever imbued with the Lord's Love. Meeting the True Lord, glory is obtained. ||6||
The self-willed manmukhs do their deeds in ego.
They lose their whole lives in the gamble.
Within is the terrible darkness of greed, and so they come and go in reincarnation, over and over again. ||7||
The Creator Himself bestows Glory on those whom He Himself has so pre-destined.
O Nanak, they receive the Naam, the Name of the Lord, the Destroyer of fear; through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, they find peace. ||8||1||34||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl, First House:
The Unseen Lord is within, but He cannot be seen.
He has taken the Jewel of the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and He keeps it well concealed.
The Inaccessible and Incomprehensible Lord is the highest of all. Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, He is known. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to those who chant the Naam, in this Dark Age of Kali Yuga.
The Beloved Saints were established by the True Lord. By great good fortune, the Blessed Vision of their Darshan is obtained. ||1||Pause||
The One who is sought by the Siddhas and the seekers,
upon whom Brahma and Indra meditate within their hearts,
whom the three hundred thirty million demi-gods search for-meeting the Guru, one comes to sing His Praises within the heart. ||2||
Twenty-four hours a day, the wind breathes Your Name.
The earth is Your servant, a slave at Your Feet.
In the four sources of creation, and in all speech, You dwell. You are dear to the minds of all. ||3||
The True Lord and Master is known to the Gurmukhs.
He is realized through the Shabad, the Word of the Perfect Guru.
Those who drink it in are satisfied. Through the Truest of the True, they are fulfilled. ||4||
In the home of their own beings, they are peacefully and comfortably at ease.
They are blissful, enjoying pleasures, and eternally joyful.
They are wealthy, and the greatest kings; they center their minds on the Guru's Feet. ||5||
First, You created nourishment;
then, You created the living beings.
There is no other Giver as Great as You, O my Lord and Master. None approach or equal You. ||6||
Those who are pleasing to You meditate on You.
They practice the Mantra of the Holy.
They themselves swim across, and they save all their ancestors and families as well. In the Court of the Lord, they meet with no obstruction. ||7||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 038

You are so Great! You are the Highest of the High!
You are Infinite, You are Everything!
I am a sacrifice to You. Nanak is the slave of Your slaves. ||8||1||35||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
Who is liberated, and who is united?
Who is a spiritual teacher, and who is a preacher?
Who is a house-holder, and who is a renunciate? Who can estimate the Lord's Value? ||1||
How is one bound, and how is one freed of his bonds?
How can one escape from the cycle of coming and going in reincarnation?
Who is subject to karma, and who is beyond karma? Who chants the Name, and inspires others to chant it? ||2||
Who is happy, and who is sad?
Who, as sunmukh, turns toward the Guru, and who, as vaymukh, turns away from the Guru?
How can one meet the Lord? How is one separated from Him? Who can reveal the way to me? ||3||
What is that Word, by which the wandering mind can be restrained?
What are those teachings, by which we may endure pain and pleasure alike?
What is that lifestyle, by which we may come to meditate on the Supreme Lord? How may we sing the Kirtan of His Praises? ||4||
The Gurmukh is liberated, and the Gurmukh is linked.
The Gurmukh is the spiritual teacher, and the Gurmukh is the preacher.
Blessed is the Gurmukh, the householder and the renunciate. The Gurmukh knows the Lord's Value. ||5||
Egotism is bondage; as Gurmukh, one is emancipated.
The Gurmukh escapes the cycle of coming and going in reincarnation.
The Gurmukh performs actions of good karma, and the Gurmukh is beyond karma. Whatever the Gurmukh does, is done in good faith. ||6||
The Gurmukh is happy, while the self-willed manmukh is sad.
The Gurmukh turns toward the Guru, and the self-willed manmukh turns away from the Guru.
The Gurmukh is united with the Lord, while the manmukh is separated from Him. The Gurmukh reveals the way. ||7||
The Guru's Instruction is the Word, by which the wandering mind is restrained.
Through the Guru's Teachings, we can endure pain and pleasure alike.
To live as Gurmukh is the lifestyle by which we come to meditate on the Supreme Lord. The Gurmukh sings the Kirtan of His Praises. ||8||
The Lord Himself created the entire creation.
He Himself acts, and causes others to act. He Himself establishes.
From oneness, He has brought forth the countless multitudes. O Nanak, they shall merge into the One once again. ||9||2||36||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl:
God is Eternal and Imperishable, so why should anyone be anxious?
The Lord is Wealthy and Prosperous, so His humble servant should feel totally secure.
O Giver of peace of the soul, of life, of honor-as You ordain, I obtain peace. ||1||
I am a sacrifice, my soul is a sacrifice, to that Gurmukh whose mind and body are pleased with You.
You are my mountain, You are my shelter and shield. No one can rival You. ||1||Pause||
That person, unto whom Your actions seem sweet,
comes to see the Supreme Lord God in each and every heart.
In all places and interspaces, You exist. You are the One and Only Lord, pervading everywhere. ||2||
You are the Fulfiller of all the mind's desires.
Your treasures are overflowing with love and devotion.
Showering Your Mercy, You protect those who, through perfect destiny, merge into You. ||3||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 039

You pulled me out of the deep, dark well onto the dry ground.
Showering Your Mercy, You blessed Your servant with Your Glance of Grace.
I sing the Glorious Praises of the Perfect, Immortal Lord. By speaking and hearing these Praises, they are not used up. ||4||
Here and hereafter, You are our Protector.
In the womb of the mother, You cherish and nurture the baby.
The fire of Maya does not affect those who are imbued with the Lord's Love; they sing His Glorious Praises. ||5||
What Praises of Yours can I chant and contemplate?
Deep within my mind and body, I behold Your Presence.
You are my Friend and Companion, my Lord and Master. Without You, I do not know any other at all. ||6||
O God, that one, unto whom You have given shelter,
is not touched by the hot winds.
O my Lord and Master, You are my Sanctuary, the Giver of peace. Chanting, meditating on You in the Sat Sangat, the True Congregation, You are revealed. ||7||
You are Exalted, Unfathomable, Infinite and Invaluable.
You are my True Lord and Master. I am Your servant and slave.
You are the King, Your Sovereign Rule is True. Nanak is a sacrifice, a sacrifice to You. ||8||3||37||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl, Second House:
Continually, continuously, remember the Merciful Lord.
Never forget Him from your mind. ||Pause||
Join the Society of the Saints,
and you shall not have to go down the path of Death.
Take the Provisions of the Lord's Name with you, and no stain shall attach itself to your family. ||1||
Those who meditate on the Master
shall not be thrown down into hell.
Even the hot winds shall not touch them. The Lord has come to dwell within their minds. ||2||
They alone are beautiful and attractive,
who abide in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Those who have gathered in the wealth of the Lord's Name-they alone are deep and thoughtful and vast. ||3||
Drink in the Ambrosial Essence of the Name,
and live by beholding the face of the Lord's servant.
Let all your affairs be resolved, by continually worshipping the Feet of the Guru. ||4||
He alone meditates on the Lord of the World, whom the Lord has made His Own.
He alone is a warrior, and he alone is the chosen one, upon whose forehead good destiny is recorded. ||5||
Within my mind, I meditate on God.
For me, this is like the enjoyment of princely pleasures.
Evil does not well up within me, since I am saved, and dedicated to truthful actions. ||6||
I have enshrined the Creator within my mind;
I have obtained the fruits of life's rewards.
If your Husband Lord is pleasing to your mind, then your married life shall be eternal. ||7||
I have obtained everlasting wealth;
I have found the Sanctuary of the Dispeller of fear.
Grasping hold of the hem of the Lord's robe, Nanak is saved. He has won the incomparable life. ||8||4||38||
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
Maajh, Fifth Mehl, Third House:
Chanting and meditating on the Lord, the mind is held steady. ||1||Pause||
Meditating, meditating in remembrance on the Divine Guru, one's fears are erased and dispelled. ||1||
Entering the Sanctuary of the Supreme Lord God, how could anyone feel grief any longer? ||2||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 040

Serving at the Feet of the Holy Saints, all desires are fulfilled. ||3||
In each and every heart, the One Lord is pervading. He is totally permeating the water, the land, and the sky. ||4||
I serve the Destroyer of sin, and I am sanctified by the dust of the feet of the Saints. ||5||
My Lord and Master Himself has saved me completely; I am comforted by meditating on the Lord. ||6||
The Creator has passed judgement, and the evil-doers have been silenced and killed. ||7||
Nanak is attuned to the True Name; he beholds the Presence of the Ever-present Lord. ||8||5||39||1||32||1||5||39||
Baarah Maahaa ~ The Twelve Months: Maajh, Fifth Mehl, Fourth House:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
By the actions we have committed, we are separated from You. Please show Your Mercy, and unite us with Yourself, Lord.
We have grown weary of wandering to the four corners of the earth and in the ten directions. We have come to Your Sanctuary, God.
Without milk, a cow serves no purpose.
Without water, the crop withers, and it will not bring a good price.
If we do not meet the Lord, our Friend, how can we find our place of rest?
Those homes, those hearts, in which the Husband Lord is not manifest-those towns and villages are like burning furnaces.
All decorations, the chewing of betel to sweeten the breath, and the body itself, are all useless and vain.
Without God, our Husband, our Lord and Master, all friends and companions are like the Messenger of Death.
This is Nanak's prayer: "Please show Your Mercy, and bestow Your Name.
O my Lord and Master, please unite me with Yourself, O God, in the Eternal Mansion of Your Presence". ||1||
In the month of Chayt, by meditating on the Lord of the Universe, a deep and profound joy arises.
Meeting with the humble Saints, the Lord is found, as we chant His Name with our tongues.
Those who have found God-blessed is their coming into this world.
Those who live without Him, for even an instant-their lives are rendered useless.
The Lord is totally pervading the water, the land, and all space. He is contained in the forests as well.
Those who do not remember God-how much pain must they suffer!
Those who dwell upon their God have great good fortune.
My mind yearns for the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan. O Nanak, my mind is so thirsty!
I touch the feet of one who unites me with God in the month of Chayt. ||2||
In the month of Vaisaakh, how can the bride be patient? She is separated from her Beloved.
She has forgotten the Lord, her Life-companion, her Master; she has become attached to Maya, the deceitful one.
Neither son, nor spouse, nor wealth shall go along with you-only the Eternal Lord.
Entangled and enmeshed in the love of false occupations, the whole world is perishing.
Without the Naam, the Name of the One Lord, they lose their lives in the hereafter.
Forgetting the Merciful Lord, they are ruined. Without God, there is no other at all.
Pure is the reputation of those who are attached to the Feet of the Beloved Lord.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 041

Nanak makes this prayer to God: Please, come and unite me with Yourself.
The month of Vaisaakh is beautiful and pleasant, when the Saint causes me to meet the Lord. ||3||
In the month of Jayt'h, the bride longs to meet with the Lord. All bow in humility before Him.
One who has grasped the hem of the robe of the Lord, the True Friend-no one can keep him in bondage.
God's Name is the Jewel, the Pearl. It cannot be stolen or taken away.
In the Lord are all pleasures which please the mind.
As the Lord wishes, so He acts, and so His creatures act.
They alone are called blessed, whom God has made His Own.
If people could meet the Lord by their own efforts, why would they be crying out in the pain of separation?
Meeting Him in the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy, O Nanak, celestial bliss is enjoyed.
In the month of Jayt'h, the playful Husband Lord meets her, upon whose forehead such good destiny is recorded. ||4||
The month of Aasaarh seems burning hot, to those who are not close to their Husband Lord.
They have forsaken God the Primal Being, the Life of the World, and they have come to rely upon mere mortals.
In the love of duality, the soul-bride is ruined; around her neck she wears the noose of Death.
As you plant, so shall you harvest; your destiny is recorded on your forehead.
The life-night passes away, and in the end, one comes to regret and repent, and then depart with no hope at all.
Those who meet with the Holy Saints are liberated in the Court of the Lord.
Show Your Mercy to me, O God; I am thirsty for the Blessed Vision of Your Darshan.
Without You, God, there is no other at all. This is Nanak's humble prayer.
The month of Aasaarh is pleasant, when the Feet of the Lord abide in the mind. ||5||
In the month of Saawan, the soul-bride is happy, if she falls in love with the Lotus Feet of the Lord.
Her mind and body are imbued with the Love of the True One; His Name is her only Support.
The pleasures of corruption are false. All that is seen shall turn to ashes.
The drops of the Lord's Nectar are so beautiful! Meeting the Holy Saint, we drink these in.
The forests and the meadows are rejuvenated and refreshed with the Love of God, the All-powerful, Infinite Primal Being.
My mind yearns to meet the Lord. If only He would show His Mercy, and unite me with Himself!
Those brides who have obtained God-I am forever a sacrifice to them.
O Nanak, when the Dear Lord shows kindness, He adorns His bride with the Word of His Shabad.
Saawan is delightful for those happy soul-brides whose hearts are adorned with the Necklace of the Lord's Name. ||6||
In the month of Bhaadon, she is deluded by doubt, because of her attachment to duality.
She may wear thousands of ornaments, but they are of no use at all.
On that day when the body perishes-at that time, she becomes a ghost.
The Messenger of Death seizes and holds her, and does not tell anyone his secret.
And her loved ones-in an instant, they move on, leaving her all alone.
She wrings her hands, her body writhes in pain, and she turns from black to white.
As she has planted, so does she harvest; such is the field of karma.
Nanak seeks God's Sanctuary; God has given him the Boat of His Feet.
Those who love the Guru, the Protector and Savior, in Bhaadon, shall not be thrown down into hell. ||7||
In the month of Assu, my love for the Lord overwhelms me. How can I go and meet the Lord?

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 042

My mind and body are so thirsty for the Blessed Vision of His Darshan. Won't someone please come and lead me to him, O my mother.
The Saints are the helpers of the Lord's lovers; I fall and touch their feet.
Without God, how can I find peace? There is nowhere else to go.
Those who have tasted the sublime essence of His Love, remain satisfied and fulfilled.
They renounce their selfishness and conceit, and they pray, God, please attach me to the hem of Your robe.
Those whom the Husband Lord has united with Himself, shall not be separated from Him again.
Without God, there is no other at all. Nanak has entered the Sanctuary of the Lord.
In Assu, the Lord, the Sovereign King, has granted His Mercy, and they dwell in peace. ||8||
In the month of Katak, do good deeds. Do not try to blame anyone else.
Forgetting the Transcendent Lord, all sorts of illnesses are contracted.
Those who turn their backs on the Lord shall be separated from Him and consigned to reincarnation, over and over again.
In an instant, all of Maya's sensual pleasures turn bitter.
No one can then serve as your intermediary. Unto whom can we turn and cry?
By one's own actions, nothing can be done; destiny was pre-determined from the very beginning.
By great good fortune, I meet my God, and then all pain of separation departs.
Please protect Nanak, God; O my Lord and Master, please release me from bondage.
In Katak, in the Company of the Holy, all anxiety vanishes. ||9||
In the month of Maghar, those who sit with their Beloved Husband Lord are beautiful.
How can their glory be measured? Their Lord and Master blends them with Himself.
Their bodies and minds blossom forth in the Lord; they have the companionship of the Holy Saints.
Those who lack the Company of the Holy, remain all alone.
Their pain never departs, and they fall into the grip of the Messenger of Death.
Those who have ravished and enjoyed their God, are seen to be continually exalted and uplifted.
They wear the Necklace of the jewels, emeralds and rubies of the Lord's Name.
Nanak seeks the dust of the feet of those who take to the Sanctuary of the Lord's Door.
Those who worship and adore God in Maghar, do not suffer the cycle of reincarnation ever again. ||10||
In the month of Poh, the cold does not touch those, whom the Husband Lord hugs close in His Embrace.
Their minds are transfixed by His Lotus Feet. They are attached to the Blessed Vision of the Lord's Darshan.
Seek the Protection of the Lord of the Universe; His service is truly profitable.
Corruption shall not touch you, when you join the Holy Saints and sing the Lord's Praises.
From where it originated, there the soul is blended again. It is absorbed in the Love of the True Lord.
When the Supreme Lord God grasps someone's hand, he shall never again suffer separation from Him.
I am a sacrifice, 100,000 times, to the Lord, my Friend, the Unapproachable and Unfathomable.
Please preserve my honor, Lord; Nanak begs at Your Door.
Poh is beautiful, and all comforts come to that one, whom the Carefree Lord has forgiven. ||11||
In the month of Maagh, let your cleansing bath be the dust of the Saadh Sangat, the Company of the Holy.
Meditate and listen to the Name of the Lord, and give it to everyone.
In this way, the filth of lifetimes of karma shall be removed, and egotistical pride shall vanish from your mind.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 043

Sexual desire and anger shall not seduce you, and the dog of greed shall depart.
Those who walk on the Path of Truth shall be praised throughout the world.
Be kind to all beings-this is more meritorious than bathing at the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage and the giving of charity.
That person, upon whom the Lord bestows His Mercy, is a wise person.
Nanak is a sacrifice to those who have merged with God.
In Maagh, they alone are known as true, unto whom the Perfect Guru is Merciful. ||12||
In the month of Phalgun, bliss comes to those, unto whom the Lord, the Friend, has been revealed.
The Saints, the Lord's helpers, in their mercy, have united me with Him.
My bed is beautiful, and I have all comforts. I feel no sadness at all.
My desires have been fulfilled-by great good fortune, I have obtained the Sovereign Lord as my Husband.
Join with me, my sisters, and sing the songs of rejoicing and the Hymns of the Lord of the Universe.
There is no other like the Lord-there is no equal to Him.
He embellishes this world and the world hereafter, and He gives us our permanent home there.
He rescues us from the world-ocean; never again do we have to run the cycle of reincarnation.
I have only one tongue, but Your Glorious Virtues are beyond counting. Nanak is saved, falling at Your Feet.
In Phalgun, praise Him continually; He has not even an iota of greed. ||13||
Those who meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord-their affairs are all resolved.
Those who meditate on the Perfect Guru, the Lord-Incarnate-they are judged true in the Court of the Lord.
The Lord's Feet are the Treasure of all peace and comfort for them; they cross over the terrifying and treacherous world-ocean.
They obtain love and devotion, and they do not burn in corruption.
Falsehood has vanished, duality has been erased, and they are totally overflowing with Truth.
They serve the Supreme Lord God, and enshrine the One Lord within their minds.
The months, the days, and the moments are auspicious, for those upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace.
Nanak begs for the blessing of Your Vision, O Lord. Please, shower Your Mercy upon me! ||14||1||
Maajh, Fifth Mehl: Day And Night:
One Universal Creator God. By The Grace Of The True Guru:
I serve my True Guru, and meditate on Him all day and night.
Renouncing selfishness and conceit, I seek His Sanctuary, and speak sweet words to Him.
Through countless lifetimes and incarnations, I was separated from Him. O Lord, you are my Friend and Companion-please unite me with Yourself.
Those who are separated from the Lord do not dwell in peace, O sister.
Without their Husband Lord, they find no comfort. I have searched and seen all realms.
My own evil actions have kept me separate from Him; why should I accuse anyone else?
Bestow Your Mercy, God, and save me! No one else can bestow Your Mercy.
Without You, Lord, we roll around in the dust. Unto whom should we utter our cries of distress?
This is Nanak's prayer: May my eyes behold the Lord, the Angelic Being.||1||
The Lord hears the anguish of the soul; He is the All-powerful and Infinite Primal Being.
In death and in life, worship and adore the Lord, the Support of all.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 044

In this world and in the next, the soul-bride belongs to her Husband Lord, who has such a vast family.
He is Lofty and Inaccessible. His Wisdom is Unfathomable.
He has no end or limitation. That service is pleasing to Him, which makes one humble, like the dust of the feet of the Saints.
He is the Patron of the poor, the Merciful, Luminous Lord, the Redeemer of sinners.
From the very beginning, and throughout the ages, the True Name of the Creator has been our Saving Grace.
No one can know His Value; no one can weigh it.
He dwells deep within the mind and body. O Nanak, He cannot be measured.
I am forever a sacrifice to those who serve God, day and night. ||2||
The Saints worship and adore Him forever and ever; He is the Forgiver of all.
He fashioned the soul and the body, and by His Kindness, He bestowed the soul.
Through the Word of the Guru's Shabad, worship and adore Him, and chant His Pure Mantra.
His Value cannot be evaluated. The Transcendent Lord is endless.
That one, within whose mind the Lord abides, is said to be most fortunate.
The soul's desires are fulfilled, upon meeting the Master, our Husband Lord.
Nanak lives by chanting the Lord's Name; all sorrows have been erased.
One who does not forget Him, day and night, is continually rejuvenated. ||3||
God is overflowing with all powers. I have no honor-He is my resting place.
I have grasped the Support of the Lord within my mind; I live by chanting and meditating on His Name.
Grant Your Grace, God, and bless me, that I may merge into the dust of the feet of the humble.
As You keep me, so do I live. I wear and eat whatever You give me.
May I make the effort, O God, to sing Your Glorious Praises in the Company of the Holy.
I can conceive of no other place; where could I go to lodge a complaint?
You are the Dispeller of ignorance, the Destroyer of darkness, O Lofty, Unfathomable and Unapproachable Lord.
Please unite this separated one with Yourself; this is Nanak's yearning.
That day shall bring every joy, O Lord, when I take to the Feet of the Guru. ||4||1||
Vaar In Maajh, And Shaloks Of The First Mehl: To Be Sung To The Tune Of Malik Mureed And Chandrahraa Sohee-Aa
One Universal Creator God. Truth Is The Name. Creative Being Personified. By Guru's Grace:
Shalok, First Mehl:
The Guru is the Giver; the Guru is the House of ice. The Guru is the Light of the three worlds.
O Nanak, He is everlasting wealth. Place your mind's faith in Him, and you shall find peace. ||1||
First Mehl:
First, the baby loves mother's milk;
second, he learns of his mother and father;
third, his brothers, sisters-in-law and sisters;
fourth, the love of play awakens.
Fifth, he runs after food and drink;
sixth, in his sexual desire, he does not respect social customs.
Seventh, he gathers wealth and dwells in his house;
eighth, he becomes angry, and his body is consumed.
Ninth, he turns grey, and his breathing becomes labored;
tenth, he is cremated, and turns to ashes.
His companions send him off, crying out and lamenting.
The swan of the soul takes flight, and asks which way to go.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 045

He came and he went, and now, even his name has died.
After he left, food was offered on leaves, and the birds were called to come and eat.
O Nanak, the self-willed manmukhs love the darkness.
Without the Guru, the world is drowning. ||2||
First Mehl:
At the age of ten, he is a child; at twenty, a youth, and at thirty, he is called handsome.
At forty, he is full of life; at fifty, his foot slips, and at sixty, old age is upon him.
At seventy, he loses his intellect, and at eighty, he cannot perform his duties.
At ninety, he lies in his bed, and he cannot understand his weakness.
After seeking and searching for such a long time, O Nanak, I have seen that the world is just a mansion of smoke. ||3||
Pauree:
You, O Creator Lord, are Unfathomable. You Yourself created the Universe,
its colors, qualities and varieties, in so many ways and forms.
You created it, and You alone understand it. It is all Your Play.
Some come, and some arise and depart; but without the Name, all are bound to die.
The Gurmukhs are imbued with the deep crimson color of the poppy; they are dyed in the color of the Lord's Love.
So serve the True and Pure Lord, the Supremely Powerful Architect of Destiny.
You Yourself are All-knowing. O Lord, You are the Greatest of the Great!
O my True Lord, I am a sacrifice, a humble sacrifice, to those who meditate on You within their conscious mind. ||1||
Shalok, First Mehl:
He placed the soul in the body which He had fashioned. He protects the Creation which He has created.
With their eyes, they see, and with their tongues, they speak; with their ears, they bring the mind to awareness.
With their feet, they walk, and with their hands, they work; they wear and eat whatever is given.
They do not know the One who created the Creation. The blind fools do their dark deeds.
When the pitcher of the body breaks and shatters into pieces, it cannot be re-created again.
O Nanak, without the Guru, there is no honor; without honor, no one is carried across. ||1||
Second Mehl:
They prefer the gift, instead of the Giver; such is the way of the self-willed manmukhs.
What can anyone say about their intelligence, their understanding or their cleverness?
The deeds which one commits, while sitting in one's own home, are known far and wide, in the four directions.
One who lives righteously is known as righteous; one who commits sins is known as a sinner.
You Yourself enact the entire play, O Creator. Why should we speak of any other?
As long as Your Light is within the body, You speak through that Light. Without Your Light, who can do anything? Show me any such cleverness!
O Nanak, the Lord alone is Perfect and All-knowing; He is revealed to the Gurmukh. ||2||
Pauree:
You Yourself created the world, and You Yourself put it to work.
Administering the drug of emotional attachment, You Yourself have led the world astray.
The fire of desire is deep within; unsatisfied, people remain hungry and thirsty.
This world is an illusion; it dies and it is re-born-it comes and it goes in reincarnation.
Without the True Guru, emotional attachment is not broken. All have grown weary of performing empty rituals.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord. Filled with a joyful peace, they surrender to Your Will.
They save their families and ancestors; blessed are the mothers who gave birth to them.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 046

Beautiful and sublime is the glory and the understanding of those who focus their consciousness on the Lord. ||2||
Shalok, Second Mehl:
To see without eyes; to hear without ears;
to walk without feet; to work without hands;
to speak without a tongue-like this, one remains dead while yet alive.
O Nanak, recognize the Hukam of the Lord's Command, and merge with your Lord and Master. ||1||
Second Mehl:
He is seen, heard and known, but His subtle essence is not obtained.
How can the lame, armless and blind person run to embrace the Lord?
Let the Fear of God be your feet, and let His Love be your hands; let His Understanding be your eyes.
Says Nanak, in this way, O wise soul-bride, you shall be united with your Husband Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
Forever and ever, You are the only One; You set the play of duality in motion.
You created egotism and arrogant pride, and You placed greed within our beings.
Keep me as it pleases Your Will; everyone acts as You cause them to act.
Some are forgiven, and merge with You; through the Guru's Teachings, we are joined to You.
Some stand and serve You; without the Name, nothing else pleases them.
Any other task would be worthless to them-You have enjoined them to Your True Service.
In the midst of children, spouse and relations, some still remain detached; they are pleasing to Your Will.
Inwardly and outwardly, they are pure, and they are absorbed in the True Name. ||3||
Shalok, First Mehl:
I may make a cave, in a mountain of gold, or in the water of the nether regions;
I may remain standing on my head, upside-down, on the earth or up in the sky;
I may totally cover my body with clothes, and wash them continually;
I may shout out loud, the white, red, yellow and black Vedas;
I may even live in dirt and filth. And yet, all this is just a product of evil-mindedness, and intellectual corruption.
I was not, I am not, and I will never be anything at all! O Nanak, I dwell only on the Word of the Shabad. ||1||
First Mehl:
They wash their clothes, and scrub their bodies, and try to practice self-discipline.
But they are not aware of the filth staining their inner being, while they try and try to wash off the outer dirt.
The blind go astray, caught by the noose of Death.
They see other people's property as their own, and in egotism, they suffer in pain.
O Nanak, the egotism of the Gurmukhs is broken, and then, they meditate on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
They chant the Naam, meditate on the Naam, and through the Naam, they are absorbed in peace. ||2||
Pauree:
Destiny has brought together and united the body and the soul-swan.
He who created them, also separates them.
The fools enjoy their pleasures; they must also endure all their pains.
From pleasures, arise diseases and the commission of sins.
From sinful pleasures come sorrow, separation, birth and death.
The fools try to account for their misdeeds, and argue uselessly.
The judgement is in the Hands of the True Guru, who puts an end to the argument.
Whatever the Creator does, comes to pass. It cannot be changed by anyone's efforts. ||4||
Shalok, First Mehl:
Telling lies, they eat dead bodies.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 047

And yet, they go out to teach others.
They are deceived, and they deceive their companions.
O Nanak, such are the leaders of men. ||1||
Fourth Mehl:
Those, within whom the Truth dwells, obtain the True Name; they speak only the Truth.
They walk on the Lord's Path, and inspire others to walk on the Lord's Path as well.
Bathing in a pool of holy water, they are washed clean of filth. But, by bathing in a stagnant pond, they are contaminated with even more filth.
The True Guru is the Perfect Pool of Holy Water. Night and day, He meditates on the Name of the Lord, Har, Har.
He is saved, along with his family; bestowing the Name of the Lord, Har, Har, He saves the whole world.
Servant Nanak is a sacrifice to one who himself chants the Naam, and inspires others to chant it as well. ||2||
Pauree:
Some pick and eat fruits and roots, and live in the wilderness.
Some wander around wearing saffron robes, as Yogis and Sanyaasees.
But there is still so much desire within them-they still yearn for clothes and food.
They waste their lives uselessly; they are neither householders nor renunciates.
The Messenger of Death hangs over their heads, and they cannot escape the three-phased desire.
Death does not even approach those who follow the Guru's Teachings, and become the slaves of the Lord's slaves.
The True Word of the Shabad abides in their true minds; within the home of their own inner beings, they remain detached.
O Nanak, those who serve their True Guru, rise from desire to desirelessness. ||5||
Shalok, First Mehl:
If one's clothes are stained with blood, the garment becomes polluted.
Those who suck the blood of human beings-how can their consciousness be pure?
O Nanak, chant the Name of God, with heart-felt devotion.
Everything else is just a pompous worldly show, and the practice of false deeds. ||1||
First Mehl:
Since I am no one, what can I say? Since I am nothing, what can I be?
As He created me, so I act. As He causes me to speak, so I speak. I am full and overflowing with sins-if only I could wash them away!
I do not understand myself, and yet I try to teach others. Such is the guide I am!
O Nanak, the one who is blind shows others the way, and misleads all his companions.
But, going to the world hereafter, he shall be beaten and kicked in the face; then, it will be obvious, what sort of guide he was! ||2||
Pauree:
Through all the months and the seasons, the minutes and the hours, I dwell upon You, O Lord.
No one has attained You by clever calculations, O True, Unseen and Infinite Lord.
That scholar who is full of greed, arrogant pride and egotism, is known to be a fool.
So read the Name, and realize the Name, and contemplate the Guru's Teachings.
Through the Guru's Teachings, I have earned the wealth of the Naam; I possess the storehouses, overflowing with devotion to the Lord.
Believing in the Immaculate Naam, one is hailed as true, in the True Court of the Lord.
The Divine Light of the Infinite Lord, who owns the soul and the breath of life, is deep within the inner being.
You alone are the True Banker, O Lord; the rest of the world is just Your petty trader. ||6||
Shalok, First Mehl:
Let mercy be your mosque, faith your prayer-mat, and honest living your Koran.
Make modesty your circumcision, and good conduct your fast. In this way, you shall be a true Muslim.
Let good conduct be your Kaabaa, Truth your spiritual guide, and the karma of good deeds your prayer and chant.
Let your rosary be that which is pleasing to His Will. O Nanak, God shall preserve your honor. ||1||

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 048

First Mehl
: To take what rightfully belongs to another, is like a Muslim eating pork, or a Hindu eating beef.
Our Guru, our Spiritual Guide, stands by us, if we do not eat those carcasses.
By mere talk, people do not earn passage to Heaven. Salvation comes only from the practice of Truth.
By adding spices to forbidden foods, they are not made acceptable.
O Nanak, from false talk, only falsehood is obtained. ||2||
First Mehl:
There are five prayers and five times of day for prayer; the five have five names.
Let the first be truthfulness, the second honest living, and the third charity in the Name of God.
Let the fourth be good will to all, and the fifth the praise of the Lord.
Repeat the prayer of good deeds, and then, you may call yourself a Muslim.
O Nanak, the false obtain falsehood, and only falsehood. ||3||
Pauree:
Some trade in priceless jewels, while others deal in mere glass.
When the True Guru is pleased, we find the treasure of the jewel, deep within the self.
Without the Guru, no one has found this treasure. The blind and the false have died in their endless wanderings.
The self-willed manmukhs putrefy and die in duality. They do not understand contemplative meditation.
Without the One Lord, there is no other at all. Unto whom should they complain?
Some are destitute, and wander around endlessly, while others have storehouses of wealth.
Without God's Name, there is no other wealth. Everything else is just poison and ashes.
O Nanak, the Lord Himself acts, and causes others to act; by the Hukam of His Command, we are embellished and exalted. ||7||
Shalok, First Mehl:
It is difficult to be called a Muslim; if one is truly a Muslim, then he may be called one.
First, let him savor the religion of the Prophet as sweet; then, let his pride of his possessions be scraped away.
Becoming a true Muslim, a disciple of the faith of Mohammed, let him put aside the delusion of death and life.
As he submits to God's Will, and surrenders to the Creator, he is rid of selfishness and conceit.
And when, O Nanak, he is merciful to all beings, only then shall he be called a Muslim. ||1||
Fourth Mehl:
Renounce sexual desire, anger, falsehood and slander; forsake Maya and eliminate egotistical pride.
Renounce sexual desire and promiscuity, and give up emotional attachment. Only then shall you obtain the Immaculate Lord amidst the darkness of the world.
Renounce selfishness, conceit and arrogant pride, and your love for your children and spouse. Abandon your thirsty hopes and desires, and embrace love for the Lord.
O Nanak, the True One shall come to dwell in your mind. Through the True Word of the Shabad, you shall be absorbed in the Name of the Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
Neither the kings, nor their subjects, nor the leaders shall remain.
The shops, the cities and the streets shall eventually disintegrate, by the Hukam of the Lord's Command.
Those solid and beautiful mansions-the fools think that they belong to them.
The treasure-houses, filled with wealth, shall be emptied out in an instant.
The horses, chariots, camels and elephants, with all their decorations; the gardens, lands, houses, tents, soft beds and satin pavilions-Oh, where are those things, which they believe to be their own?
O Nanak, the True One is the Giver of all; He is revealed through His All-powerful Creative Nature. ||8||
Shalok, First Mehl:
If the rivers became cows, giving milk, and the spring water became milk and ghee;
If all the earth became sugar, to continually excite the mind;

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 049

if the mountains became gold and silver, studded with gems and jewels
\-even then, I would worship and adore You, and my longing to chant Your Praises would not decrease. ||1||
First Mehl:
If all the eighteen loads of vegetation became fruits,
and the growing grass became sweet rice; if I were able to stop the sun and the moon in their orbits and hold them perfectly steady
\-even then, I would worship and adore You, and my longing to chant Your Praises would not decrease. ||2||
First Mehl:
If my body were afflicted with pain, under the evil influence of unlucky stars;
and if the blood-sucking kings were to hold power over me
\-even if this were my condition, I would still worship and adore You, and my longing to chant Your Praises would not decrease. ||3||
First Mehl:
If fire and ice were my clothes, and the wind was my food;
and even if the enticing heavenly beauties were my wives, O Nanak-all this shall pass away!
Even then, I would worship and adore You, and my longing to chant Your Praises would not decrease. ||4||
Pauree:
The foolish demon, who does evil deeds, does not know his Lord and Master.
Call him a mad-man, if he does not understand himself.
The strife of this world is evil; these struggles are consuming it.
Without the Lord's Name, life is worthless. Through doubt, the people are being destroyed.
One who recognizes that all spiritual paths lead to the One shall be emancipated.
One who speaks lies shall fall into hell and burn.
In all the world, the most blessed and sanctified are those who remain absorbed in Truth.
One who eliminates selfishness and conceit is redeemed in the Court of the Lord. ||9||
First Mehl, Shalok:
They alone are truly alive, whose minds are filled with the Lord.
O Nanak, no one else is truly alive;
those who merely live shall depart in dishonor;
everything they eat is impure.
Intoxicated with power and thrilled with wealth, they delight in their pleasures, and dance about shamelessly.
O Nanak, they are deluded and defrauded.
Without the Lord's Name, they lose their honor and depart. ||1||
First Mehl:
What good is food, and what good are clothes,
if the True Lord does not abide within the mind?
What good are fruits, what good is ghee, sweet jaggery, what good is flour, and what good is meat?
What good are clothes, and what good is a soft bed, to enjoy pleasures and sensual delights?
What good is an army, and what good are soldiers, servants and mansions to live in?
O Nanak, without the True Name, all this paraphernalia shall disappear. ||2||
Pauree:
What good is social class and status? Truthfulness is measured within.
Pride in one's status is like poison-holding it in your hand and eating it, you shall die.
The True Lord's Sovereign Rule is known throughout the ages.
One who respects the Hukam of the Lord's Command is honored and respected in the Court of the Lord.
By the Order of our Lord and Master, we have been brought into this world.
The Drummer, the Guru, has announced the Lord's meditation, through the Word of the Shabad.
Some have mounted their horses in response, and others are saddling up.
Some have tied up their bridles, and others have already ridden off. ||10||
Shalok, First Mehl:
When the crop is ripe, then it is cut down; only the stalks are left standing.
The corn on the cob is put into the thresher, and the kernels are separated from the cobs.
Placing the kernels between the two mill-stones, people sit and grind the corn.
Those kernels which stick to the central axle are spared-Nanak has seen this wonderful vision! ||1||
First Mehl:
Look, and see how the sugar-cane is cut down. After cutting away its branches, its feet are bound together into bundles,

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 050

and then, it is placed between the wooden rollers and crushed.
What punishment is inflicted upon it! Its juice is extracted and placed in the cauldron; as it is heated, it groans and cries out.
And then, the crushed cane is collected and burnt in the fire below.
Nanak: come, people, and see how the sweet sugar-cane is treated! ||2||
Pauree:
Some do not think of death; they entertain great hopes.
They die, and are re-born, and die, over and over again. They are of no use at all!
In their conscious minds, they call themselves good.
The King of the Angels of Death hunts down those self-willed manmukhs, over and over again.
The manmukhs are false to their own selves; they feel no gratitude for what they have been given.
Those who merely perform rituals of worship are not pleasing to their Lord and Master.
Those who attain the True Lord and chant His Name are pleasing to the Lord.
They worship the Lord and bow at His Throne. They fulfill their pre-ordained destiny. ||11||
First Mehl, Shalok:
What can deep water do to a fish? What can the vast sky do to a bird?
What can cold do to a stone? What is married life to a eunuch?
You may apply sandalwood oil to a dog, but he will still be a dog.
You may try to teach a deaf person by reading the Simritees to him, but how will he learn?
You may place a light before a blind man and burn fifty lamps, but how will he see?
You may place gold before a herd of cattle, but they will pick out the grass to eat.
You may add flux to iron and melt it, but it will not become soft like cotton.
O Nanak, this is the nature of a fool-everything he speaks is useless and wasted. ||1||
First Mehl:
When pieces of bronze or gold or iron break,
the metal-smith welds them together again in the fire, and the bond is established.
If a husband leaves his wife,
their children may bring them back together in the world, and the bond is established.
When the king makes a demand, and it is met, the bond is established.
When the hungry man eats, he is satisfied, and the bond is established.
In the famine, the rain fills the streams to overflowing, and the bond is established.
There is a bond between love and words of sweetness.
When one speaks the Truth, a bond is established with the Holy Scriptures.
Through goodness and truth, the dead establish a bond with the living.
Such are the bonds which prevail in the world.
The fool establishes his bonds only when he is slapped in the face.
Nanak says this after deep reflection:
through the Lord's Praise, we establish a bond with His Court. ||2||
Pauree:
He Himself created and adorned the Universe, and He Himself contemplates it.
Some are counterfeit, and some are genuine. He Himself is the Appraiser.
The genuine are placed in His Treasury, while the counterfeit are thrown away.
The counterfeit are thrown out of the True Court-unto whom should they complain?
They should worship and follow the True Guru-this is the lifestyle of excellence.
The True Guru converts the counterfeit into genuine; through the Word of the Shabad, He embellishes and exalts us.
Those who have enshrined love and affection for the Guru, are honored in the True Court.
Who can estimate the value of those who have been forgiven by the Creator Lord Himself? ||12||
Shalok, First Mehl:
All the spiritual teachers, their disciples and the rulers of the world shall be buried under the ground.
The emperors shall also pass away; God alone is Eternal.
You alone, Lord, You alone. ||1||
First Mehl:
Neither the angels, nor the demons, nor human beings, nor the Siddhas, nor the seekers shall remain on the earth.
Who else is there?

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 051

You alone, Lord, You alone. ||2||
First Mehl:
Neither the just, nor the generous, nor any humans at all, nor the seven realms beneath the earth, shall remain.
The One Lord alone exists. Who else is there?
You alone, Lord, You alone. ||3||
First Mehl:
Neither the sun, nor the moon, nor the planets, nor the seven continents, nor the oceans, nor food, nor the wind-nothing is permanent.
You alone, Lord, You alone. ||4||
First Mehl:
Our sustenance is not in the hands of any person.
The hopes of all rest in the One Lord.
The One Lord alone exists-who else is there?
You alone, Lord, You alone. ||5||
First Mehl:
The birds have no money in their pockets.
They place their hopes on trees and water.
He alone is the Giver.
You alone, Lord, You alone. ||6||
First Mehl:
O Nanak, that destiny which is pre-ordained and written on one's forehead
\-no one can erase it.
The Lord infuses strength, and He takes it away again.
You alone, O Lord, You alone. ||7||
Pauree:
True is the Hukam of Your Command. To the Gurmukh, it is known.
Through the Guru's Teachings, selfishness and conceit are eradicated, and the Truth is realized.
True is Your Court. It is proclaimed and revealed through the Word of the Shabad.
Meditating deeply on the True Word of the Shabad, I have merged into the Truth.
The self-willed manmukhs are always false; they are deluded by doubt.
They dwell in manure, and they do not know the taste of the Name.
Without the Name, they suffer the agonies of coming and going.
O Nanak, the Lord Himself is the Appraiser, who distinguishes the counterfeit from the genuine. ||13||
Shalok, First Mehl:
Tigers, hawks, falcons and eagles-the Lord could make them eat grass.
And those animals which eat grass-He could make them eat meat. He could make them follow this way of life.
He could raise dry land from the rivers, and turn the deserts into bottomless oceans.
He could appoint a worm as king, and reduce an army to ashes.
All beings and creatures live by breathing, but He could keep us alive, even without the breath.
O Nanak, as it pleases the True Lord, He gives us sustenance. ||1||
First Mehl:
Some eat meat, while others eat grass.
Some have all the thirty-six varieties of delicacies,
while others live in the dirt and eat mud.
Some control the breath, and regulate their breathing.
Some live by the Support of the Naam, the Name of the Formless Lord.
The Great Giver lives; no one dies.
O Nanak, those who do not enshrine the Lord within their minds are deluded. ||2||
Pauree:
By the karma of good actions, some come to serve the Perfect Guru.
Through the Guru's Teachings, some eliminate selfishness and conceit, and meditate on the Naam, the Name of the Lord.
Undertaking any other task, they waste their lives in vain.
Without the Name, all that they wear and eat is poison.
Praising the True Word of the Shabad, they merge with the True Lord.
Without serving the True Guru, they do not obtain the home of peace; they are consigned to reincarnation, over and over again.
Investing counterfeit capital, they earn only falsehood in the world.
O Nanak, singing the Praises of the Pure, True Lord, they depart with honor. ||14||
Shalok, First Mehl:
When it pleases You, we play music and sing; when it pleases You, we bathe in water.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 052

When it pleases You, we smear our bodies with ashes, and blow the horn and the conch shell.
When it pleases You, we read the Islamic Scriptures, and are acclaimed as Mullahs and Shaykhs.
When it pleases You, we become kings, and enjoy all sorts of tastes and pleasures.
When it pleases You, we wield the sword, and cut off the heads of our enemies.
When it pleases You, we go out to foreign lands; hearing news of home, we come back again.
When it pleases You, we are attuned to the Name, and when it pleases You, we become pleasing to You.
Nanak utters this one prayer; everything else is just the practice of falsehood. ||1||
First Mehl:
You are so Great-all Greatness flows from You. You are So Good-Goodness radiates from You.
You are True-all that flows from You is True. Nothing at all is false.
Talking, seeing, speaking, walking, living and dying-all these are transitory.
By the Hukam of His Command, He creates, and in His Command, He keeps us. O Nanak, He Himself is True. ||2||
Pauree:
Serve the True Guru fearlessly, and your doubt shall be dispelled.
Do that work which the True Guru asks you to do.
When the True Guru becomes merciful, we meditate on the Naam.
The profit of devotional worship is excellent. It is obtained by the Gurmukh.
The self-willed manmukhs are trapped in the darkness of falsehood; they practice nothing but falsehood.
Go to the Gate of Truth, and speak the Truth.
The True Lord calls the true ones to the Mansion of His Presence.
O Nanak, the true ones are forever true; they are absorbed in the True Lord. ||15||
Shalok, First Mehl:
The Dark Age of Kali Yuga is the knife, and the kings are butchers; righteousness has sprouted wings and flown away.
In this dark night of falsehood, the moon of Truth is not visible anywhere.
I have searched in vain, and I am so confused; in this darkness, I cannot find the path.
In egotism, they cry out in pain.
Says Nanak, how will they be saved? ||1||
Third Mehl:
In this Dark Age of Kali Yuga, the Kirtan of the Lord's Praise has appeared as a Light in the world.
How rare are those few Gurmukhs who swim across to the other side!
The Lord bestows His Glance of Grace;
O Nanak, the Gurmukh receives the jewel. ||2||
Pauree:
Between the Lord's devotees and the people of the world, there can never be any true alliance.
The Creator Himself is infallible. He cannot be fooled; no one can fool Him.
He blends His devotees with Himself; they practice Truth, and only Truth.
The Lord Himself leads the people of the world astray; they tell lies, and by telling lies, they eat poison.
They do not recognize the ultimate reality, that we all must go; they continue to cultivate the poisons of sexual desire and anger.
The devotees serve the Lord; night and day, they meditate on the Naam.
Becoming the slaves of the Lord's slaves, they eradicate selfishness and conceit from within.
In the Court of their Lord and Master, their faces are radiant; they are embellished and exalted with the True Word of the Shabad. ||16||
Shalok, First Mehl:
Those who praise the Lord in the early hours of the morning and meditate on Him single-mindedly,
are the perfect kings; at the right time, they die fighting.
In the second watch, the focus of the mind is scattered in all sorts of ways.
So many fall into the bottomless pit; they are dragged under, and they cannot get out again.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 053

In the third watch, both hunger and thirst bark for attention, and food is put into the mouth.
That which is eaten becomes dust, but they are still attached to eating.
In the fourth watch, they become drowsy. They close their eyes and begin to dream.
Rising up again, they engage in conflicts; they set the stage as if they will live for 100 years.
If at all times, at each and every moment, they live in the fear of God
\-O Nanak, the Lord dwells within their minds, and their cleansing bath is true. ||1||
Second Mehl:
They are the perfect kings, who have found the Perfect Lord.
Twenty-four hours a day, they remain unconcerned, imbued with the Love of the One Lord.
Only a few obtain the Darshan, the Blessed Vision of the Unimaginably Beauteous Lord.
Through the perfect karma of good deeds, one meets the Perfect Guru, whose speech is perfect.
O Nanak, when the Guru makes one perfect, one's weight does not decrease. ||2||
Pauree:
When You are with me, what more could I want? I speak only the Truth.
Plundered by the thieves of worldly affairs, she does not obtain the Mansion of His Presence.
Being so stone-hearted, she has lost her chance to serve the Lord.
That heart, in which the True Lord is not found, should be torn down and re-built.
How can she be weighed accurately, upon the scale of perfection?
No one will say that her weight has been shorted, if she rids herself of egotism.
The genuine are assayed, and accepted in the Court of the All-knowing Lord.
The genuine merchandise is found only in one shop-it is obtained from the Perfect Guru. ||17||
Shalok, Second Mehl:
Twenty-four hours a day, destroy the eight things, and in the ninth place, conquer the body.
Within the body are the nine treasures of the Name of the Lord-seek the depths of these virtues.
Those blessed with the karma of good actions praise the Lord. O Nanak, they make the Guru their spiritual teacher.
In the fourth watch of the early morning hours, a longing arises in their higher consciousness.
They are attuned to the river of life; the True Name is in their minds and on their lips.
The Ambrosial Nectar is distributed, and those with good karma receive this gift.
Their bodies become golden, and take on the color of spirituality.
If the Jeweller casts His Glance of Grace, they are not placed in the fire again.
Throughout the other seven watches of the day, it is good to speak the Truth, and sit with the spiritually wise.
There, vice and virtue are distinguished, and the capital of falsehood is decreased.
There, the counterfeit are cast aside, and the genuine are cheered.
Speech is vain and useless. O Nanak, pain and pleasure are in the power of our Lord and Master. ||1||
Second Mehl:
Air is the Guru, Water is the Father, and Earth is the Great Mother of all.
Day and night are the two nurses, in whose lap all the world is at play.
Good deeds and bad deeds-the record is read out in the Presence of the Lord of Dharma.
According to their own actions, some are drawn closer, and some are driven farther away.
Those who have meditated on the Naam, the Name of the Lord, and departed after having worked by the sweat of their brow
\-O Nanak, their faces are radiant in the Court of the Lord, and many others are saved along with them! ||2||
Pauree:
The True Food is the Love of the Lord; the True Guru has spoken.
With this True Food, I am satisfied, and with the Truth, I am delighted.
True are the cities and the villages, where one abides in the True Home of the self.
When the True Guru is pleased, one receives the Lord's Name, and blossoms forth in His Love.
No one enters the Court of the True Lord through falsehood.
By uttering falsehood and only falsehood, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is lost.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 054

No one blocks the way of those who are blessed with the Banner of the True Word of the Shabad.
Hearing, understanding and speaking Truth, one is called to the Mansion of the Lord's Presence. ||18||
Shalok, First Mehl:
If I dressed myself in fire, and built my house of snow, and made iron my food;
and if I were to drink in all pain like water, and drive the entire earth before me;
and if I were to place the earth upon a scale and balance it with a single copper coin;
and if I were to become so great that I could not be contained, and if I were to control and lead all;
and if I were to possess so much power within my mind that I could cause others to do my bidding-so what?
As Great as our Lord and Master is, so great are His gifts. He bestows them according to His Will.
O Nanak, those upon whom the Lord casts His Glance of Grace, obtain the glorious greatness of the True Name. ||1||
Second Mehl:
The mouth is not satisfied by speaking, and the ears are not satisfied by hearing.
The eyes are not satisfied by seeing-each organ seeks out one sensory quality.
The hunger of the hungry is not appeased; by mere words, hunger is not relieved.
O Nanak, hunger is relieved only when one utters the Glorious Praises of the Praiseworthy Lord. ||2||
Pauree:
Without the True One, all are false, and all practice falsehood.
Without the True One, the false ones are bound and gagged and driven off.
Without the True One, the body is just ashes, and it mingles again with ashes.
Without the True Ome, all food and clothes are unsatisfying.
Without the True One, the false ones do not attain the Lord's Court.
Attached to false attachments, the Mansion of the Lord's Presence is lost.
The whole world is deceived by deception, coming and going in reincarnation.
Within the body is the fire of desire; through the Word of the Shabad, it is quenched. ||19||
Shalok, First Mehl:
O Nanak, the Guru is the tree of contentment, with flowers of faith, and fruits of spiritual wisdom.
Watered with the Lord's Love, it remains forever green; through the karma of good deeds and meditation, it ripens.
Honor is obtained by eating this tasty dish; of all gifts, this is the greatest gift. ||1||
First Mehl:
The Guru is the tree of gold, with leaves of coral, and blossoms of jewels and rubies.
The Words from His Mouth are fruits of jewels. Within His Heart, He beholds the Lord.
O Nanak, He is obtained by those, upon whose faces and foreheads such pre-recorded destiny is written.
The sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage are contained in the constant worship of the feet of the Exalted Guru.
Cruelty, material attachment, greed and anger are the four rivers of fire.
Falling into them, one is burned, O Nanak! One is saved only by holding tight to good deeds. ||2||
Pauree:
While you are alive, conquer death, and you shall have no regrets in the end.
This world is false, but only a few understand this.
People do not enshrine love for the Truth; they chase after worldly affairs instead.
The terrible time of death and annihilation hovers over the heads of the world.
By the Hukam of the Lord's Command, the Messenger of Death smashes his club over their heads.
The Lord Himself gives His Love, and enshrines it within their minds.
Not a moment or an instant's delay is permitted, when one's measure of life is full.
By Guru's Grace, one comes to know the True One, and is absorbed into Him. ||20||
Shalok, First Mehl:
Bitter melon, swallow-wort, thorn-apple and nim fruit
\-these bitter poisons lodge in the minds and mouths of those who do not remember You.
O Nanak, how shall I tell them this? Without the karma of good deeds, they are only destroying themselves. ||1||
First Mehl:
The intellect is a bird; on account of its actions, it is sometimes high, and sometimes low.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 055

Sometimes it is perched on the sandalwood tree, and sometimes it is on the branch of the poisonous swallow-wort. Sometimes, it soars through the heavens.
O Nanak, our Lord and Master leads us on, according to the Hukam of His Command; such is His Way. ||2||
Pauree:
Some speak and expound, and while speaking and lecturing, they pass away.
The Vedas speak and expound on the Lord, but they do not know His limits.
Not by studying, but through understanding, is the Lord's Mystery revealed.
There are six pathways in the Shaastras, but how rare are those who merge in the True Lord through them.
The True Lord is Unknowable; through the Word of His Shabad, we are embellished.
One who believes in the Name of the Infinite Lord, attains the Court of the Lord.
I humbly bow to the Creator Lord; I am a minstrel singing His Praises.
Nanak enshrines the Lord within his mind. He is the One, throughout the ages. ||21||
Shalok, Second Mehl:
Those who charm scorpions and handle snakes only brand themselves with their own hands.
By the pre-ordained Order of our Lord and Master, they are beaten badly, and struck down.
If the self-willed manmukhs fight with the Gurmukh, they are condemned by the Lord, the True Judge.
He Himself is the Lord and Master of both worlds. He beholds all and makes the exact determination.
O Nanak, know this well: everything is in accordance with His Will. ||1||
Second Mehl:
O Nanak, if someone judges himself, only then is he known as a real judge.
If someone understands both the disease and the medicine, only then is he a wise physician.
Do not involve yourself in idle business on the way; remember that you are only a guest here.
Speak with those who know the Primal Lord, and renounce your evil ways.
That virtuous person who does not walk in the way of greed, and who abides in Truth, is accepted and famous.
If an arrow is shot at the sky, how can it reach there?
The sky above is unreachable-know this well, O archer! ||2||
Pauree:
The soul-bride loves her Husband Lord; she is embellished with His Love.
She worships Him day and night; she cannot be restrained from doing so.
In the Mansion of the Lord's Presence, she has made her home; she is adorned with the Word of His Shabad.
She is humble, and she offers her true and sincere prayer.
She is beautiful in the Company of her Lord and Master; she walks in the Way of His Will.
With her dear friends, she offers her heart-felt prayers to her Beloved.
Cursed is that home, and shameful is that life, which is without the Name of the Lord.
But she who is adorned with the Word of His Shabad, drinks in the Amrit of His Nectar. ||22||
Shalok, First Mehl:
The desert is not satisfied by rain, and the fire is not quenched by desire.
The king is not satisfied with his kingdom, and the oceans are full, but still they thirst for more.
O Nanak, how many times must I seek and ask for the True Name? ||1||
Second Mehl:
Life is useless, as long as one does not know the Lord God.
Only a few cross over the world-ocean, by Guru's Grace.
The Lord is the All-powerful Cause of causes, says Nanak after deep deliberation.
The creation is subject to the Creator, who sustains it by His Almighty Power. ||2||
Pauree:
In the Court of the Lord and Master, His minstrels dwell.
Singing the Praises of their True Lord and Master, the lotuses of their hearts have blossomed forth.
Obtaining their Perfect Lord and Master, their minds are transfixed with ecstasy.
Their enemies have been driven out and subdued, and their friends are very pleased.
Those who serve the Truthful True Guru are shown the True Path.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 056

Reflecting on the True Word of the Shabad, death is overcome.
Speaking the Unspoken Speech of the Lord, one is adorned with the Word of His Shabad.
Nanak holds tight to the Treasure of Virtue, and meets with the Dear, Beloved Lord. ||23||
Shalok, First Mehl:
Born because of the karma of their past mistakes, they make more mistakes, and fall into mistakes.
By washing, their pollution is not removed, even though they may wash hundreds of times.
O Nanak, if God forgives, they are forgiven; otherwise, they are kicked and beaten. ||1||
First Mehl:
O Nanak, it is absurd to ask to be spared from pain by begging for comfort.
Pleasure and pain are the two garments given, to be worn in the Court of the Lord.
Where you are bound to lose by speaking, there, you ought to remain silent. ||2||
Pauree:
After looking around in the four directions, I looked within my own self.
There, I saw the True, Invisible Lord Creator.
I was wandering in the wilderness, but now the Guru has shown me the Way.
Hail to the True, True Guru, through whom we merge in the Truth.
I have found the jewel within the home of my own self; the lamp within has been lit.
Those who praise the True Word of the Shabad, abide in the peace of Truth.
But those who do not have the Fear of God, are overtaken by fear. They are destroyed by their own pride.
Having forgotten the Name, the world is roaming around like a wild demon. ||24||
Shalok, Third Mehl:
In fear we are born, and in fear we die. Fear is always present in the mind.
O Nanak, if one dies in the fear of God, his coming into the world is blessed and approved. ||1||
Third Mehl:
Without the fear of God, you may live very, very long, and savor the most enjoyable pleasures.
O Nanak, if you die without the fear of God, you will arise and depart with a blackened face. ||2||
Pauree:
When the True Guru is merciful, then your desires will be fulfilled.
When the True Guru is merciful, you will never grieve.
When the True Guru is merciful, you will know no pain.
When the True Guru is merciful, you will enjoy the Lord's Love.
When the True Guru is merciful, then why should you fear death?
When the True Guru is merciful, the body is always at peace.
When the True Guru is merciful, the nine treasures are obtained.
When the True Guru is merciful, you shall be absorbed in the True Lord. ||25||
Shalok, First Mehl:
They pluck the hair out of their heads, and drink in filthy water; they beg endlessly and eat the garbage which others have thrown away.
They spread manure, they suck in rotting smells, and they are afraid of clean water.
Their hands are smeared with ashes, and the hair on their heads is plucked out-they are like sheep!
They have renounced the lifestyle of their mothers and fathers, and their families and relatives cry out in distress.
No one offers the rice dishes at their last rites, and no one lights the lamps for them. After their death, where will they be sent?
The sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage give them no place of protection, and no Brahmin will eat their food.
They remain polluted forever, day and night; they do not apply the ceremonial tilak mark to their foreheads.
They sit together in silence, as if in mourning; they do not go to the Lord's Court.
With their begging bowls hanging from their waists, and their fly-brushes in their hands, they walk along in single file.
They are not Yogis, and they are not Jangams, followers of Shiva. They are not Qazis or Mullahs.

## Section 06 - Raag Maajh - Part 057

Ruined by the Merciful Lord, they wander around in disgrace, and their entire troop is contaminated.
The Lord alone kills and restores to life; no one else can protect anyone from Him.
They go without giving alms or any cleansing baths; their shaven heads become covered with dust.
The jewel emerged from the water, when the mountain of gold was used to churn it.
The gods established the sixty-eight sacred shrines of pilgrimage, where the festivals are celebrated and hymns are chanted.
After bathing, the Muslims recite their prayers, and after bathing, the Hindus perform their worship services. The wise always take cleansing baths.
At the time of death, and at the time of birth, they are purified, when water is poured on their heads.
O Nanak, the shaven-headed ones are devils. They are not pleased to hear these words.
When it rains, there is happiness. Water is the key to all life.
When it rains, the corn grows, and the sugar cane, and the cotton, which provides clothing for all.
When it rains, the cows always have grass to graze upon, and housewives can churn the milk into butter.
With that ghee, sacred feasts and worship services are performed; all these efforts are blessed.
The Guru is the ocean, and all His Teachings are the river. Bathing within it, glorious greatness is obtained.
O Nanak, if the shaven-headed ones do not bathe, then seven handfuls of ashes are upon their heads. ||1||
Second Mehl:
What can the cold do to the fire? How can the night affect the sun?
What can the darkness do to the moon? What can social status do to air and water?
What are personal possessions to the earth, from which all things are produced?
O Nanak, he alone is known as honorable, whose honor the Lord preserves. ||2||
Pauree:
It is of You, O my True and Wondrous Lord, that I sing forever.
Yours is the True Court. All others are subject to coming and going.
Those who ask for the gift of the True Name are like You.
Your Command is True; we are adorned with the Word of Your Shabad.
Through faith and trust, we receive spiritual wisdom and meditation from You.
By Your Grace, the banner of honor is obtained. It cannot be taken away or lost.
You are the True Giver; You give continually. Your Gifts continue to increase.
Nanak begs for that gift which is pleasing to You. ||26||
Shalok, Second Mehl:
Those who have accepted the Guru's Teachings, and who have found the path, remain absorbed in the Praises of the True Lord.
What teachings can be imparted to those who have the Divine Guru Nanak as their Guru? ||1||
First Mehl:
We understand the Lord only when He Himself inspires us to understand Him.
He alone knows everything, unto whom the Lord Himself gives knowledge.
One may talk and preach and give sermons but still yearn after Maya.
The Lord, by the Hukam of His Command, has created the entire creation.
He Himself knows the inner nature of all.
O Nanak, He Himself uttered the Word.
Doubt departs from one who receives this gift. ||2||
Pauree:
I was a minstrel, out of work, when the Lord took me into His service.
To sing His Praises day and night, He gave me His Order, right from the start.
My Lord and Master has summoned me, His minstrel, to the True Mansion of His Presence.
He has dressed me in the robes of His True Praise and Glory.
The Ambrosial Nectar of the True Name has become my food.
Those who follow the Guru's Teachings, who eat this food and are satisfied, find peace.
His minstrel spreads His Glory, singing and vibrating the Word of His Shabad.
O Nanak, praising the True Lord, I have obtained His Perfection. ||27||SUDH||

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">5. Siree Raag</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Sikhism/Shri_Guru_Granth_Sahib/7">
          <span class="pr-2">7. Raag Gauree</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
