---
title: "Workbook II — Science in The Urantia Book — Part IV. Biology"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: biology, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science/3">Part III. Physics and Chemistry</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_2_Science/5">Part V. Anthropology</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

Author: **William S. Sadler**

## INTRODUCTION - THE SOURCE OF LIFE

1. “The Universal Father is the God of all creation, the First Source and Center of all things and beings.” [UB 1:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p0_1)

2. “The myriads of planetary systems were all made to be eventually inhabited by many different types of intelligent creatures, beings who could know God, receive the divine affection, and love him in return. The universe of universes is the work of God and the dwelling place of his diverse creatures. ‘God created the heavens and formed the earth; he established the universe and created this world not in vain; he formed it to be inhabited.’” [UB 1:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p0_1)

3. “The Father unceasingly pours forth energy, light, and life.” [UB 4:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p1_6)

4. “Therefore, nature, as mortal man understands it, presents the underlying foundation and fundamental background of a changeless Deity and his immutable laws, modified by, fluctuating because of, and experiencing upheavals through, the working of the local plans, purposes, patterns, and conditions which have been inaugurated and are being carried out by the local universe, constellation, system, and planetary forces and personalities. For example: As God’s laws have been ordained in Nebadon, they are modified by the plans established by the Creator Son and Creative Spirit of this local universe; and in addition to all this the operation of these laws has been further influenced by the errors, defaults, and insurrections of certain beings resident upon your planet and belonging to your immediate planetary system of Satania.” [UB 4:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p2_2)

	> “Nature is the perfection of Paradise divided by the incompletion, evil, and sin of the unfinished universes. This quotient is thus expressive of both the perfect and the partial, of both the eternal and the temporal. Continuing evolution modifies nature by augmenting the content of Paradise perfection and by diminishing the content of the evil, error, and disharmony of relative reality.” [UB 4:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p2_4)

5. “The Creator Sons go out from Paradise into the universes of time and, with the co-operation of the controlling and creative agencies of the Third Source and Center, complete the organization of the local universes of progressive evolution.” [UB 7:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/7#p6_4)

6. “Since the personalization of the Third Source, the First Source no more personally participates in universe creation. The Universal Father delegates everything possible to his Eternal Son; likewise does the Eternal Son bestow all possible authority and power upon the Conjoint Creator.

	> “The Eternal Son and the Conjoint Creator have, as partners and through their co-ordinate personalities, planned and fashioned every post-Havona universe which has been brought into existence. The Spirit sustains the same personal relation to the Son in all subsequent creation that the Son sustains to the Father in the first and central creation.

	> “A Creator Son of the Eternal Son and a Creative Spirit of the Infinite Spirit created you and your universe; and while the Father in faithfulness upholds that which they have organized, it devolves upon this Universe Son and this Universe Spirit to foster and sustain their work as well as to minister to the creatures of their own making.” [UB 8:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/8#p3_2)

7. “It is highly probable, though we cannot offer definite proof, that the Master Spirit of Orvonton exerts a decided influence in the following spheres of activity:

	> “1. The life-initiation procedures of the local universe Life Carriers.

	> “2. The life activations of the adjutant mind-spirits bestowed upon the worlds by a local universe Creative Spirit.” [UB 16:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p4_8)

8. “The Creator Sons are the makers and rulers of the local universes of time and space.” [UB 21:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p0_1)

9. “Among these limitations to the otherwise all-powerful creator prerogatives of a local universe Father are the following: ...

	> “2. _Creature designs and types_ are controlled by the Eternal Son. Before a Creator Son may engage in the creation of any new type of being, any new design of creature, he must secure the consent of the Eternal and Original Mother Son.” [UB 21:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_3)

## SECTION 1. THE LOCAL UNIVERSE - THE CREATIVE DOMAIN OF A CREATOR SON

### I. **The Creation of Life in the Local Universe**

#### A. Function of the Creator Son and Creative Spirit.

1. The projection of the plan of life creation by the Creator Son and Creative Spirit is followed by the creation of the Bright and Morning Star.

	> “Presently, the physical plan of a universe is completed, and the Creator Son, in association with the Creative Spirit, projects his plan of life creation; whereupon does this representation of the Infinite Spirit begin her universe function as a distinct creative personality. When this first creative act is formulated and personal associate of the Creator Son, one like him in all aspects of character, though markedly limited in the attributes of divinity.” [UB 32:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_6)

2. After the creation of Gabriel, there ensues the creation of a vast array of diverse creatures, including mortal man.

	> “And now that the right-hand helper and chief executive of the Creator Son has been provided, there ensues the bringing into existence of a vast and wonderful array of diverse creatures. The sons and daughters of the local universe are forthcoming, and soon thereafter the government of such a creation is provided, extending from the supreme councils of the universe to the fathers of the constellations and the sovereigns of the local systems—the aggregations of those worlds which are designed subsequently to become the homes of the varied mortal races of will creatures; and each of these worlds will be presided over by a Planetary Prince.

	> “And then, when such a universe has been so completely organized and so repletely manned, does the Creator Son enter into the Father’s proposal to create mortal man in their divine image.” [UB 32:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_7)

3. The Creative Spirit is coresponsible with the Creator Son in producing the creatures of the worlds.

	> “The Creative Spirit is coresponsible with the Creator Son in producing the creatures of the worlds and never fails the Son in all efforts to uphold and conserve these creations. Life is ministered and maintained through the agency of the Creative Spirit. ‘You send forth your Spirit, and they are created. You renew the face of the earth.’

	> “In the creation of a universe of intelligent creatures the Creative Mother Spirit functions first in the sphere of universe perfection, collaborating with the Son in the production of the Bright and Morning Star. Subsequently the offspring of the Spirit increasingly approach the order of created beings on the planets, even as the Sons grade downward from the Melchizedeks to the Material Sons, who actually contact with the mortals of the realms. In the later evolution of mortal creatures the Life Carrier Sons provide the physical body, fabricated out of the existing organized material of the realm, while the Universe Spirit contributes the ‘breath of life.’” [UB 34:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p2_4)

#### B. The nature of creatures of the superuniverses.

1. Except Deity-origin beings, all creatures are of progressive evolutionary nature. There is no limit to the progress of ThoughtAdjuster-endowed creatures.

	> “Excepting perfect beings of Deity origin, all will creatures in the superuniverses are of evolutionary nature, beginning in lowly estate and climbing ever upward, in reality inward. Even highly spiritual personalities continue to ascend the scale of life by progressive translations from life to life and from sphere to sphere. And in the case of those who entertain the Mystery Monitors, there is indeed no limit to the possible heights of their spiritual ascent and universe attainment.” [UB 32:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p3_8)

2. The fact of evolutionary origin is not a stigma. All the more honor for those who climb from the bottom to the top.

	> “The fact of animal evolutionary origin does not attach stigma to any personality in the sight of the universe as that is the exclusive method of producing one of the two basic types of finite intelligent will creatures. When the heights of perfection and eternity are attained, all the more honor to those who began at the bottom and joyfully climbed the ladder of life, round by round, and who, when they do reach the heights of glory, will have gained a personal experience which embodies an actual knowledge of every phase of life from the bottom to the top.” [UB 32:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p3_10)

#### C. Biologic headquarters of the local universe.

1. Life Carrier World No. 1 is devoted to the study of universal life and life planning. Here are the central emplacements of the adjutant mind-spirits.

	> “World Number One, the headquarters sphere, together with its six tributary satellites, is devoted to the study of universal life, life in all of its known phases of manifestation. Here is located the college of life planning, wherein function teachers and advisers from Uversa and Havona, even from Paradise. And I am permitted to reveal that the seven central emplacements of the adjutant mindspirits are situated on this world of the Life Carriers.” [UB 36:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p2_10)

2. The second world is the life-designing sphere.

	> “The Second World is the life-designing sphere; here all new modes of life organization are worked out. While the original life designs are provided by the Creator Son, the actual outworking of these plans is intrusted to the Life Carriers and their associates. When the general life plans for a new world have been formulated, they are transmitted to the headquarters sphere, where they are minutely scrutinized by the supreme council of the senior Life Carriers in collaboration with a corps of consulting Melchizedeks. If the plans are a departure from previously accepted formulas, they must be passed upon, and endorsed by, the Creator Son. The chief of Melchizedeks often represents the Creator Son in these deliberations.” [UB 36:2.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p2_12)

3. A whole world is devoted to the study and elaboration of basic life patterns. On Urantia, life is reproduced in a pattern of twenty-four units.

	> “World Number Three is devoted to the conservation of life. Here various modes of life protection and preservation are studied and developed by the assistants and custodians of the Life Carrier corps. The life plans for every new world always provide for the early establishment of the life-conservation commission, consisting of custodian specialists in the expert manipulation of the basic life patterns. On Urantia there were twenty-four such custodian commissioners, two for each fundamental or parent pattern of the architectural organization of the life material. On planets such as yours the highest form of life is reproduced by a life-carrying bundle which possesses twenty-four pattern units. (And since the intellectual life grows out of, and upon the foundation of, the physical, there come into existence the four and twenty basic orders of psychic organization.)” [UB 36:2.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p2_16)

4. The original life plasm contains the potentials of all future variations of organic evolution.

	> “_Sphere Number Four_ and its tributary satellites are devoted to the study of the evolution of creature life in general and to the evolutionary antecedents of any one life level in particular. The original life plasm of an evolutionary world must contain the full potential for all future developmental variations and for all subsequent evolutionary changes and modifications. The provision for such far-reaching projects of life metamorphosis may require the appearance of many apparently useless forms of animal and vegetable life. Such by-products of planetary evolution, foreseen or unforeseen, appear upon the stage of action only to disappear, but in and through all this long process there runs the thread of the wise and intelligent formulations of the original designers of the planetary life plan and species scheme. The manifold by-products of biologic evolution are all essential to the final and full function of the higher intelligent forms of life, notwithstanding that great outward disharmony may prevail from time to time in the long upward struggle of the higher creatures to effect the mastery of the lower forms of life, many of which are sometimes so antagonistic to the peace and comfort of the evolving will creatures.” [UB 36:2.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p2_17)

#### D. Function of the Life Carriers.

1. The Life Carriers either import life or formulate its patterns on the local worlds.

	> “Life does not originate spontaneously. Life is constructed according to plans formulated by the (unrevealed) Architects of Being and appears on the inhabited planets either by direct importation or as a result of the operations of the Life Carriers of the local universes. These carriers of life are among the most interesting and versatile of the diverse family of universe Sons. They are intrusted with designing and carrying creature life to the planetary spheres. And after planting this life on such new worlds, they remain there for long periods to foster its development.” [UB 36:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p0_1)

2. Life does not spontaneously appear in the universes.

	> “Life does not spontaneously appear in the universes; the Life Carriers must initiate it on the barren planets. They are the carriers, disseminators, and guardians of life as it appears on the evolutionary worlds of space. All life of the order and forms known on Urantia arises with these Sons, though not all forms of planetary life are existent on Urantia.” [UB 36:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p3_1)

3. Life Carriers may carry actual life plasms to a new world, or organize life patterns after arriving in accordance with approved formulas.

	> “The corps of Life Carriers commissioned to plant life upon a new world usually consists of one hundred senior carriers, one hundred assistants, and one thousand custodians. The Life Carriers often carry actual life plasm to a new world, but not always. They sometimes organize the life patterns after arriving on the planet of assignment in accordance with formulas previously approved for a new adventure in life establishment. Such was the origin of the planetary life of Urantia.” [UB 36:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p3_2)

4. Life Carriers catalyze the lifeless material, and the vital spark from the Mother Spirit is imparted through them. From the Universe Mother Spirit comes the vital spark which enlivens the body and presages the mind.

	> “When, in accordance with approved formulas, the physical patterns have been provided, then do the Life Carriers catalyze this lifeless material, imparting through their persons the vital spirit spark; and forthwith do the inert patterns become living matter.

	> “The vital spark—the mystery of life—is bestowed through the Life Carriers, not by them. They do indeed supervise such transactions, they formulate the life plasm itself, but it is the Universe Mother Spirit who supplies the essential factor of the living plasm. From the Creative Daughter of the Infinite Spirit comes that energy spark which enlivens the body and presages the mind.” [UB 36:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p3_3)

5. It is the spirit of God who really contributes the vital spark.

	> “When the Life Carriers have designed the patterns of life, after they have organized the energy systems, there must occur an additional phenomenon; the ‘breath of life’ must be imparted to these lifeless forms. The Sons of God can construct the forms of life, but it is the Spirit of God who really contributes the vital spark. And when the life thus imparted is spent, then again the remaining material body becomes dead matter. When the bestowed life is exhausted, the body returns to the bosom of the material universe from which it was borrowed by the Life Carriers to serve as a transient vehicle for that life endowment which they conveyed to such a visible association of energy-matter.” [UB 36:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p6_4)

6. Life Carriers are living catalytic presences.

	> “In the bestowal of life the Life Carriers transmit nothing of their personal natures, not even on those spheres where new orders of life are projected. At such times they simply initiate and transmit the spark of life, start the required revolutions of matter in accordwith the physical, chemical, and electrical specifications of the ordained plans and patterns. Life Carriers are living catalytic presences which agitate, organize, and vitalize the otherwise inert elements of the material order of existence.” [UB 36:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p3_5)

7. Life Carriers are given a certain period to establish life on a new world, after which nothing new may be added by them.

	Until the emergence of human beings they may directionize the course of evolution.The Life Carriers of a planetary corps are given a certain period in which to establish life on a new world, approximately one-half million years of the time of that planet. At the termination of this period, indicated by certain developmental attainments of the planetary life, they cease implantation efforts, and they may not subsequently add any thing new or supplemental to the life of that planet.

	> “During the ages intervening between life establishment and the emergence of human creatures of moral status, the Life Carriers are permitted to manipulate the life environment and otherwise favorably directionize the course of biologic evolution. And this they do for long periods of time.” [UB 36:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p3_7)

8. While Life Carriers can organize living forms—such life is devoid of two powers—mind and reproductive powers.

	> “Things material may enjoy an independent existence, but life springs only from life. Mind can be derived only from pre-existent mind. Spirit takes origin only from spirit ancestors. The creature may produce the forms of life, but only a creator personality or a creative force can supply the activating living spark.

	> “Life Carriers can organize the material forms, or physical patterns, of living beings, but the Spirit provides the initial spark of life and bestows the endowment of mind. Even the living forms of experimental life which the Life Carriers organize on their Salvington worlds are always devoid of reproductive powers. When the life formulas and the vital patterns are correctly assembled and properly organized, the presence of a Life Carrier is sufficient to initiate life, but all such living organisms are lacking in two essential attributes—mind endowment and reproductive powers. Animal mind and human mind are gifts of the local universe Mother Spirit, functioning through the seven adjutant mindspirits, while creature ability to reproduce is the specific and personal impartation of the Universe Spirit to the ancestral life plasm inaugurated by the Life Carriers.” [UB 36:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p6_2)

9. There is a mystery connected with the impartation of life. But we do know that concept is inherent in the Father, expression in the Son, and life realization in the Spirit.

	> “There are some things connected with the elaboration of life on the evolutionary planets which are not altogether clear to us. We fully comprehend the physical organization of the electrochemical formulas of the Life Carriers, but we do not wholly understand the nature and source of the _life-activation spark_. We know that life flows from the Father through the Son and _by_ the Spirit. It is more than possible that the Master Spirits are the sevenfold channel of the river of life which is poured out upon all creation. But we do not comprehend the technique whereby the supervising Master Spirit participates in the initial episode of life bestowal on a new planet. The Ancients of Days, we are confident, also have some part in this inauguration of life on a new world, but we are wholly ignorant of the nature thereof. We do know that the Universe Mother Spirit actually vitalizes the lifeless patterns and imparts to such activated plasm the prerogatives of organismal reproduction. We observe that these three are the levels of God the Sevenfold, sometimes designated as the Supreme Creators of time and space; but otherwise we know little more than Urantia mortals—simply that concept is inherent in the Father, expression in the Son, and life realization in the Spirit.” [UB 36:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p6_7)

#### E. Function of the adjutant mind circuits.

1. The seven adjutant mind-spirits determine the course of organic evolution.

	> “It is the presence of the seven adjutant mind-spirits on the primitive worlds that conditions the course of organic evolution; that explains why evolution is purposeful and not accidental. These adjutants represent that function of the mind ministry of the Infinite Spirit which is extended to the lower orders of intelligent life through the operations of a local universe Mother Spirit. The adjutants are the children of the Universe Mother Spirit and constitute her personal ministry to the material minds of the realms. Wherever and whenever such mind is manifest, these spirits are variously functioning.” [UB 36:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p5_1)

2. Names and function of the seven adjutant mind-spirits.

	> “The seven adjutant mind-spirits are called by names which are the equivalents of the following designations: intuition, understanding, courage, knowledge, counsel, worship, and wisdom. These mindspirits send forth their influence into all the inhabited worlds as a differential urge, each seeking receptivity capacity for manifestation quite apart from the degree to which its fellows may find reception and opportunity for function.” [UB 36:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p5_2)

#### F. Control and function of life energies.

1. We know but little about the mobilization and transmutation of universal energy.

	> “Life has inherent capacity for the mobilization and transmutation of universal energy. You are familiar with the action of vegetable life in transforming the material energy of light into the varied manifestations of the vegetable kingdom. You also know something of the method whereby this vegetative energy can be converted into the phenomena of animal activities, but you know practically nothing of the technique of the power directors and the physical controllers, who are endowed with ability to mobilize, transform, directionize, and concentrate the manifold energies of space.” [UB 41:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/41#p2_5)

2. Science will never create matter, energy or life.

	> “Subsequent to even still greater progress and further discoveries, after Urantia has advanced immeasurably in comparison with present knowledge, though you should gain control of the energy revolutions of the electrical units of matter to the extent of modifying their physical manifestations—even after all such possible progress, forever will scientists be powerless to create one atom of matter or to originate one flash of energy or ever to add to matter that which we call life.” [UB 42:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p1_4)

3. Life is both mechanistic and vitalistic—but it is not inherent in matter.

	> “Life is both mechanistic and vitalistic—material and spiritual. Ever will Urantia physicists and chemists progress in their understanding of the protoplasmic forms of vegetable and animal life, but never will they be able to produce living organisms. Life is something different from all energy manifestations; even the material life of physical creatures is not inherent in matter.” [UB 36:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p6_1)

4. Life after death.S

	> “The life bestowed upon plants and animals by the Life Carriers does not return to the Life Carriers upon the death of plant or animal. The departing life of such a living thing possesses neither identity nor personality; it does not individually survive death. During its existence and the time of its sojourn in the body of matter, it has undergone a change; it has undergone energy evolution and survives only as a part of the cosmic forces of the universe; it does not survive as individual life. The survival of mortal creatures is wholly predicated on the evolvement of an immortal soul within the mortal mind.” [UB 36:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p6_5)

### II. **Biology of the Architectural Worlds**

#### A. Description of the constellation headquarters worlds.

1. The architectural worlds enjoy ten forms of life.

	> “The architectural worlds enjoy ten forms of life of the material order. On Urantia there is plant and animal life, but on such a world as Edentia there are ten divisions of the material orders of life. Were you to view these ten divisions of Edentia life, you would quickly classify the first three as vegetable and the last three as animal, but you would be utterly unable to comprehend the nature of the intervening four groups of prolific and fascinating forms of life.” [UB 43:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p6_4)

2. The biologic beautification of the architectural worlds.

	> “Being endowed with ten divisions of physical life, not to mention the morontia variations, these architectural worlds provide tremendous possibilities for the biologic beautification of the landscape and of the material and the morontia structures. The celestial artisans direct the native spornagia in this extensive work of botanic decoration and biologic embellishment. Whereas your artists must resort to inert paint and lifeless marble to portray their concepts, the celestial artisans and the univitatia more frequently utilize living materials to represent their ideas and to capture their ideals.” [UB 43:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p6_7)

3. The material growth is green, the morontia violet or orchid. Morontial growth is purely energy—has no residue.

	> “The vegetable life is also very different from that of Urantia, consisting of both material and morontia varieties. The material growths have a characteristic green coloration, but the morontia equivalents of vegetative life have a violet or orchid tinge of varying hue and reflection. Such morontia vegetation is purely an energy growth; when eaten there is no residual portion.” [UB 43:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p6_6)

4. There is floral grandeur and botanic beauty in the supernal gardens of Eden.

	> “If you enjoy the flowers, shrubs, and trees of Urantia, then will you feast your eyes upon the botanical beauty and the floral grandeur of the supernal gardens of Edentia. But it is beyond my powers of description to undertake to convey to the mortal mind an adequate concept of these beauties of the heavenly worlds. Truly, eye has not seen such glories as await your arrival on these worlds of the mortal-ascension adventure.” [UB 43:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p6_8)

5. The animal life of Edentia is manifold—but there are no carnivorous creatures.

	> “Even the distinctively animal life is very different from that of the evolutionary worlds, so different that it is quite impossible to portray to mortal minds the unique character and affectionate nature of these nonspeaking creatures. There are thousands upon thousands of living creatures which your imagination could not possibly picture. The whole animal creation is of an entirely different order from the gross animal species of the evolutionary planets. But all this animal life is most intelligent and exquisitely serviceable, and all the various species are surprisingly gentle and touchingly companionable. There are no carnivorous creatures on such architectural worlds; there is nothing in all Edentia to make any living being afraid.” [UB 43:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/43#p6_5)

#### B. Description of Jerusem.

1. There are beauteous highlands and “natural” parks.

	> “On Jerusem you will miss the rugged mountain ranges of Urantia and other evolved worlds since there are neither earthquakes nor rainfalls, but you will enjoy the beauteous highlands and other unique variations of topography and landscape. Enormous areas of Jerusem are preserved in a ‘natural state,’ and the grandeur of such districts is quite beyond the powers of human imagination.

	> “There are thousands upon thousands of small lakes but no raging rivers nor expansive oceans. There is no rainfall, neither storms nor blizzards, on any of the architectural worlds, but there is the daily precipitation of the condensation of moisture during the time of lowest temperature attending the light recession.” [UB 46:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p2_1)

2. The system headquarters worlds are endowed with ten divisions of physical life—which foreshadows the beauty of the central universe.

	> “Jerusem and its associated worlds are endowed with the ten standard divisions of physical life characteristic of the architectural spheres of Nebadon. And since there is no organic evolution on Jerusem, there are no conflicting forms of life, no struggle for existence, no survival of the fittest. Rather is there a creative adaptation which foreshadows the beauty, the harmony, and the perfection of the eternal worlds of the central and divine universe. And in all this creative perfection there is the most amazing intermingling of physical and of morontia life, artistically contrasted by the celestial artisans and their fellows.” [UB 46:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p2_5)

#### C. Spornagia.

1. Spornagia do not have Adjusters—they do not possess survival souls, but they do have long lives.

	> “Spornagia are not Adjuster indwelt. They do not possess survival souls, but they do enjoy long lives, sometimes to the extent of forty to fifty thousand standard years. Their number is legion, and they afford physical ministry to all orders of universe personalities requiring material service.” [UB 46:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p7_3)

2. Spornagia experience reincarnation. They are the only beings in the universe who do have this experience.

	> “Although spornagia neither possess nor evolve survival souls, though they do not have personality, nevertheless, they do evolve an individuality which can experience reincarnation. When, with the passing of time, the physical bodies of these unique creatures deteriorate from usage and age, their creators, in collaboration with the Life Carriers, fabricate new bodies in which the old spornagia re-establish their residences.

	> “Spornagia are the only creatures in all the universe of Nebadon who experience this or any other sort of reincarnation. They are only reactive to the first five of the adjutant mind-spirits; they are not responsive to the spirits of worship and wisdom. But the fiveadjutant mind equivalates to a totality or sixth reality level, and it is this factor which persists as an experiential identity.” [UB 46:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p7_4)

3. In a future age, spornagia may escape the animal level of existence.

	> “There are those who believe that, in a future universe age, these faithful spornagia will escape from their animal level of existence and attain a worthy evolutional destiny of progressive intellectual growth and even spiritual achievement.[UB 46:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p7_8)

#### D. Material Sons.

1. Material Sons are sustained by both material and cosmic energies.

	> “The Material Sons enjoy a dual nutrition; they are really dual in nature and constitution, partaking of materialized energy much as do the physical beings of the realm, while their immortal existence is fully maintained by the direct and automatic intake of certain sustaining cosmic energies.” [UB 51:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/51#p1_4)

2. In case of sin, Material Sons are degraded and become subject to physical death.

	> “Should they fail on some mission of assignment or even consciously and deliberately rebel, this order of Sons becomes isolated, cut off from connection with the universe source of light and life. Thereupon they become practically material beings, destined to take the course of material life on the world of their assignment and compelled to look to the universe magistrates for adjudication. Material death will eventually terminate the planetary career of such an unfortunate and unwise Material Son or Daughter.” [UB 51:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/51#p1_4)

## SECTION 2. URANTIA BIOLOGY

### I. **Relation of Mind to Evolutionary Stages**

#### A. Three mind levels.

1. There are three distinct levels of life production and evolution.

	> “There are, then, three distinct levels of life production and evolution:
	> “1. The physical-energy domain—mind-capacity production.
	> “2. The mind ministry of the adjutant spirits—impinging upon spirit capacity.
	> “3. The spirit endowment of mortal mind—culminating in Thought Adjuster bestowal.[UB 65:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p0_2)

2. Progression through the three mind levels.

	> “Living mind, prior to the appearance of capacity to learn from experience, is the ministry domain of the Master Physical Controllers. Creature mind, before acquiring the ability to recognize divinity and worship Deity, is the exclusive domain of the adjutant spirits. With the appearance of the spiritual response of the creature intellect, such created minds at once become superminded, being instantly encircuited in the spirit cycles of the local universe Mother Spirit.” [UB 36:5.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p5_15)

3. The three evolutionary mind levels.

	> “The universal nonspiritual energies are reassociated in the living systems of non-Creator minds on various levels, certain of which may be depicted as follows:
	> “1. _Preadjutant-spirit minds_. This level of mind is nonexperiencing and on the inhabited worlds is ministered by the Master Physical Controllers. This is mechanical mind, the nonteachable intellect of the most primitive forms of material life, but the nonteachable mind functions on many levels beside that of primitive planetary life.
	> “2. _Adjutant-spirit minds_. This is the ministry of a local universe Mother Spirit functioning through her seven adjutant mind-spirits on the teachable (nonmechanical) level of material mind. On this level material mind is experiencing: as subhuman (animal) intellect in the first five adjutants; as human (moral) intellect in the seven adjutants; as superhuman (midwayer) intellect in the last two adjutants.
	> “3. _Evolving morontia minds_—the expanding consciousness of evolving personalities in the local universe ascending careers. This is the bestowal of the local universe Mother Spirit in liaison with the Creator Son. This mind level connotes the organization of the morontia type of life vehicle, a synthesis of the material and the spiritual which is effected by the Morontia Power Supervisors of a local universe. Morontia mind functions differentially in response to the 570 levels of morontia life, disclosing increasing associative capacity with the cosmic mind on the higher levels of attainment. This is the evolutionary course of mortal creatures, but mind of a nonmorontia order is also bestowed by a Universe Son and a Universe Spirit upon the nonmorontia children of the local creations.” [UB 42:10.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p10_2)

#### B. The physical-energy domain.

1. There is a threefold creativity concerned in the production of mind mechanisms.

	> “Basic evolutionary material life—premind life—is the formulation of the Master Physical Controllers and the life-impartation ministry of the Seven Master Spirits in conjunction with the active ministration of the ordained Life Carriers. As a result of the coordinate function of this threefold creativity there develops organismal physical capacity for mind—material mechanisms for intelligent reaction to external environmental stimuli and, later on, to internal stimuli, influences taking origin in the organismal mind itself.” [UB 65:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p0_1)

2. Nature and control of the prehuman levels of mind function.

	> “The mechanical-nonteachable levels of organismal environmental response are the domains of the physical controllers. The adjutant mind-spirits activate and regulate the adaptative or nonmechanicalteachable types of mind—those response mechanisms of organisms capable of learning from experience. And as the spirit adjutants thus manipulate mind potentials, so do the Life Carriers exercise considerable discretionary control over the environmental aspects of evolutionary processes right up to the time of the appearance of human will—the ability to know God and the power of choosing to worship him.” [UB 65:0.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p0_6)

#### C. Mind ministry of the Adjutant Spirits.

1. Analogy of adjutant spirits to power centers.

	> “These mind-adjutants of a local universe Mother Spirit are related to creature life of intelligence status much as the power centers and physical controllers are related to the nonliving forces of the universe. They perform invaluable service in the mind circuits on the inhabited worlds and are effective collaborators with the Master Physical Controllers, who also serve as controllers and directors of the preadjutant mind levels, the levels of nonteachable or mechanical mind.” [UB 36:5.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p5_14)

2. Function of the adjutant mind-spirits on the animal level.

	> “The acquisition of the potential of the ability to _learn_ from experience marks the beginning of the functioning of the adjutant spirits, and they function from the lowliest minds of primitive and invisible existences up to the highest types in the evolutionary scale of human beings. They are the source and pattern for the otherwise more or less mysterious behavior and incompletely understood quick reactions of mind to the material environment. Long must these faithful and always dependable influences carry forward their preliminary ministry before the animal mind attains the human levels of spirit receptivity.” [UB 65:7.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p7_6)

3. The difference between animal instinctive response and human insight.

	> “The selective response of an animal is limited to the motor level of behavior. The supposed insight of the higher animals is on a motor level and usually appears only after the experience of motor trial and error. Man is able to exercise scientific, moral, and spiritual insight prior to all exploration or experimentation.” [UB 16:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p7_2)

4. Only a personality can possess insight in advance of experience.

	> “Only a personality can know what it is doing before it does it; only personalities possess insight in advance of experience. A personality can look before it leaps and can therefore learn from looking as well as from leaping. A nonpersonal animal ordinarily learns only by leaping.” [UB 16:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p7_3)

5. A moral being can discriminate between both ends and their means of attainment.

	> “As a result of experience an animal becomes able to examine the different ways of attaining a goal and to select an approach based on accumulated experience. But a personality can also examine the goal itself and pass judgment on its worth-whileness, its value. Intelligence alone can discriminate as to the best means of attaining indiscriminate ends, but a moral being possesses an insight which enables him to discriminate between ends as well as between means. And a moral being in choosing virtue is nonetheless intelligent. He knows what he is doing, why he is doing it, where he is going, and how he will get there.” [UB 16:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p7_4)

6. When man fails to discriminate moral goals he descends to the animal level of thinking.

	> “When man fails to discriminate the ends of his mortal striving, he finds himself functioning on the animal level of existence. He has failed to avail himself of the superior advantages of that material acumen, moral discrimination, and spiritual insight which are an integral part of his cosmic-mind endowment as a personal being.” [UB 16:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p7_5)

#### D. Cosmic mind.

1. The cosmic mind is the mind of the finite level.

	> “_The cosmic mind_. This is the sevenfold diversified mind of time and space, one phase of which is ministered by each of the Seven Master Spirits to one of the seven superuniverses. The cosmic mind encompasses all finite-mind levels and co-ordinates experientially with the evolutionary-deity levels of the Supreme Mind and transcendentally with the existential levels of absolute mind—the direct circuits of the Conjoint Actor.” [UB 42:10.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p10_6)

#### E. Absolute mind.

1. The absolute mind of Paradise and the mind-gravity grasp of the Conjoint Actor.

	> “On Paradise, mind is absolute; in Havona, absonite; in Orvonton, finite. Mind always connotes the presence-activity of living ministry plus varied energy systems, and this is true of all levels and of all kinds of mind. But beyond the cosmic mind it becomes increasingly difficult to portray the relationships of mind to nonspiritual energy. Havona mind is subabsolute but superevolutionary; being existential-experiential, it is nearer the absonite than any other concept revealed to you. Paradise mind is beyond human understanding; it is existential, nonspatial, and nontemporal. Nevertheless, all of these levels of mind are overshadowed by the universal presence of the Conjoint Actor—by the mind-gravity grasp of the God of mind on Paradise.[UB 42:10.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/42#p10_7)

### II. **Life Implantation by the Life Carriers**

> “When the Life Carriers make ready to engage in life implantation, and after they have selected the sites for such an undertaking, they summon the archangel commission of Life Carrier transmutation. This group consists of ten orders of diverse personalities, including the physical controllers and their associates, and is presided over by the chief of archangels, who acts in this capacity by the mandate of Gabriel and with the permission of the Ancients of Days. When these beings are properly encircuited, they can effect such modifications in the Life Carriers as will enable them immediately to function on the physical levels of electrochemistry.” [UB 65:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p1_6)

#### A. Conditions necessary for formulation of life on Urantia.

1. Life can be initiated only in suitable environment.

	> “It should be made clear that Life Carriers cannot initiate life until a sphere is ripe for the inauguration of the evolutionary cycle. Neither can we provide for a more rapid life development than can be supported and accommodated by the physical progress of the planet.” [UB 58:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p1_2)

2. The Urantia life is a sodium chloride type.

	> “The Satania Life Carriers had projected a sodium chloride pattern of life; therefore no steps could be taken toward planting it until the ocean waters had become sufficiently briny. The Urantia type of protoplasm can function only in a suitable salt solution. All ancestral life—vegetable and animal—evolved in a salt-solution habitat. And even the more highly organized land animals could not continue to live did not this same essential salt solution circulate throughout their bodies in the blood stream which freely bathes, literally submerses, every tiny living cell in this ‘briny deep.’” [UB 58:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p1_3)

3. Primitive life circulated in the salty ocean; today this same solution circulates in the animal body.

	> “Your primitive ancestors freely circulated about in the salty ocean; today, this same oceanlike salty solution freely circulates about in your bodies, bathing each individual cell with a chemical liquid in all essentials comparable to the salt water which stimulated the first protoplasmic reactions of the first living cells to function on the planet.” [UB 58:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p1_4)

#### B. Three simultaneous life implantations.

1. Life was not brought to Urantia. It was formulated on the planet and is unique.

	> “That we are called Life Carriers should not confuse you. We can and do carry life to the planets, but we brought no life to Urantia. Urantia life is unique, original with the planet. This sphere is a life-modification world; all life appearing hereon was formulated by us right here on the planet; and there is no other world in all Satania, even in all Nebadon, that has a life existence just like that of Urantia.” [UB 58:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p4_1)

2. Three life implantations were made to accompany the separating continents.

	> “We had planted the primitive form of marine life in the sheltered tropic bays of the central seas of the east-west cleavage of the breaking-up continental land mass. Our purpose in making three marinelife implantations was to insure that each great land mass would carry this life with it, in its warm-water seas, as the land subsequently separated. We foresaw that in the later era of the emergence of land life large oceans of water would separate these drifting continental land masses.” [UB 58:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p4_4)

### III. **Biologic History of Urantia**

#### A. Chronology of Urantia biology.

1. The five major biologic eras.

	> “We reckon the history of Urantia as beginning about one billion years ago and extending through five major eras:
	> “1. _The prelife era_ extends over the initial four hundred and fifty million years, from about the time the planet attained its present size to the time of life establishment. Your students have designated this period as the _Archeozoic_.
	> “2. _The life-dawn era_ extends over the next one hundred and fifty million years. This epoch intervenes between the preceding prelife or cataclysmic age and the following period of more highly developed marine life. This era is known to your researchers as the _Proterozoic_.
	> “3. _The marine-life era_ covers the next two hundred and fifty million years and is best known to you as the _Paleozoic_.
	> “4. _The early land-life era_ extends over the next one hundred million years and is known as the _Mesozoic_.
	> “5. _The mammalian era_ occupies the last fifty million years. This recent-times era is known as the _Cenozoic_.” [UB 59:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p0_1)

#### B. The life-dawn era.

1. Life was implanted simultaneously in three marine locations on Urantia 550,000,000 years ago.

	> “_550,000,000_ years ago the Life Carrier corps returned to Urantia. In co-operation with spiritual powers and superphysical forces we organized and initiated the original life patterns of this world and planted them in the hospitable waters of the realm. All planetary life (aside from extraplanetary personalities) down to the days of Caligastia, the Planetary Prince, had its origin in our three original, identical, and simultaneous marine-life implantations. These three life implantations have been designated as: the _central_ or Eurasian-African, the _eastern_ or Australasian, and the _western_, embracing Greenland and the Americas.” [UB 58:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p4_2)

2. Half a billion years ago, marine vegetable life was well established.

	> “_500,000,000_ years ago primitive marine vegetable life was well established on Urantia. Greenland and the arctic land mass, together with North and South America, were beginning their long and slow westward drift. Africa moved slightly south, creating an east and west trough, the Mediterranean basin, between itself and the mother body. Antarctica, Australia, and the land indicated by the islands of the Pacific broke away on the south and east and have drifted far away since that day.” [UB 58:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p4_3)

3. The transition from marine vegetable to animal life was gradual. It took place 450,000,000 years ago.

	> “_450,000,000_ years ago the _transition from vegetable to animal life_ occurred. This metamorphosis took place in the shallow waters of the sheltered tropic bays and lagoons of the extensive shore lines of the separating continents. And this development, all of which was inherent in the original life patterns, came about gradually. There were many transitional stages between the early primitive vegetable forms of life and the later well-defined animal organisms. Even today the transition slime molds persist, and they can hardly be classified either as plants or as animals.” [UB 58:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p6_1)

4. Few species that participated in the transition from vegetable to animal types exist today.

	> “Very few species of the early types of marine vegetation that participated in those epochal changes which resulted in the animallike borderland organisms are in existence today. The sponges are the survivors of one of these early midway types, those organisms through which the _gradual_ transition from the vegetable to the animal took place. These early transition forms, while not identical with modern sponges, were much like them; they were true borderline organisms—neither vegetable nor animal—but they eventually led to the development of the true animal forms of life.” [UB 65:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p2_2)

5. The nature, evolution, and retrogression of bacteria.

	> “The bacteria, simple vegetable organisms of a very primitive nature, are very little changed from the early dawn of life; they even exhibit a degree of retrogression in their parasitic behavior. Many of the fungi also represent a retrograde movement in evolution, being plants which have lost their chlorophyll-making ability and have become more or less parasitic. The majority of disease-causing bacteria and their auxiliary virus bodies really belong to this group of renegade parasitic fungi. During the intervening ages all of the vast kingdom of plant life has evolved from ancestors from which the bacteria have also descended.” [UB 65:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p2_3)

6. Changes from one great division of the animal kingdom to another and from prehuman animal types to dawn men occurred suddenly. “Missing links” never existed.

	> “Although the evolution of vegetable life can be traced into animal life, and though there have been found graduated series of plants and animals which progressively lead up from the most simple to the most complex and advanced organisms, you will not be able to find such connecting links between the great divisions of the animal kingdom nor between the highest of the prehuman animal types and the dawn men of the human races. These so-called ‘missing links’ will forever remain missing, for the simple reason that they never existed.

	> “From era to era radically new spees of animal life arise. They do not evolve as the result of the gradual accumulation of small variations; they appear as full-fledged and new orders of life, and they appear _suddenly_.

	> “The _sudden_ appearance of new species and diversified orders of living organisms is wholly biologic, strictly natural. There is nothing supernatural connected with these genetic mutations.” [UB 58:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p6_2)

7. The adjustment of animal life to both salt water and fresh water.

	> “At the proper degree of saltiness in the oceans animal life evolved, and it was comparatively simple to allow the briny waters to circulate through the animal bodies of marine life. But when the oceans were contracted and the percentage of salt was greatly increased, these same animals evolved the ability to reduce the saltiness of their body fluids just as those organisms which learned to live in fresh water acquired the ability to maintain the proper degree of sodium chloride in their body fluids by ingenious techniques of salt conservation.” [UB 58:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p6_5)

8. The never-ending adjustment of life to its changing environment.

	> “Study of the rock-embraced fossils of marine life reveals the early adjustment struggles of these primitive organisms. Plants and animals never cease to make these adjustment experiments. Ever the environment is changing, and always are living organisms striving to accommodate themselves to these never-ending fluctuations.” [UB 58:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p6_6)

9. “Survival of the fittest.”

	> “Through almost endless cycles of gains and losses, adjustments and readjustments, all living organisms swing back and forth from age to age. Those that attain cosmic unity persist, while those that fall short of this goal cease to exist.” [UB 58:6.8](https://www.urantia.org/urantia-book-standardized/paper-58-life-establishment-urantia#U58_6_*)

10. The most important factors in plant evolution were chlorophyll and seeds.

	> “The most important step in plant evolution was the development of chlorophyll-making ability, and the second greatest advance was the evolution of the spore into the complex seed. The spore is most efficient as a reproductive agent, but it lacks the potentials of variety and versatility inherent in the seed.” [UB 65:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p6_3)

#### C. The marine-life era.

1. The marine-life era is divided into six periods and covers one quarter of planetary history.

	> “The marine-life era thus covers about one quarter of your planetary history. It may be subdivided into six long periods, each characterized by certain well-defined developments in advance was the evolution of the spore into the complex seed. both the geologic realms and the biologic domains.” [UB 59:0.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p0_7)

2. The widespread distribution of marine vegetable and animal life.

	> “As this era begins, the sea bottoms, the extensive continental shelves, and the numerous shallow near-shore basins are covered with prolific vegetation. The more simple and primitive forms of animal life have already developed from preceding vegetable organisms, and the early animal organisms have gradually made their way along the extensive coast lines of the various land masses until the many inland seas are teeming with primitive marine life. Since so few of these early organisms had shells, not many have been preserved as fossils. Nevertheless the stage is set for the opening chapters of that great ‘stone book’ of the life-record preservation which was so methodically laid down during the succeeding ages.[UB 59:0.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p0_8)

3. In North America, marine-life fossils are found in two segregated strata.“

	> “The continent of North America is wonderfully rich in the fossilbearing deposits of the entire marine-life era. The very first and oldest layers are separated from the later strata of the preceding period by extensive erosion deposits which clearly segregate these two stages of planetary development.” [UB 59:0.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p0_9)

4. Ameba are typical survivors of the early animal life.

	> “By the dawn of this period of relative quiet on the earth’s surface, life is confined to the various inland seas and the oceanic shore line; as yet no form of land organism has evolved. Primitive marine animals are well established and are prepared for the next evolutionary development. Ameba are typical survivors of this initial stage of animal life, having made their appearance toward the close of the preceding transition period.” [UB 59:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p1_1)

5. The ameba represents a primitive type of animal which failed to develop.

	> “The higher protozoan type of animal life soon appeared, and appeared _suddenly_. And from these far-distant times the ameba, the typical single-celled animal organism, has come on down but little modified. He disports himself today much as he did when he was the last and greatest achievement in life evolution. This minute creature and his protozoan cousins are to the animal creation what bacteria are to the plant kingdom; they represent the survival of the first early evolutionary steps in life differentiation together with _failure of subsequent development_.” [UB 65:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p2_4)

6. The beginnings of land life.

	> “_400,000,000_ years ago marine life, both vegetable and animal, is fairly well distributed over the whole world. The world climate grows slightly warmer and becomes more equable. There is a general inundation of the seashores of the various continents, particularly of North and South America. New oceans appear, and the older bodies of water are greatly enlarged.
	> “Vegetation now for the first time crawls out upon the land and soon makes considerable progress in adaptation to a nonmarine habitat.
	> “_Suddenly_ and without gradation ancestry the first multicellular animals make their appearance. The trilobites have evolved, and for ages they dominate the seas. From the standpoint of marine life this is the trilobite age.” [UB 59:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p1_2)

7. Marine life during the trilobite age—the Cambrian Period.

	> “The marine life was much alike the world over and consisted of the seaweeds, one-celled organisms, simple sponges, trilobites, and other crustaceans—shrimps, crabs, and lobsters. Three thousand varieties of brachiopods appeared at the close of this period, only two hundred of which have survived. These animals represent a variety of early life which has come down to the present time practically unchanged.
	> “But the trilobites were the dominant living creatures. They were sexed animals and existed in many forms; being poor swimmers, they sluggishly floated in the water or crawled along the sea bottoms, curling up in self-protection when attacked by their later appearing enemies. They grew in length from two inches to one foot and developed into four distinct groups: carnivorous, herbivorous, omnivorous, and ‘mud eaters.’ The ability of the latter group largely to subsist on inorganic matter—being the last multicelled animal that could—explains their great increase and long survival.” [UB 59:1.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p1_18)

8. Evolutionary developments during the invertebrate—animal age— the Ordovician Period.

	> “This was the great age of individual animal organismal evolution, though many of the basic changes, such as the transition from plant to animal, had previously occurred. The marine fauna developed to the point where every type of life below the vertebrate scale was represented in the fossils of those rocks which were laid down during these times. But all of these animals were marine organisms. No land animals had yet appeared except a few types of worms which burrowed along the seashores, nor had the land plants yet overspread the continents; there was still too much carbon dioxide in the air to permit of the existence of air breathers. Primarily, all animals except certain of the more primitive ones are directly or indirectly dependent on plant life for their existence.
	> “The trilobites were still prominent. These little animals existed in tens of thousands of patterns and were the predecessors of modern crustaceans. Some of the trilobites had from twenty-five to four thousand tiny eyelets; others had aborted eyes. As this period closed, the trilobites shared domination of the seas with several other forms of invertebrate life. But they utterly perished during the beginning of the next period.
	> “Lime-secreting algae were widespread. There existed thousands of species of the early ancestors of the corals. Sea worms were abundant, and there were many varieties of jellyfish which have since become extinct. Corals and the later types of sponges evolved. The cephalopods were well developed, and they have survived as the modern pearly nautilus, octopus, cuttlefish, and squid.
	> “There were many varieties of shell animals, but their shells were not then so much needed for defensive purposes as in subsequent ages. The gastropods were present in the waters of the ancient seas, and they included single-shelled drills, periwinkles, and snails. The bivalve gastropods have come on down through the intervening millions of years much as they then existed and embrace the muscles, clams, oysters, and scallops. The valve-shelled organisms also evolved, and these brachiopods lived in those ancient waters much as they exist today; they even had hinged, notched, and other sorts of protective arrangements of their valves.” [UB 59:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p2_9)

9. The Silurian period—the coral period—the brachiopod age.

	> “The trilobites rapidly declined, and the center of the stage was occupied by the larger mollusks, or cephalopods. These animals grew to be fifteen feet long and one foot in diameter and became masters of the seas. This species of animal appeared _suddenly_ and assumed dominance of sea life.” [UB 59:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p3_5)

	> “Toward the close of the final Silurian submergence there is a great increase in the echinoderms—the stone lilies—as is evidenced by the crinoid limestone deposits. The trilobites have nearly disappeared, and the mollusks continue monarchs of the seas; coral-reef formation increases greatly. During this age, in the more favorable locations the primitive water scorpions first evolve. Soon thereafter, and _suddenly_, the true scorpions—actual air breathers—make their appearance.” [UB 59:3.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p3_11)

10. The Devonian period—the vegetative land-life period—the age of fishes.

	- a. The appearance of vertebrates.

	> “The marine life of this age was very diverse due to the early species segregation, but later on there was free commingling and association of all these different types. The brachiopods early reached their climax, being succeeded by the arthropods, and barnacles made their first appearance. But the greatest event of all was the sudden appearance of the fish family. This became the age of fishes, that period of the world’s history characterized by the _vertebrate_ type of animal.” [UB 59:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p4_3)

	> “One of the most serviceable and complex episodes in the evolution of the higher types of animals consisted in the development of the ability of the iron in the circulating blood cells to perform in the double role of oxygen carrier and carbon dioxide remover. And this performance of the red blood cells illustrates how evolving organisms are able to adapt their functions to varying or changing environment. The higher animals, including man, oxygenate their tissues by the action of the iron of the red blood cells, which carries oxygen to the living cells and just as efficiently removes the carbon dioxide. But other metals can be made to serve the same purpose. The cuttlefish employs copper for this function, and the sea squirt utilizes vanadium.” [UB 65:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p6_4)

	> “_250,000,000_ years ago witnessed the appearance of the fish family, the vertebrates, one of the most important steps in all prehuman evolution.
	> “The arthropods, or crustaceans, were the ancestors of the first vertebrates. The forerunners of the fish family were two modified arthropod ancestors; one had a long body connecting a head and tail, while the other was a backboneless, jawless prefish. But these preliminary types were quickly destroyed when the fishes, the first vertebrates of the animal world, made their _sudden_ appearance from the north.
	> “Many of the largest true fish belong to this age, some of the teeth-bearing varieties being twenty-five to thirty feet long; the present-day sharks are the survivors of these ancient fishes. The lung and armored fishes reached their evolutionary apex, and before this epoch had ended, fishes had adapted to both fresh and salt waters.
	> “Veritable bone beds of fish teeth and skeletons may be found in the deposits laid down toward the close of this period, and rich fossil beds are situated along the coast of California since many sheltered bays of the Pacific Ocean extended into the land of that region.” [UB 59:4.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p4_10)

	- b. The appearance of ferns.

	> “The earth was being rapidly overrun by the new orders of land vegetation. Heretofore few plants grew on land except about the water’s edge. Now, and _suddenly_, the prolific _fern family_ appeared and quickly spread over the face of the rapidly rising land in all parts of the world. Tree types, two feet thick and forty feet high, soon developed; later on, leaves evolved, but these early varieties had only rudimentary foliage. There were many smaller plants, but their fossils are not found since they were usually destroyed by the still earlier appearing bacteria.” [UB 59:4.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p4_13)

	> “The elevation of the continents proceeded, and the atmosphere was becoming enriched with oxygen. The earth was overspread by vast forests of ferns one hundred feet high and by the peculiar trees of those days, silent forests; not a sound was heard, not even the rustle of a leaf, for such trees had no leaves.” [UB 59:4.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p4_17)

11. The Carboniferous period—the age of frogs.

	- a. The age of ferns.

	> “_220,000,000_ years ago many of the continental land areas, including most of North America, were above water. The land was overrun by luxurious vegetation; this was indeed the _age of ferns_. Carbon dioxide was still present in the atmosphere but in lessening degree.” [UB 59:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p5_2)

	- b. The age of frogs and insects.

	> “When the seas were at their height, a new evolutionary development _suddenly_ occurred. Abruptly, the first of the land animals appeared. There were numerous species of these animals that were able to live on land or in water. These airbreathing amphibians developed from the arthropods, whose swim bladders had evolved into lungs.
	> “From the briny waters of the seas there crawled out upon the land snails, scorpions, and frogs. Today frogs still lay their eggs in water, and their young first exist as little fishes, tadpoles. This period could well be known as the _age of frogs_.
	> “Very soon thereafter the insects first appeared and, together with spiders, scorpions, cockroaches, crickets, and locusts, soon overspread the continents of the world. Dragon flies measured thirty inches across. One thousand species of cockroaches developed, and some grew to be four inches long.” [UB 59:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p5_5)

	- c. Marine life continues to evolve.

	> “Two groups of echinoderms became especially well developed, and they are in reality the guide fossils of this epoch. The large shell-feeding sharks were also highly evolved, and for more than five million years they dominated the oceans. The climate was still mild and equable; the marine life was little changed. Fresh-water fish were developing and the trilobites were nearing extinction. Corals were scarce, and much of the limestone was being made by the crinoids. The finer building limestones were laid down during this epoch.” [UB 59:5.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p5_8)

	- d. The formation of coal.

	> “The land was periodically going up and down due to the shifting sea level occasioned by activities on the ocean bottoms. This crustal uneasiness—the settling and rising of the land-in connection with the prolific vegetation of the coastal swamps, contributed to the production of extensive coal deposits, which have caused this period to be known as the _Carboniferous_. And the climate was still mild the world over.
	> “The coal layers alternate with shale, stone, and conglomerate. These coal beds over central and eastern United States vary in thickness from forty to fifty feet. But many of these deposits were washed away during subsequent land elevations. In some parts of North America and Europe the coal-bearing strata are 18,000 feet in thickness.
	> “The presence of roots of trees as they grew in the clay underlying the present coal beds demonstrates that coal was formed exactly where it is now found. Coal is the water-preserved and pressure-modified remains of the rank vegetation growing in the bogs and on the swamp shores of this faraway age. Coal layers often hold both gas and oil. Peat beds, the remains of past vegetable growth, would be converted into a type of coal if subjected to proper pressure and heat. Anthracite has been subjected to more pressure and heat than other coal.” [UB 59:5.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p5_14)

	> “The plants of these times were spore bearing, and the wind was able to spread them far and wide. The trunks of the Carboniferous trees were commonly seven feet in diameter and often one hundred and twenty-five feet high. The modern ferns are truly relics of these bygone ages.” [UB 59:5.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p5_22)

12. The Permian period—the seed-plant period—the age of biologic tribulation.

	- a. The climatic transition stage.

	> “This period marks the end of pivotal evolutionary development in marine life and the opening of the transition period leading to the subsequent ages of land animals.
	> “This age was one of great life impoverishment. Thousands of marine species perished, and life was hardly yet established on land. This was a time of biologic tribulation, the age when life nearly vanished from the face of the earth and from the depths of the oceans. Toward the close of the long marine-life era there were more than one hundred thousand species of living things on earth. At the close of this period of transition less than five hundred had survived.
	> “The peculiarities of this new period were not due so much to the cooling of the earth’s crust or to the long absence of volcanic action as to an unusual combination of common place and preexisting influences—restrictions of the seas and increasing elevation of enormous land masses. The mild marine climate of former times was disappearing, and the harsher continental type of weather was fast developing.” [UB 59:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p6_1)

	- b. Development of seed plants.

	> “Throughout these times of climatic change, great variations also occurred in the land plants. The _seed plants_ first appeared, and they afforded a better food supply for the subsequently increased land-animal life. The insects underwent a radical change. The _resting stages_ evolved to meet the demands of suspended animation during winter and drought.” [UB 59:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p6_7)

	- c. Beginning of the marine-life-adversity age.

	> “The gradual cooling of the ocean waters contributed much to the destruction of oceanic life. The marine animals of those ages took temporary refuge in three favorable retreats: the present Gulf of Mexico region, the Ganges Bay of India, and the Sicilian Bay of the Mediterranean basin. And it was from these three regions that the new marine species, born to adversity, later went forth to replenish the seas.” [UB 59:6.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p6_9)

	- d. Changes during the life-adversity period—the marine-life crisis.

	> “Among the land animals the frogs reached their climax in the preceding age and rapidly declined, but they survived because they could long live even in the drying-up pools and ponds of these far-distant and extremely trying times. During this declining frog age, in Africa, the first step in the evolution of the frog into the reptile occurred. And since the land masses were still connected, this prereptilian creature, an air breather, spread over all the world. By this time the atmosphere had been so changed that it served admirably to support animal respiration. It was soon after the arrival of these prereptilian frogs that North America was temporarily isolated, cut off from Europe, Asia, and South America.” [UB 59:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p6_8)

	- e. The ending of the life-adversity age.

	> “_160,000,000_ years ago the land was largely covered with vegetation adapted to support land-animal life, and the atmosphere had become ideal for animal respiration. Thus ends the period of marine-life curtailment and those testing times of biologic adversity which eliminated all forms of life except such as had survival value, and which were therefore entitled to function as the ancestors of the more rapidly developing and highly differentiated life of the ensuing ages of planetary evolution.” [UB 59:6.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p6_10)

	> “The ending of this period of biologic tribulation, known to your students as the _Permian_, also marks the end of the long _Paleozoic_ era, which covers one quarter of the planetary history, two hundred and fifty million years.” [UB 59:6.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p6_11)

	- f. The primary era of marine life diminishes while the second stage of evolution begins to unfold on land.

	> “The vast oceanic nursery of life on Urantia has served its purpose. During the long ages when the land was unsuited to support life, before the atmosphere contained sufficient oxygen to sustain the higher land animals, the sea mothered and nurtured the early life of the realm. Now the biologic importance of the sea progressively diminishes as the second stage of evolution begins to unfold on the land.” [UB 59:6.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/59#p6_12)

#### D. The early land-life era.

> “The era of exclusive marine life has ended. Land elevation, cooling crust and cooling oceans, sea restriction and consequent deepening, together with a great increase of land in northern latitudes, all conspired greatly to change the world’s climate in all regions far removed from the equatorial zone.
> “The closing epochs of the preceding era were indeed the age of frogs, but these ancestors of the land vertebrates were no longer dominant, having survived in greatly reduced numbers. Very few types outlived the rigorous trials of the preceding period of biologic tribulation. Even the spore-bearing plants were nearly extinct.” [UB 60:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p0_1)

1. The Triassic period—the early reptilian age.

	- a. The land-life period begins.

	> “_150,000,000_ years ago the early land-life periods of the world’s history began. Life, in general, did not fare well but did better than at the strenuous and hostile close of the marinelife era.” [UB 60:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p1_5)

	- b. The sudden appearance of the reptiles.

	> “_140,000,000_ years ago, _suddenly_ and with only the hint of the two prereptilian ancestors that developed in Africa during the preceding epoch, the reptiles appeared in full-fledged form. They developed rapidly, soon yielding crocodiles, scaled reptiles, and eventually both sea serpents and flying reptiles. Their transition ancestors speedily disappeared.” [UB 60:1.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p1_9)

	- c. The age of the dinosaurs.

	> “These rapidly evolving reptilian dinosaurs soon became the monarchs of this age. They were egg layers and are distinguished from all animals by their small brains, having brains weighing less than one pound to control bodies later weighing as much as forty tons. But earlier reptiles were smaller, carnivorous, and walked kangaroolike on their hind legs. They had hollow avian bones and subsequently developed only three toes on their hind feet, and many of their fossil footprints have been mistaken for those of giant birds. Later on, the herbivorous dinosaurs evolved. They walked on all fours, and one branch of this group developed a protective armor.” [UB 60:1.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p1_10)

	- d. Failure of the nonplacental mammals.

	> “Several million years later the first mammals appeared. They were nonplacental and proved a speedy failure; none survived. This was an experimental effort to improve mammalian types, but it did not succeed on Urantia.” [UB 60:1.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p1_11)

2. The Jurassic period—the later reptilian age.

	- a. The later reptilian age.

	> “_120,000,000_ years ago a new phase of the reptilian age began. The great event of this period was the evolution and decline of the dinosaurs. Land-animal life reached its greatest development, in point of size, and had virtually perished from the face of the earth by the end of this age. The dinosaurs evolved in all sizes from a species less than two feet long up to the huge noncarnivorous dinosaurs, seventy-five feet long, that have never since been equaled in bulk by any living creature.
	> “The largest of the dinosaurs originated in western North America. These monstrous reptiles are buried throughout the Rocky Mountain regions, along the whole of the Atlantic coast of North America, over western Europe, South Africa, and India, but not in Australia.”
	> “These massive creatures became less active and strong as they grew larger and larger; but they required such an enormous amount of food and the land was so overrun by them that they literally starved to death and became extinct—they lacked the intelligence to cope with the situation.” [UB 60:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p2_1)

	- b. The flora of this age.

	> “The flora of this age was much like that of the preceding. Ferns persisted, while conifers and pines became more and more like the present-day varieties. Some coal was still being formed along the northern Mediterranean shores.” [UB 60:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p2_7)

	- c. Marine life continues to evolve and some dinosaurs return to the sea.

	> “_110,000,000_ years ago the potentials of marine life were continuing to unfold. The sea urchin was one of the outstanding mutations of this epoch. Crabs, lobsters, and the modern types of crustaceans matured. Marked changes occurred in the fish family, a sturgeon type first appearing, but the ferocious sea serpents, descended from the land reptiles, still infested all the seas, and they threatened the destruction of the entire fish family.
	> “This continued to be, pre-eminently, the age of the dinosaurs. They so overran the land that two species had taken to the water for sustenance during the preceding period of sea encroachment. These sea serpents represent a backward step in evolution. While some new species are progressing, certain strains remain stationary and others gravitate backward, reverting to a former state. And this is what happened when these two types of reptiles forsook the land.” [UB 60:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p2_9)

	- d. The failure of several species—the survival of one species.

	> “As time passed, the sea serpents grew to such size that they became very sluggish and eventually perished because they did not have brains large enough to afford protection for their immense bodies. Their brains weighed less than two ounces notwithstanding the fact that these huge ichthyosaurs sometimes grew to be fifty feet long, the majority being over thirty-five feet in length. The marine crocodilians were also a reversion from the land type of reptile, but unlike the sea serpents, these animals always returned to the land to lay their eggs.
	> “Soon after two species of dinosaurs migrated to the water in a futile attempt at self-preservation, two other types were driven to the air by the bitter competition of life on land. But these flying pterosaurs were not the ancestors of the true birds of subsequent ages. They evolved from the hollow-boned leaping dinosaurs, and their wings were of batlike formation with a spread of twenty to twenty-five feet. These ancient flying reptiles grew to be ten feet long, and they had separable jaws much like those of modern snakes. For a time these flying reptiles appeared to be a success, but they failed to evolve along lines which would enable them to survive as air navigators. They represent the nonsurviving strains of bird ancestry.
	> “Turtles increased during this period, first appearing in North America. Their ancestors came over from Asia by way of the northern land bridge.” [UB 60:2.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p2_11)

	- c. The decline of the dinosaurs.

	> “One hundred million years ago the reptilian age was drawing to a close. The dinosaurs, for all their enormous mass, were all but brainless animals, lacking the intelligence to provide sufficient food to nourish such enormous bodies. And so did these sluggish land reptiles perish in ever-increasing numbers. Henceforth, evolution will follow the growth of brains, not physical bulk, and the development of brains will characterize each succeeding epoch of animal evolution and planetary progress.” [UB 60:2.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p2_14)

3. The Cretaceous period—the flowering plant—the age of birds.

	- a. The angiosperms suddenly appear on land and overrun the continents.

	> “_90,000,000_ years ago the angiosperms emerged from these early Cretaceous seas and soon overran the continents. These land plants _suddenly_ appeared along with fig trees, magnolias, and tulip trees. Soon after this time fig trees, breadfruit trees, and palms overspread Europe and the western plains of North America. No new land animals appeared.” [UB 60:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p3_7)

	- b. Bering Strait is closed and marine life is modified.

	> “_85,000,000_ years ago Bering Strait closed, shutting off the cooling waters of the northern seas. Theretofore the marine life of the Atlantic-Gulf waters and that of the Pacific Ocean had differed greatly, owing to the temperature variations of these two bodies of water, which now became uniform.” [UB 60:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p3_8)

	- c. Present-day trees appear, together with cereals, grasses, and flowering plants.

	> “Great plant-life evolution was taking place. Among the land plants the angiosperms predominated, and many present-day trees first appeared, including beech, birch, oak, walnut, sycamore, maple, and modern palms. Fruits, grasses, and cereals were abundant, and these seed-bearing grasses and trees were to the plant world what the ancestors of man were to the animal world—they were second in evolutionary importance only to the appearance of man himself. _Suddenly_ and without previous gradation, the great family of flowering plants mutated. And this new flora soon overspread the entire world.” [UB 60:3.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p3_19)

	- d. The dinosaurs still rule the land as the stage is set for the appearance of birds.

	> “_60,000,000_ years ago, though the land reptiles were on the decline, the dinosaurs continued as monarchs the smaller leaping kangaroo varieties of the carnivorous dinosaurs. But some time previously there had appeared new types of the herbivorous dinosaurs, whose rapid increase was due to the appearance of the grass family of land plants. One of these new grass-eating dinosaurs was a true quadruped having two horns and a capelike shoulder flange. The land type of turtle, twenty feet across, appeared as did also the modern crocodile and true snakes of the modern type. Great changes were also occurring among the fishes and other forms of marine life.

	> “The wading and swimming prebirds of earlier ages had not been a success in the air, nor had the flying dinosaurs. They were a short-lived species, soon becoming extinct. They, too, were subject to the dinosaur doom, destruction, because of having too little brain substance in comparison with body size. This second attempt to produce animals that could navigate the atmosphere failed, as did the abortive attempt to produce mammals during this and a preceding age.” [UB 60:3.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p3_20)

	- e. The birds suddenly appear as the reptiles decline.

	> “_55,000,000_ years ago the evolutionary march was from the earlier types of toothed land birds. And so this becomes known as the _age of birds_ as well as the decling age of reptiles.” [UB 60:3.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p3_22)

	- f. The close of the Cretaceous period and the Mesozoic era.

	> “Biologically as well as geologically this was an eventful and active age on land and under water. Sea urchins increased while corals and crinoids decreased. The ammonites, of preponderant influence during a previous age, also rapidly declined. On land the fern forests were largely replaced by pine and other modern trees, including the gigantic redwoods. By the end of this period, while the placental mammal has not yet evolved, the biologic stage is fully set for the appearance, in a subsequent age, of the early ancestors of the future mammalian types.” [UB 60:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/60#p4_5)

#### E. The mammalian era.

> “The era of mammals extends from the times of the origin of placental mammals to the end of the ice age, covering a little less than fifty million years.

> “During this Cenozoic age the world’s landscape presented an attractive appearance—rolling hills, broad valleys, wide rivers, and great forests. Twice during this sector of time the Panama Isthmus went up and down; three times Bering Strait land bridge did the same. The animal types were both many and varied. The trees swarmed with birds, and the whole world was an animal paradise, notwithstanding the incessant struggle of the evolving animal species for supremacy.” [UB 61:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p0_2)

1. The Eocene—the age of early mammals.

	- a. Mammalian life suddenly appears in North America.

	> “_50,000,000_ years ago the land areas of the world were very generally above water or only slightly submerged. The formations and deposits of this period are both land and marine, but chiefly land. For a considerable time the land gradually rose but was simultaneously washed down to the lower levels and toward the seas.

	> “Early in this period and in North America the placental type of mammals _suddenly_ appeared, and they constituted the most important evolutionary development up to this time. Previous orders of nonplacental mammals had existed, but this new type sprang directly and _suddenly_ from the pre-existent reptilian ancestor whose descendants had persisted on down through the times of dinosaur decline. The father of the placental mammals was a small, highly active, carnivorous, springing type of dinosaur.” [UB 61:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p1_1)

	- b. Mammalian survival advantages.

	> “Basic mammalian instincts began to be manifested in these primitive mammalian types. Mammals possess an immense survival advantage over all other forms of animal life in that they can:
	> “1. Bring forth relatively mature and well-developed offspring.
	> “2. Nourish, nurture, and protect their offspring with affectionate regard.
	> “3. Employ their superior brain power in self- perpetuation.
	> “4. Utilize increased agility in escaping from enemies.
	> “5. Apply superior intelligence to environmental adjustment and adaptation.[UB 61:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p1_3)

	- c. Diversification of mammals.

	> “_45,000,000_ years ago the continental backbones were elevated in association with a very general sinking of the coast lines. Mammalian life was evolving rapidly. A small reptilian, egg-laying type of mammal flourished, and the ancestors of the later kangaroos roamed Australia. Soon there were small horses, fleet-footed rhinoceroses, tapirs with proboscises, primitive pigs, squirrels, lemurs, opossums, and several tribes of monkeylike animals. They were all small, primitive, and best suited to living among the forests of the mountain regions. A large ostrichlike land bird developed to a height of ten feet and laid an egg nine by thirteen inches. These were the ancestors of the later gigantic passenger birds that were so highly intelligent, and that onetime transported human beings through the air.
	> “The mammals of the early Cenozoic lived on land, under the water, in the air, and among the treetops. They had from one to eleven pairs of mammary glands, and all were covered with considerable hair. In common with the later appearing orders, they developed two successive sets of teeth and possessed large brains in comparison to body size. But among them all no modern forms existed.[UB 61:1.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p1_9)

2. The Oligocene—the age of advanced mammals.

	- a. Development of herbivorous and omnivorous animals.

	> “This period was characterized by the further and rapid evolution of placental mammals, the more progressive forms of mammalian life developing during these times.
	> “Although the early placental mammals sprang from carnivorous ancestors, very soon herbivorous branches developed, and, erelong, omnivorous mammalian families also sprang up. The angiosperms were the principal food of the rapidly increasing mammals, the modern land flora, including the majority of present-day plants and trees, having appeared during earlier periods.” [UB 61:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p2_1)

	- b. Mammals begin to dominate the world.

	> “_35,000,000_ years ago marks the beginning of the age of placental-mammalian world domination. The southern land bridge was extensive, reconnecting the then enormous Antarctic continent with South America, South Africa, and Australia. In spite of the massing of land in high latitudes, the world climate remained relatively mild because of the enormous increase in the size of the tropic seas, nor was the land elevated sufficiently to produce glaciers. Extensive lava flows occurred in Greenland and Iceland, some coal being deposited between these layers.” [UB 61:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p2_3)

	- c. Mammals dominate the earth as dinosaurs decline.

	> “On land this was pre-eminently the age of mammalian renovation and expansion. Of the earlier and more primitive mammals, over one hundred species were extinct before this period ended. Even the mammals of large size and small brain soon perished. Brains and agility had replaced armor and size in the progress of animal survival. And with the dinosaur family on the decline, the mammals slowly assumed domination of the earth, speedily and completely destroying the remainder of their reptilian ancestors.
	> “Along with the disappearance of the dinosaurs, other and great changes occurred in the various branches of thesaurian family. The surviving members of the early reptilian families are turtles, snakes, and crocodiles, together with the venerable frog, the only remaining group representative of man’s earlier ancestors. “Various groups of mammals had their origin in a unique animal now extinct. This carnivorous creature was something of a cross between a cat and a seal; it could live on land or in water and was highly intelligent and very active. In Europe the ancestor of the canine family evolved, soon giving rise to many species of small dogs. About the same time the gnawing rodents, including beavers, squirrels, gophers, mice, and rabbits, appeared and soon became a notable form of life, very little change having since occurred in this family. The later deposits of this period contain the fossil remains of dogs, cats, coons, and weasels in ancestral form.” [UB 61:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p2_5)

	- d. A great variety of mammals continues to evolve.

	> “_30,000,000_ years ago the modern types of mammals began to make their appearance. Formerly the mammals had lived for the greater part in the hills, being of the mountainous types; _suddenly_ there began the evolution of the plains or hoofed type, the grazing species, as differentiated from the clawed flesh eaters. These grazers sprang from an undifferentiated ancestor having five toes and forty-four teeth, which perished before the end of the age. Toe evolution did not progress beyond the three-toed stage throughout this period.
	> “The horse, an outstanding example of evolution, lived during these times in both North America and Europe, though his development was not fully completed until the later ice age. While the rhinoceros family appeared at the close of this period, it underwent its greatest expansion subsequently. A small hoglike creature also developed which became the ancestor of the many species of swine, peccaries, and hippopotamuses. Camels and llamas had their origin in North America about the middle of this period and overran the western plains. Later, the llamas migrated to South America, the camels to Europe, and soon both were extinct in North America, though a few camels survived up to the ice age.” [UB 61:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p2_8)

	- e. In North America, the ancestors of the true lemurs appear.

	> “About this time a notable thing occurred in western North America: The early ancestors of the ancient lemurs first made their appearance. While this family cannot be regarded as true lemurs, their coming marked the establishment of the line from which the true lemurs subsequently sprang.” [UB 61:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p2_10)

3. The Miocene—age of the elephant and the horse.

	- a. Evolution of the grazing type of mammals.

	> “There was a great increase in the varieties of grasses, and the teeth of many mammalian species gradually altered to conform to the present-day grazing type.” [UB 61:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p3_2)

	- b. The golden age of mammals.

	> “_20,000,000_ years ago was indeed the golden age of mammals. Bering Strait land bridge was up, and many groups of animals migrated to North America from Asia, including the four-tusked mastodons, short-legged rhinoceroses, and many varieties of the cat family.
	> “The first deer appeared, and North America was soon overrun by ruminants—deer, oxen, camels, bison, and several species of rhinoceroses—but the giant pigs, more than six feet tall, became extinct.
	> “The huge elephants of this and subsequent periods possessed large brains as well as large bodies, and they soon overran the entire world except Australia. For once the world was dominated by a huge animal with a brain sufficiently large to enable it to carry on. Confronted by the highly intelligent life of these ages, no animal the size of an elephant could have survived unless it had possessed a brain of large size and superior quality. In intelligence and adaptation the elephant is approached only by the horse and is surpassed only by man himself. Even so, of the fifty species of elephants in existence at the opening of this period, only two have survived.” [UB 61:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p3_4)

	- c. The age of horses and elephants.

	> “Mammalian life continued to evolve. Enormous herds of horses joined the camels on the western plains of North America; this was truly the age of horses as well as of elephants. The horse’s brain is next in animal quality to that of the elephant, but in one respect it is decidedly inferior, for the horse never fully overcame the deep-seated propensity to flee when frightened. The horse lacks theemotional control of the elephant, while the elephant is greatly handicapped by size and lack of agility. During this period an animal evolved which was somewhat like both the elephant and the horse, but it was soon destroyed by the rapidly increasing cat family.
	> “As Urantia is entering the so-called ‘horseless age,’ you should pause and ponder what this animal meant to your ancestors. Men first used horses for food, then for travel, and later in agriculture and war. The horse has long served mankind and has played an important part in the development of human civilization.” [UB 61:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p3_10)

	- d. Evolution of types of monkeys.

	> “The biologic developments of this period contributed much toward the setting of the stage for the subsequent appearance of man. In central Asia the true types of both the primitive monkey and the gorilla evolved, having a common ancestor, now extinct. But neither of these species is concerned in the line of living beings which were, later on, to become the ancestors of the human race.” [UB 61:3.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p2_12)

	- e. The dog and cat family.

	> “The dog family was represented by several groups, notably wolves and foxes; the cat tribe, by panthers and large saber-toothed tigers, the latter first evolving in North America. The modern cat and dog families increased in numbers all over the world. Weasels, martins, otters, and raccoons thrived and developed throughout the northern latitudes.” [UB 61:3.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p3_13)

4. The Pliocene—the last great mammalian migration.

	- a. World-wide animal migration

	> “For a short time all the land of the world was again joined excepting Australia, and the last great world-wide animal migration took place. North America was connected with both South America and Asia, and there was a free exchange of animal life. Asiatic sloths, armadillos, antelopes, and bears entered North America, while NorthAmerican camels went to China. Rhinoceroses migrated over the whole world except Australia and South America, but they were extinct in the Western Hemisphere by the close of this period..
	> “In general, the life of the preceding period continued to evolve and spread. The cat family dominated the animal life, and marine life was almost at a standstill.
	> “Many of the horses were still three-toed, but the modern types were arriving; llamas and giraffelike camels mingled with the horses on the grazing plains. The giraffe appeared in Africa, having just as long a neck then as now. In South America sloths, armadillos, anteaters, and the South American type of primitive monkeys evolved. Before the continents were finally isolated, those massive animals, the mastodons, migrated everywhere except to Australia.” [UB 61:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p4_3)

	- b. The horse appears in North America.

	> “_5,000,000_ years ago the horse evolved as it now is and from North America migrated to all the world. But the horse had become extinct on the continent of its origin long before the red man arrived.” [UB 61:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p4_5)

5. The Pleistocene—the ice age.

	- a. North American animals during early epochs of the ice age.

	> “These first two ice invasions were not extensive in Eurasia. During these early epochs of the ice age North America was overrun with mastodons, woolly mammoths, horses, camels, deer, musk oxen, bison, ground sloths, giant beavers, saber-toothed tigers, sloths as large as elephants, and many groups of the cat and dog families. But from this time forward they were rapidly reduced in numbers by the increasing cold of the glacial period. Toward the close of the ice age the majority of these animal species were extinct in North America.” [UB 61:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p5_7)

	- b. The appearance of ancestors of the human race.

	> “The great event of this glacial period was the evolution of primitive man. Slightly to the west of India, on land now under water and among the offspring of Asiatic migrants of the older North American lemur types, the dawn mammals _suddenly_ appeared. These small animals walked mostly on their hind legs, and they possessed large brains in proportion to their size and in comparison with the brains of other animals. In the seventieth generation of this order of life a new and higher group of animals _suddenly_ differentiated. These new mid-mammals—almost twice the size and height of their ancestors and possessing proportionately increased brain power—had only well established themselves when the Primates, the third vital mutation, _suddenly_ appeared. (At this same time, a retrograde development within the mid-mammal stock gave origin to the simian ancestry; and from that day to this the human branch has gone forward by progressive evolution, while the simian tribes have remained stationary or have actually retrogressed.)” [UB 61:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p6_1)

	- c. The appearance of man.

	> “_1,000,000_ years ago Urantia was registered as an _inhabited world_. A mutation within the stock of the progressing Primates _suddenly_ produced two primitive human beings, the actual ancestors of mankind.” [UB 61:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p6_2)

	- d. The effects of the ice age.

	> “This event occurred at about the time of the beginning of the third glacial advance; thus it may be seen that your early ancestors were born and bred in a stimulating, invigorating, and difficult environment. And the sole survivors of these Urantia aborigines, the Eskimos, even now prefer to dwell in frigid northern climes.
	> “Human beings were not present in the Western Hemisphere until near the close of the ice age. But during the interglacial epochs they passed westward around the Mediterranean and soon overran the continent of Europe. In the caves of western Europe may be found human bones mingled with the remains of both tropic and arctic animals, testifying that man lived in these regions throughout the later epochs of the advancing and retreating glaciers.” [UB 61:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/61#p6_3)

### IV. **Overview of Evolution**.

#### A. The evolutionary panorama.

> “The story of man’s ascent from seaweed to the lordship of earthly creation is indeed a romance of biologic struggle and mind survival. Man’s primordial ancestors were literally the slime and ooze of the ocean bed in the sluggish and warm-water bays and lagoons of the vast shore lines of the ancient inland seas, those very waters in which the Life Carriers established the three independent life implantations on Urantia.” [UB 65:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p2_1)

1. Few early marine vegetable species still exist.

	> “Very few species of the early types of marine vegetation that participated in those epochal changes which resulted in the animallike borderland organisms are in existence today. The sponges are the survivors of one of these early midway types, those organisms through which the _gradual_ transition from the vegetable to the animal took place. These early transition forms, while not identical with modern sponges, were much like them; they were true borderline organisms—neither vegetable nor animal—but they eventually led to the development of the true animal forms of life.” [UB 65:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p2_2)

2. Single-celled animal types associated into communities and later evolved into more complex forms.

	> “Before long the early single-celled animal types associated themselves in communities, first on the plan of the Volvox and presently along the lines of the Hydra and jellyfish. Still later there evolved the starfish, stone lilies, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, centipedes, insects, spiders, crustaceans, and the closely related groups of earthworms and leeches, soon followed by the mollusks-the oyster, octopus, and snail. Hundreds upon hundreds of species intervened and perished; mention is made only of those which survived the long, long struggle. Such nonprogressive specimens, together with the later appearing fish family, today represent the stationary types of early and lower animals, branches of the tree of life which failed to progress.” [UB 65:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p2_5)

3. Development of vertebrates, amphibians, reptiles, birds.

	> “The stage was thus set for the appearance of the first backboned animals, the fishes. From this fish family there sprang two unique modifications, the frog and the salamander. And it was the frog which began that series of progressive differentiations in animal life that finally culminated in man himself.
	> “The frog is one of the earliest of surviving human-race ancestors, but it also failed to progress, persisting today much as in those remote times. The frog is the only species ancestor of the early dawn races now living on the face of the earth. The human race has no surviving ancestry between the frog and the Eskimo.
	> “The frogs gave rise to the Reptilia, a great animal family which is virtually extinct, but which, before passing out of existence, gave origin to the whole bird family and the numerous orders of mammals.
	> “Probably the greatest single leap of all prehuman evolution was executed when the reptile became a bird. The bird types of todayeagles, ducks, pigeons, and ostriches—all descended from the enormous reptiles of long, long ago.
	> “The kingdom of reptiles, descended from the frog family, is today represented by four surviving divisions: two nonprogressive, snakes and lizards, together with their cousins, alligators and turtles; one partially progressive, the bird family, and the fourth, the ancestors of mammals and the direct line of descent of the human species. But though long departed, the massiveness of the passing Reptilia found echo in the elephant and mastodon, while their peculiar forms were perpetuated in the leaping kangaroos.” [UB 65:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p2_6)

4. Development of placental mammals and prehuman types.

	> “It was from an agile little reptilian dinosaur of carnivorous habits but having a comparatively large brain that the placental mammals _suddenly_ sprang. These mammals developed rapidly and in many different ways, not only giving rise to the common modern varieties but also evolving into marine types, such as whales and seals, and into air navigators like the bat family.
	> “Man thus evolved from the higher mammals derived principally from the _western implantation_ of life in the ancient east-west sheltered seas. The _eastern_ and _central groups_ of living organisms were early progressing favorably toward the attainment of prehuman levels of animal existence. But as the ages passed, the eastern focus of life emplacement failed to attain a satisfactory level of intelligent prehuman status, having suffered such repeated and irretrievable losses of its highest types of germ plasm that it was forever shorn of the power to rehabilitate human potentialities.” [UB 65:2.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p2_12)

5. Manipulation of favorable prehuman strains toward the evolution of man.

	> “Since the quality of the mind capacity for development in this eastern group was so definitely inferior to that of the other two groups, the Life Carriers, with the consent of their superiors, so manipulated the environment as further to circumscribe these inferior prehuman strains of evolving life. To all outward appearances the elimination of these inferior groups of creatures was accidental, but in reality it was altogether purposeful.
	> “Later in the evolutionary unfolding of intelligence, the lemur ancestors of the human species were far more advanced in North America than in other regions; and they were therefore led to migrate from the arena of western life implantation over the Bering land bridge and down the coast to southwestern Asia, where they continued to evolve and to benefit by the addition of certain strains of the central life group. Man thus evolved out of certain western and central life strains but in the central to near-eastern regions.
	> “In this way the life that was planted on Urantia evolved until the ice age, when man himself first appeared and began his eventful planetary career. And this appearance of primitive man on earth during the ice age was not just an accident; it was by design. The rigors and climatic severity of the glacial era were in every way adapted to the purpose of fostering the production of a hardy type of human being with tremendous survival endowment.” [UB 65:2.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p2_14)

#### B. Various aspects or repercussions of evolution.

1. Change in nature and function of the Life Carriers upon the appearance of will creatures—human beings.

	> “After the life patterns have been formulated and the material organizations have been duly completed, the supermaterial forces concerned in life propagation become forthwith active, and life is existent. Whereupon the Life Carriers are immediately returned to their normal mid-phase of personality existence, in which estate they can manipulate the living units and maneuver the evolving organisms, even though they are shorn of all ability to organize-create—new patterns of living matter.
	> “After organic evolution has run a certain course and free will of the human type has appeared in the highest evolving planet or take renunciation vows; that is, they must pledge themselves to refrain from all attempts further to influence the course of organic evolution. And when such vows are voluntarily taken by those Life Carriers who choose to remain on the planet as future advisers to those who shall be intrusted with the fostering of the newly evolved will creatures, there is summoned a commission of twelve, presided over by the chief of the Evening Stars, acting by authority of the System Sovereign and with permission of Gabriel; and forthwith these Life Carriers are transmuted to the third phase of personality existence—the semispiritual level of being. And I have functioned on Urantia in this third phase of existence ever since the times of Andon and Fonta.” [UB 65:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p1_7)

2. The biologic bacterial regression and the Adamic default in relation to human diseases.

	> “But throughout all of this biologic adventure our greatest disappointment grew out of the reversion of certain primitive plant life to the prechlorophyll levels of parasitic bacteria on such an extensive and unexpected scale. This eventuality in plant-life evolution caused many distressful diseases in the higher mammals, particularly in the more vulnerable human species. When we were confronted with this perplexing situation, we somewhat discounted the difficulties involved because we knew that the subsequent admixture of the Adamic life plasm would so reinforce the resisting powers of the resulting blended race as to make it practically immune to all diseases produced by the vegetable type of organism. But our hopes were doomed to disappointment owing to the misfortune of the Adamic default.” [UB 65:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p5_2)

3. The inexorable progress of evolution.

	> “You have been informed that Urantia mortals evolved by way of primitive frog development, and that this ascending strain, carried in potential in a single frog, narrowly escaped extinction on a certain occasion. But it should not be inferred that the evolution of mankind would have been terminated by an accident at this juncture. At that very moment we were observing and fostering no less than one thousand different and remotely situated mutating strains of life which could have been directed into various different patterns of prehuman development. This particular ancestral frog represented our third selection, the two prior life strains having perished in spite of all our efforts toward their conservation.
	> “Even the loss of Andon and Fonta before they had offspring, though delaying human evolution, would not have prevented it. Subsequent to the appearance of Andon and Fonta and before the mutating human potentials of animal life were exhausted, there evolved no less than seven thousand favorable strains which could have achieved some sort of human type of development. And many of these better stocks were subsequently assimilated by the various branches of the expanding human species.
	> “Long before the Material Son and Daughter, the biologic uplifters, arrive on a planet, the human potentials of the evolving animal species have been exhausted. This biologic status of animal life is disclosed to the Life Carriers by the phenomenon of the third phase of adjutant spirit mobilization, which automatically occurs concomitantly with the exhaustion of the capacity of all animal life to give origin to the mutant potentials of prehuman individuals.” [UB 65:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p3_3)

4. Unique features of Urantia life experiment.

	> “There were many unique features of the Urantia life experiment, but the two outstanding episodes were the appearance of the Andonic race prior to the evolution of the six colored peoples and the later simultaneous appearance of the Sangik mutants in a single family. Urantia is the first world in Satania where the six colored races sprang from the same human family. They ordinarily arise in diversified strains from independent mutations within the prehuman animal stock and usually appear on earth one at a time and successively over long periods of time, beginning with the red man and passing on down through the colors to indigo.
	> “Another outstanding variation of procedure was the late arrival of the Planetary Prince. As a rule, the prince appears on a planet about the time of will development;and if such a plan had been followed, Caligastia might have come to Urantia even during the lifetimes of Andon and Fonta instead of almost five hundred thousand years later, simultaneously with the appearance of the six Sangik races.[UB 65:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p4_7)

5. The enigma of evolution.

	> “But many seemingly mysterious adjustments of living organisms are purely chemical, wholly physical. At any moment of time, in the blood stream of any human being there exists the possibility of upward of 15,000,000 chemical reactions between the hormone output of a dozen ductless glands.” [UB 65:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p6_6)
	> “Physics and chemistry alone cannot explain how a human being evolved out of the primeval protoplasm of the early seas. The ability to learn, memory and differential response to environment, is the endowment of mind. The laws of physics are not responsive to training; they are immutable and unchanging. The reactions of chemistry are not modified by education; they are uniform and dependable. Aside from the presence of the Unqualified Absolute, electrical and chemical reactions are predictable. But mind can profit from experience, can learn from reactive habits of behavior in response to repetition of stimuli.” [UB 65:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p6_8)

6. Reasons for the apparent slow progress of evolution.

	> “If spending so much time in effecting the evolutionary changes of life development occasions perplexity, I would say that we cannot time the life processes to unfold any faster than the physical metamorphoses of a planet will permit. We must wait upon the natural, physical development of a planet; we have absolutely no control over geologic evolution. If the physical conditions would allow, we could arrange for the completed evolution of life in considerably less than one million years. But we are all under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Rulers of Paradise, and time is nonexistent on Paradise.
	> “The individual’s yardstick for time measurement is the length of his life. All creatures are thus time conditioned, and therefore do they regard evolution as being a long-drawn-out process. To those of us whose life span is not limited by a temporal existence, evolution does not seem to be such a protracted transaction. On Paradise, where time is nonexistent, these things are all _present_ in the mind of Infinity and the acts of Eternity.” [UB 65:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p8_2)

## CONCLUSION

> “The fact of animal evolutionary origin does not attach stigma to any personality in the sight of the universe as that is the exclusive method of producing one of the two basic types of finite intelligent will creatures. When the heights of perfection and eternity are attained, all the more honor to those who began at the bottom and joyfully climbed the ladder of life, round by round, and who, when they do reach the heights of glory, will have gained a personal experience which embodies an actual knowledge of every phase of life from the bottom to the top.

> “In all this is shown the wisdom of the Creators. It would be just as easy for the Universal Father to make all mortals perfect beings, to impart perfection by his divine word. But that would deprive them of the wonderful experience of the adventure and training associated with the long and gradual inward climb, an experience to be had only by those who are so fortunate as to begin at the very bottom of living existence.” [UB 32:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p3_10)

> “Nature is a time-space resultant of two cosmic factors: first, the immutability, perfection, and rectitude of Paradise Deity, and second, the experimental plans, executive blunders, insurrectionary errors, incompleteness of development, and imperfection of wisdom of the extra-Paradise creatures, from the highest to the lowest. Nature therefore carries a uniform, unchanging, majestic, and marvelous thread of perfection from the circle of eternity; but in each universe, on each planet, and in each individual life, this nature is modified, qualified, and perchance marred by the acts, the mistakes, and the disloyalties of the creatures of the evolutionary systems and universes; and therefore must nature ever be of a changing mood, whimsical withal, though stable underneath, and varied in accordance with the operating procedures of a local universe.” [UB 4:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p2_3)

> “The apparent defects of the natural world are not indicative of any such corresponding defects in the character of God. Rather are such observed imperfections merely the inevitable stop-moments in the exhibition of the evermoving reel of infinity picturization. It is these very defect-interruptions of perfection-continuity which make it possible for the finite mind of material man to catch a fleeting glimpse of divine reality in time and space. The material manifestations of divinity appear defective to the evolutionary mind of man only because mortal man persists in viewing the phenomena of nature through natural eyes, human vision unaided by morontia mota or by revelation, its compensatory substitute on the worlds of time.” [UB 4:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p2_7)

> “But the inhabitants of Urantia are to find deliverance from these ancient errors and pagan superstitions respecting the nature of the Universal Father. The revelation of the truth about God is appearing, and the human race is destined to know the Universal Father in all that beauty of character and loveliness of attributes so magnificently portrayed by the Creator Son who sojourned on Urantia as the Son of Man and the Son of God.” [UB 4:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p5_7)

> “Be not discouraged; human evolution is still in progress, and the revelation of God to the world, in and through Jesus, shall not fail.” [UB 196:3.33](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p3_33)