


### GENERAL ORGANIZATION OF THE URANTIA BOOK

### PART I - The Central and Superuniverses (32 papers)

| Type | Content |
| --- | --- |
| A. Foreword | Definitive |
| B. Deity | 1. Source<br>2. Derivations |
| C. Universes | 1. Source<br>2. Derivations|
| D. Personalities | 1. Supreme Spirits<br>2.Trinity Origin<br>3. Sons of God <br>4. Family of the Infinite Spirit<br>5. General

### PART II - The Local Universe (25 papers)

A. Deity In Time-Space B. Personalities<br> 1. Sons of God<br> 2. General<br> 3. Ministering Spirits<br> 4. Sons of God C. Universe<br> 1. Physical<br> 2. Divisions<br> 3. Satania Rebellion<br> 4. The Future D. Deity Paradise-Evolutionary

### PART III - The History of Urantia (63 papers)

A. History<br> 1. Beginnings<br> 2. Society<br> 3. Adam<br> 4. Marriage B. Religion<br> 1. Evolutionary<br> 2. Melchizedek<br> 3. At Present C. Deity<br> 1. Eschatology<br> 2. Ministry<br> 3. Experience

### PART IV - The Life and Teachings of Jesus (77 papers)

A. Mortal Career<br> 1. Introduction<br> 2. Growth<br> 3. Joshua the Tutor B. Public Work (Son of Man)<br> 1. Baptism<br> 2. Training the Twelve<br> 3. Early Public Work<br> 4. The Crisis C. Public Work (Son of God)<br> 1. Transfiguration<br> 2. Later Ministry<br> 3. Final Teachings<br> 4. Betrayal and Death D. Post-Mortal Career<br> 1. The Resurrection<br> 2. Morontia Appearances<br> 3. After Jesus Left

### ORGANIZATION OF PART I OF THE URANTIA BOOK

### The Central and Superuniverses

**A. Foreword** Foreword **B. Deity**<br> 1. Personal a. Father<br> 1. The Universal Father<br> 2. The Nature of God<br> 3. The Attributes of God<br> 4. God's Relation to the Universe<br> 5. God's Relation to the Individual b. Son<br> 6. The Eternal Son<br> 7. Relation of Eternal Son to the Universe c. Spirit<br> 8. The Infinite Spirit<br> 9. Relation of Infinite Spirit to the Universe<br> 2. Total<br> 10. The Paradise Trinity **C. Universe**<br> 1. Source<br> 11. The Eternal Isle of Paradise<br> 2. Derivations a. Total<br> 12. The Universe of Universes b. Parts<br> 13. The Sacred Spheres of Paradise<br> 14. The Central and Divine Universe<br> 15. The Seven Superuniverses **D. Personalities**<br> 1. Supreme Spirits<br> 16. The Seven Master Spirits<br> 17. The Supreme Spirit Groups<br> 2. Trinity Origin<br> 18. Supreme Trinity Personalities<br> 19. Co-Ordinate Trinity-Origin<br> 3. Sons of God<br> 20. The Paradise Sons of God<br> 21. The Paradise Creator Sons<br> 22. The Trinitized Sons of God<br> 4. Family of the Infinite Spirit a. Higher Personalities<br> 23. The Solitary Messengers<br> 24. Higher Personalities of the Infinite Spirit b. Messenger Hosts<br> 25. The Messenger Hosts of Space c. Ministering Spirits<br> 26. Ministering Spirits of the Central Universe<br> 27. Ministry of Primary Supernaphim<br> 28. Ministering Spirits of the Superuniverse d. Power Directors<br> 29. Power Directors<br> 5. General<br> 30. Personalities of the Grand Universe<br> 31. The Corps of the Finality

### ORGANIZATION OF PART II OF THE URANTIA BOOK

### The Local Universe

**A. Deity** In Time-Space a. Father<br> 32. The Evolution of Local Universes b. Son<br> 33. Administration of Local Universes c. Spirit<br> 34. The Local Universe Mother Spirit **B. Personalities**<br> 1. Sons of God<br> 35. The Local Universe Sons of God<br> 36. The Life Carriers<br> 2. General<br> 37. Personalities of the Local Universe<br> 3. Ministering Spirits<br> 38. Ministering Spirits of the Local Universe<br> 39. The Seraphic Hosts<br> 4. Sons of God<br> 40. The Ascending Sons of God **C. Universe**<br> 1. Physical<br> 41. Physical Aspects of the Local Universe<br> 42. Energy-Mind and Matter<br> 2. Divisions a. Constellation<br> 43. The Constellations<br> 44. The Celestial Artisans b. System<br> 45. The Local System Administration<br> 46. The Local System Headquarters<br> 47. The Seven Mansion Worlds c. Morontia<br> 48. The Morontia Life d. Planets<br> 49. The Inhabited Worlds<br> 50. The Planetary Princes<br> 51. The Planetary Adams<br> 52. Planetary Mortal Epochs<br> 3. Satania Rebellion<br> 53. The Lucifer Rebellion<br> 54. Problems of the Lucifer Rebellion<br> 4.The Future<br> 55. The Spheres of Light and Life **D. Deity** Paradise-Evolutionary<br> 56. Universal Unity

### ORGANIZATION OF PART III OF THE URANTIA BOOK

### The History of Urantia

**A. History**<br> 1. Beginnings a. Physical<br> 57. The Origin of Urantia<br> 58. Life Establishment on Urantia b. Pre-Human<br> 59. The Marine-Life Era on Urantia<br> 60. Urantia During the Early Land-Life Era<br> 61. The Mammalian Era c. Early Man<br> 62. The Dawn Races of Early Man<br> 63. The First Human Family<br> 64. The Evolutionary Races of Color d. Summary<br> 65. Overcontrol of Evolution<br> 2. Society a. Prince<br> 66. The Planetary Prince<br> 67. The Planetary Rebellion b. Institutions<br> 68. The Dawn of Civilization<br> 69. Primitive Human Institutions<br> 70. The Evolution of Human Government<br> 71. Development of the State c. Inspiration<br> 72. Government on a Neighboring Planet<br> 3. Adam a. Adam and Eve<br> 73. The Garden of Eden<br> 74. Adam and Eve<br> 75. Default of Adam and Eve<br> 76. The Second Garden b. Midwayers<br> 77. The Midway Creatures c. After Adam<br> 78. The Violet Race After Adam<br> 79. Andite Expansion in the Orient<br> 80. Andite Expansion in the Occident<br> 81. Development of Modern Civilization<br> 4. Marriage<br> 82. Evolution of Marriage<br> 83. The Marriage Institution<br> 84. Marriage and Family Life **B. Religion**<br> 1. Evolution a. Beginnings<br> 85. The Origins of Worship<br> 86. Early Evolution of Religion b. Development<br> 87. The Ghost Cults<br> 88. Fetishes, Charms, and Magic<br> 89. Sin, Sacrifice and Atonement<br> 90. Shamanism--Medicine Men and Priests c. Prayer<br> 91. The Evolution of Prayer d. To Date<br> 92. The Later Evolution of Religion<br> 2. Melchizedek a. Mission<br> 93. Machiventa Melchizedek b. Results<br> 94. Melchizedek Teachings in the Orient<br> 95. Melchizedek Teachings in the Levant<br> 96. Yaweh--God of the Hebrews<br> 97. Evolution of the God Concept Among the Hebrews<br> 98. Melchizedek Teachings in the Occident<br> 3. At Present a. Social<br> 99. The Social Problems of Religion b. Personal<br> 100. Religion in Human Experience<br> 101. The Real Nature of Religion<br> 102. The Foundations of Religious Faith<br> 103. The Reality of Religious Experience **C. Deity**<br> 1. Eschatology<br> 104. Growth of the Trinity Concept<br> 105. Deity and Reality<br> 106. Universe Levels of Reality<br> 2. Ministry a. Adjusters<br> 107. Origin and Nature of Thought Adjusters<br> 108. Mission and Ministry of Thought Adjusters<br> 109. Relation of Adjusters to Universe Creatures<br> 110. Relation of Adjusters to Individual Mortals b. Survival<br> 111. The Adjuster and the Soul<br> 112. Personality Survival<br> 113. Seraphic Guardians of Destiny c. Planetary<br> 114. Seraphic Planetary Government<br> 3. Experiential a. Total<br> 115. Supreme Being<br> 116. Almighty Supreme<br> 117. God the Supreme<br> 118. Supreme and Ultimate--Time and Space b. Individual<br> 119. The Bestowals of Christ Michael

### ORGANIZATION OF PART IV OF THE URANTIA BOOK

### The Life and Teachings of Jesus

| &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; | &nbsp; |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **A. Mortal Career** | 1. Introduction | a. Universe<br>b. Planetary<br>c. Familial | 120. The Bestowal of Michael on Urantia <br> 121. The Times of Michael's Bestowal <br> 122. Birth and Infancy of Jesus|
| | 2. Growth | a. Childhood <br>b. Crisis<br>c. Maturity<br>| 123. The Early Childhood of Jesus<br> 124. The Later Childhood of Jesus <br> 125. Jesus at Jerusalem<br> 126. The Two Crucial Years <br> 127. The Adolescent Years<br> 128. Jesus' Early Manhood |
<br> 3. Joshua the Tutor a. General<br> 129. Later Adult Life of Jesus b. Rome<br> 130. On the Way to Rome<br> 131. The World's Religions<br> 132. The Sojourn at Rome<br> 133. The Return from Rome c. Transition<br> 134. The Transition Years **B. Public Work - The Son of Man**<br> 1. Baptism<br> 135. John the Baptist<br> 136. Baptism and the Forty Days<br> 2. Training the Twelve<br> 137. Tarrying Time in Galilee<br> 138. Training the Kingdom's Messengers<br> 139. The Twelve Apostles<br> 140. Ordination of the Twelve<br> 3. Early Public Work a. Beginnings<br> 141. Beginning the Public Work<br> 142. Passover at Jerusalem<br> 143. Going Through Samaria<br> 144. At Gilboa and the Decapolis<br> 145. Four Eventful Days at Capernaum b. First Tour<br> 146. First Preaching Tour of Galilee<br> 147. The Interlude Visit to Jerusalem c. Second Tour<br> 148. Training Evangelists at Bethsaida<br> 149. The Second Preaching Tour d. Third Tour<br> 150. The Third Preaching Tour<br> 151. Tarrying and Teaching by the Seaside<br> 4. The Crisis a. Capernaum<br> 152. Events Leading up to the Capernaum Crisis<br> 153. The Crisis at Capernaum<br> 154. Last Days at Capernaum b. Phoenicia<br> 155. Fleeing Through Northern Galilee<br> 156. Sojourn at Tyre and Sidon **C. Public Work - The Son of God**<br> 1. Transfiguration<br> 157. At Caesarea-Philippi<br> 158. The Mount of Transfiguration<br> 2. Later Ministry a. Decapolis Tour<br> 159. The Decapolis Tour b. Rodan<br> 160. Rodan of Alexandria<br> 161. Further Discussions with Rodan c. Pre-Perean Ministry<br> 162. At the Feast of Tabernacles<br> 163. Ordination of the Seventy at Magadan<br> 164. At the Feast of Dedication d. Perean Mission<br> 165. The Perean Mission Begins<br> 166. The Last Visit to Northern Perea<br> 167. The Visit to Philadelphia<br> 168. The Resurrection of Lazarus<br> 169. Last Teaching at Pella e. Summary<br> 170. The Kingdom of Heaven<br> 3. Final Teachings a. Jerusalem<br> 171. On the Way to Jerusalem<br> 172. Going Into Jerusalem<br> 173. Monday in Jerusalem<br> 174. Tuesday Morning in the Temple<br> 175. The Last Temple Discourse<br> 176. Tuesday Evening on Mount Olivet b. At Camp<br> 177. Wednesday, the Rest Day<br> 178. Last Day at the Camp c. Last Supper<br> 179. The Last Supper<br> 180. The Farewell Discourse<br> 181. Final Admonitions and Warnings<br> 4. Betrayal and Death a. Arrest<br> 182. In Gethsemane<br> 183. The Betrayal and Arrest of Jesus b. Trial<br> 184. Before the Sanhedrin Court<br> 185. The Trial Before Pilate c. Crucifixion<br> 186. Just Before the Crucifixion<br> 187. The Crucifixion **D. Post-Mortal Career**<br> 1. The Resurrection<br> 188. The Time of the Tomb<br> 189. The Resurrection<br> 2. Morontia Appearances<br> 190. Morontia Appearances of Jesus<br> 191. Appearances to the Apostles and Others<br> 192. Appearances in Galilee<br> 193. Final Appearances and Ascension<br> 3. After Jesus Left<br> 194. Bestowal of the Spirit of Truth<br>195. After Pentecost<br> 196. The Faith of Jesus