---
title: "Archangels – Agents Of Epochal Change"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-02-13T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Angels and midwayers, Fellowship Herald, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-02-13T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2007 Carolyn Kendall<br>© 2007 The Urantia Book Fellowship</p>

_The Urantia Book_ opens up a knowledge of archangels far greater than the popular conception of these beings. The archangels of the revelation are a grand order of local universe workers who are charged with a wide array of vital functions and important duties: They facilitate life implantation on inhabited planets; they initiate the resurrection of unimaginable billions of mortals on the inhabited worlds; they operate circuits of vital communication between individual planets and the headquarters worlds above; and they accompany the system and Paradise Sons on their missions of bestowal, as well as their judicial visitations. There are even more surprising projects and programs in which they engage. We could, in fact, have titled our subject, “Archangels and Magisterial Sons,” because it is they who are projected to be the next order to visit our planet with an enlarged revelation of truth. Archangels are the advance guard and right-hand associates of the Paradise Avonals on their magisterial missions.

## Archangels Originate And Function In The Local Universe

Archangels were created by the Creator Son, Michael of Nebadon, and the Universe Mother Spirit, and are one of the seven local universe orders known as Universe Aids. At this time there exist 800,000 archangels in Nebadon. The first born is the director, or chief, of the archangel corps in the local universe. They appear to be autonomous; they do not fall under Gabriel’s jurisdiction. [[UB 37:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p3_2)]

## Archangels: Life Implantation On Evolutionary World

At the earliest stage of life implantation on an evolutionary world, when physical conditions are ripe, the archangel commission is summoned by the Life Carriers to the site or sites selected. This commission consists of the chief of archangels, physical controllers and other diverse beings. It is they who encircuit and modify the Life Carriers to enable them to function on physical levels of electrochemistry. [[UB 65:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p1_3)] 

## Archangels Certified Urantia As World Of Will Dignity—Andon & Fonta

The decision of two primitive twins to separate themselves from their inferior relatives and move northward was the first sign of intelligent life on Urantia. This young brother and sister were unaware of the impact their decision to flee had on the watching universe and on the status and future of their world. This act automatically inaugurated the local universe mind circuit between the local universe headquarters, Salvington, and the pole of space communication on the planet. A Nebadon archangel established the immediate connection, and the universe chief of archangels sent greetings to the Life Carriers, acknowledging registration of the new status of Urantia as a planet of will dignity. The Life Carriers departed soon after; their work was complete. [[UB 62:7.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/62#p7_6)]

## Archangels “Sealed” Resurrection Of Survivors Prior To Planetary Prince

Before the prince arrived on our inhabited planet, as humans developed early language, acquired moral will and the ability to make ethical decisions, they began receiving Thought Adjusters. Throughout this stage in human evolution, these divine indwellers serve only during temporal existence. When the primitive souls die, the archangels certify the more spiritual survivors for later resurrection and potential Spirit fusion after they proceed to the mansion worlds.[[UB 52:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/52#p1_6)]

## Archangels Initiated Adjudication Upon Arrival Of Prince

When the planetary princes arrive on an inhabited planet, they are always accompanied by archangels. A dispensational adjudication of those humans who have died sleeping survivors always occurs simultaneously with his arrival. [[UB 52:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/52#p2_1)] It was during the prince’s reign that the Lucifer Rebellion occurred, and was joined by Urantia’s Prince Caligastia. His catastrophic decision plunged our world into isolation and suspended for thousands of years the ability of mortals to proceed directly to the mansion worlds upon death. [[UB 52:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/52#p5_5)] “_Upon the actual outbreak of the insurrection the entire system of Satania was isolated in both the constellation and the universe circuits. . .  The circuits to the fallen worlds were also cut off. . . and will not be restored so long as the archrebel lives within the confines of Satania._” [[UB 53:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p7_3)]

## Archangels Proclaimed Second Judgment & Resurrection—Dispensational Roll Call

Soon after they awakened in the first Garden of Eden on Urantia, Adam and Eve were formally inducted into world rulership and adorned with kingly robes. “_Then was heard the archangels’ proclamation, and the broadcast voice of Gabriel decreed the second judgment roll call of Urantia and the resurrection of the sleeping survivors of the second dispensation of grace and mercy on 606 of Satania. The dispensation of the Prince has passed; the age of Adam, the third planetary epoch, opens amidst scenes of simple grandeur; and the new rulers of Urantia start their reign_ . . .” [[UB 74:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/74#p2_8)]

Years later, after their tragic default Adam recalled the dispensational resurrection which occurred at the time of their arrival on Urantia. He assumed that after their own deaths he and Eve would be resurrected at the time of the arrival of an Avonal son on Urantia. [[UB 76:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/76#p5_3)] However, Gabriel was authorized to initiate a special resurrection in their behalf, even though the planet was under isolation due to the Lucifer Rebellion. Three days after Adam’s death he and Eve were reassembled in the resurrection halls of the Satania mansion worlds. [[UB 76:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/76#p6_2)]

The Bible refers to special resurrections, when, in the book of Jude, verse 9, he writes: “_Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, ‘Lord rebuke you.’_ ” We can only guess that New Testament writer Jude had been privately instructed by Jesus, his brother in the flesh, concerning the soon-to-occur dispensational adjudication of the Adamic Age.

## Archangels Accomplished The Dissolution Of The Mortal Remains Of Jesus

Shortly after the morontia Jesus came forth from his tomb, at 3:00 A.M., the chief of archangels, the angels of the resurrection, approached Gabriel to make a request for the body of Jesus. Said the chief of the archangels: “_We may not participate in the morontia resurrection of the bestowal experience of Michael our sovereign, but we would have his mortal remains put in our custody for immediate dissolution. We do not propose to employ our technique of dematerialization; we merely wish to invoke the process of accelerated time. . .  In the name of the celestial intelligences of all Nebadon, I ask for a mandate giving me the custody of the mortal body of Jesus of Nazareth and empowering us to proceed with its immediate dissolution._” [[UB 189:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p2_1)] With the agreement of the senior Most High of Edentia, the archangel was given permission by Gabriel to take possession of the physical remains of Jesus. This body had been literal and physical, but could not be removed from the sealed sepulcher as had been the morontia body of Jesus.[[UB 189:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p2_3)] (We can only wonder under what circumstances the archangels employ their “technique of dematerialization” on an inhabited planet.

There is little revealed about the personalities of archangels, except that, in this episode we’re given insight into their emotions: The touching appeal of the chief of archangels is shown as he approached Gabriel requesting permission to take custody of the body of Jesus, so that they might “. . . be spared the memory of enduring the sight of the slow decay of the human form of the Creator and Upholder of a universe. . . It is enough that we have seen our Sovereign live and die on Urantia. . . ” (It is also in this context that the archangel is referred to in male gender terms, e.g., “he,” “him,” not “she” or “her,” as with the lower angelic orders) 

The chief of archangels summoned his fellows, and together with a host of representatives of many orders of celestial personalities, including the Urantia midwayers, provided a near-instantaneous dissolution and disposal of the lifeless physical body. [[UB 189:2.7-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p2_7)]

## Archangels: Third Dispensational Resurrection On Urantia

The first planetary dispensational roll call occurred upon the arrival of planetary prince Caligastia in the city of Dalamatia. The second adjudication was soon after the arrival of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. Each of these momentous incidents was facilitated by archangels. Now, the third such epochal milestone was about to occur. [[UB 189:3.1-2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p3_1)] One hour following the disposition of the mortal body of Jesus, the archangels were called together by Gabriel. Michael also appeared, stating that while he hadn’t fully resumed jurisdiction of the universe of Nebadon, it would not affect resumption of life of the sleeping sons and daughters of Urantia—those who had slept the sleep of death since as far back as the time of Adam and Eve. He proclaimed: “_(L)et the roll call of the planetary resurrection begin._” The archangel circuit operated for the first time from Urantia. The archangels and Gabriel moved to the location of the spiritual polarity on Urantia, and Gabriel’s voice was heard instantly on the first mansion world, “_‘By the mandate of Michael, let the dead of a Urantia dispensation rise!’_. . .  _Notwithstanding that countless individuals having personal seraphic guardians and those achieving the requisite attainment of spiritual personality progress had gone on to mansonia during the ages subsequent to the times of Adam and Eve, and though there had been many special and millennial resurrections of Urantia sons, this was the third of the planetary roll calls, or complete dispensational resurrections._” [[UB 189:3.2-3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p3_2)] (These mortals are presumed to be the less spiritually advanced human beings, but, still had survival capacity. They were unconscious, waiting in limbo for perhaps hundreds of years.)

## Archangels Preserve The Record Of Personality During Death

_“During the transit of surviving mortals from the world of origin to the mansion worlds, whether they experience personality reassembly on the third period or ascend at the time of a group resurrection, the record of personality constitution is faithfully preserved by the archangels on their worlds of special activities. These beings are not the custodians of personality (as the guardian seraphim are of the soul), but it is nonetheless true that every identifiable factor of personality is effectually safeguarded in the custody of these dependable trustees of mortal survival._” [[UB 112:5.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_15)] In fact, the archangels maintain the records of each personality “_from the moment of birth” until the individual leaves the local universe, either moving upward into the superuniverse, or “is blotted out of recorded existence_. . .” [[UB 37:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p3_7)] They don’t always know where personality actually is, during death, for example: “_As to the exact whereabouts of mortal personality during the time intervening between death and survival, we do not know._” [[UB 112:5.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_15)] While this is an interesting statement, we should not read too much into it; just assume that personality is being safeguarded during this critical period of transition. Incidentally, the worlds of the archangels are the seventh group of satellites of the Salvington headquarters cluster and consist of forty-nine worlds. [[UB 37:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p3_7)]

## Archangels Are Dedicated To Creature Survival

> “[Archangels] are . . . dedicated to the work of creature survival and to the furtherance of the ascending career of the mortals of time and space.” [[UB 37:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p5_2)] “The very center of all activities on the first mansion world is the resurrection hall, the enormous temple of personality assembly. This gigantic structure consists of the central rendezvous of the seraphic destiny guardians, the Thought Adjusters, and the archangels of the resurrection. The Life Carriers also function with these celestial beings in the resurrection of the dead.” [[UB 47:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/47#p3_2)]

## Archangel Circuit Established On Urantia, A.D. 30

Shortly after the resurrection of Jesus and the disposition of his body Gabriel called the archangels to him. It was then that “_the circuit of the archangels operated for the first time from Urantia_” and “_the archangel hosts moved to the place of the spiritual polarity of the planet_. . .” [[UB 189:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p3_2)] 

Urantia has been cut off _from_ all normal communication with the universe since the Caligastia rebellion. The exception has been the liaison between Thought Adjusters, especially the self-acting Adjusters of the members of the reserve corps of destiny. The archangel circuit largely serves their own corps’ activities. The messages of Michael are, however, relayed directly via the archangels over their circuit _to_ the isolated worlds. [[UB 46:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p3_4)] [Emphasis added: “from” and “to”] 

Nevertheless, when planetary emergencies occur, even though the constellation circuits to Urantia were severed, the archangels’ circuit can be pressed into service by the superhuman planetary government. A planetary chief of archangels is a daily consultant of the resident governor general of Urantia. [[UB 114:5.4-5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p5_4)]

## Archangel Divisional Headquarters Established Recently

In Paper 37, describing the archangels, there is a tantalizing revelation:

> . . . In more recent times a divisional headquarters of the archangels has been maintained on Urantia. It is this unusual fact that soon arrests the attention of extra-Nebadon student visitors. Among their early observations of intrauniverse transactions is the discovery that many ascendant activities of the Brilliant Evening Stars are directed from the capital of a local system, Satania. On further examination they discover that certain archangel activities are directed from a small and apparently insignificant inhabited world called Urantia. . . . [[UB 37:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p3_3)]

If that doesn’t excite our curiosity, then this next raises further interest: “_Do you grasp the significance of the fact that your lowly and confused planet has become a divisional headquarters for the universe administration and direction of certain archangel activities having to do with the Paradise ascension scheme?_” [[UB 37:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p3_4)] When I read this I always think, No, frankly, I don’t get it.

## What Are They Telling Us That They Aren’T Telling Us?

Taken together, the reason for the establishment of the archangels’ circuit on April 9th, A.D. 30, as well as the locations of the “_place of spiritual polarity_” and the archangels’ divisional headquarters are not disclosed in _The Urantia Book_. The date of the establishment of the latter is not given; only that it occurred “_in recent times_”. Their physical placement may or may not change from time to time. When the Papers were received the spiritual headquarters was rumored to be located in the far western North American continent. Undoubtedly, during Jesus’ time it was located somewhere else, in the Middle East, perhaps. We do not known whether the place of spiritual polarity—the spiritual headquarters, the archangels’ divisional headquarters and their circuit are all situated in the same location.

It is unknown how much longer our isolation will continue. Our “unsettled status” combined with the existence of the divisional headquarters of archangels, is unprecedented. [[UB 114:7.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p7_13)] But the existence of the headquarters “_undoubtedly presages the future concentration of other ascendant activities on the bestowal world of Michael and lends a tremendous and solemn import to the Master’s personal promise, ‘I will come again’ _” .[[UB 37:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p3_4)] Even the chief of seraphim who authored Paper 114 comments on the conundrum: “_Among the many things difficult to understand concerning the future government of Urantia, a prominent one is the location on the planet of a circuit and divisional headquarters of the archangels._” [[UB 114:7.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p7_16)] She also seemed to believe that not much will change until the second personal arrival of Michael: “_At which time sweeping changes will be effected in planetary management._” [[UB 114:7.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p7_16)] In August 1951, one change did occur, although it is not included in _The Urantia Book_. A new regent of the acting planetary prince (our Master Son, Michael) was installed. He is a Melchizedek and his main function appears to be oversight of the progress of the Urantia Revelation.

We can only note that they are attempting to draw our attention to a significant and unusual aspect of the local universe’s ascension program, and that the archangels are involved (archangels being the order most associated with facilitating survival of mortals) and that it has to do with the timing and purpose of the Urantia Revelation. And, oh yes, they do possess the unexplained “_technique of dematerialization._” [[UB 189:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p2_1)]

## When Will The Master Return?

Jesus stipulated the conditions of both his return and for a dispensational adjudication: 

> I also promise that I will sometime return to this world, where I have lived this life in the flesh . . . But the times of the reappearing of the Son of Man are known only in the councils of Paradise; not even the angels of heaven know when this will occur. _However, you should understand that, when this gospel of the kingdom shall have been proclaimed to all the world for the salvation of all peoples, and when the fullness of the age has come to pass, the Father will send you another dispensational bestowal, or else the Son of Man will return to adjudge the age_ . . . [Emphasis added.]

The Master went on to describe the timing of his return and requirement for another visitation: “. . ._when the world has passed through the long winter of material-mindedness and you discern the coming of the spiritual springtime of a new dispensation, should you know that the summertime of a new visitation draws near._” [[UB 176:2.3,5-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_3)]

We recall that there was no dispensational adjudication and roll call at the time of Machiventa Melchizedek’s bestowal; his was an emergency mission—to reiterate the teachings of the One God to the peoples of Urantia in preparation for the bestowal of the Creator Son, Christ Michael . It is significant that there is no mention in _The Urantia Book_, nor was there any record or rumor in any of the extra-revelatory communications, of a planetary roll call of sleeping survivors when the Urantia Papers arrived. While many wonder whether “our” revelation is also an emergency mission, it is certainly a remedial enterprise, and more probably a preparation of the planet for the arrival of the next order of sonship.

## Guess Who’S Coming To Visit

On page 1025, the revelators name names (including Machiventa Melchizedek and others), as to who’s likely to be joining us: “_And all these speculations associated with the certainty of future appearances of both Magisterial and Trinity Teacher Sons, in conjunction with the explicit promise of the Creator Son to return sometime, make Urantia a planet of future uncertainty and render it one of the most interesting and intriguing spheres in all the universe of Nebadon._” They wax prophetic, speculating: “_It is altogether possible that, in some future age when Urantia is approaching the era of light and life, after the affairs of the Lucifer rebellion and the Caligastia secession have been finally adjudicated, we may witness the presence on Urantia, simultaneously, of Machiventa, Adam, Eve, and Christ Michael, as well as either a Magisterial Son or even Trinity Teacher Sons._” [[UB 93:10.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p10_8)]  Wow! And wow again.

Let’s come back down to earth. At this point, any discussion of Trinity Teacher Sons is premature. Their missions are many years—perhaps hundreds of centuries—in the future. We are nowhere near the Age of Light and Life which the Teacher Sons, also known as Daynals, inaugurate and administer. The archangels are mentioned only once in connection with the Trinity Teacher Sons. Further, the Daynals have nothing to do with terminating dispensations. [[UB 20:9.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p9_2)] The authors of _The Urantia Book_, however, place emphasis upon the archangels and their work with the Magisterial Sons, and upon the archangel circuit, so our attention would be better drawn toward the Avonals, the Magisterial Sons, who are the next beings more likely to appear on our world.

## If Only We Were Normal

If Urantia were a normal planet operating on a normal schedule, we would have entertained an Avonal Son on a Magisterial Mission sometime between Adam and Eve and the bestowal of Christ Michael. We weren’t and we didn’t. [[UB 20:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p4_4)] Instead, Prince Caligastia joined up with the Lucifer Rebellion, our Adam and Eve defaulted, and our world was isolated from the loyal planets of the System of Satania. In fact, the wheels came off our train in so many ways, we cannot begin to describe all of the ramifications. Regardless of the double calamity, benefit has accrued to our world in that the creator of the universe of Nebadon bestowed himself upon our lowly world nineteen hundred years ago. He was preceded by Machiventa Melchizedek, two thousand years before that, who prepared the way for Christ Michael’s bestowal mission.

## Archangels Work With The Avonal (Magisterial) Sons

There are about one billion magisterial sons in the grand universe. [[UB 20:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p2_2)] We have never played host to an Avonal Son. Normally, a Paradise Avonal Son on a magisterial mission incarnates one or more times prior to the arrival of an Avonal on a bestowal mission. “Incarnation” means that he appears as a fully visible adult male, living and teaching for a period of years among the mortals of the planet. “_If the Magisterial Son should become temporary ruler of the planet, these archangels would act as the directing heads of all celestial life on that sphere._” [[UB 37:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p3_5)] There can be many magisterial missions on the same planet by the same or different Avonals. More frequently than not they incarnate as adult males on these magisterial visitations. There is only one bestowal mission on a planet, by either a Paradise Creator Son or an Avonal son, in which he is born an infant of woman and grows to maturity. An Avonal son will never come to Urantia on a bestowal mission because our world has already been blessed with a bestowal son—Michael of Nebadon/Jesus of Nazareth. Avonals also engage in multiple judicial, or technical, missions in which they terminate dispensations and inaugurate the next ages. They aren’t usually visible unless the judicial action occurs as part of either the magisterial mission (incarnation) or bestowal mission. [[UB 20:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p2_6)] “_In general, the archangels are assigned to the service and ministry of the Avonal order of sonship_. . . _A corps of one hundred (archangels) accompanies every Paradise Bestowal Son to an inhabited world, being temporarily assigned to him for the duration of such a bestowal_.” (This would presumably include Creator Sons’ bestowals as well). “_Two senior archangels are always assigned as the personal aids of a Paradise Avonal on all planetary missions, whether involving judicial actions, magisterial missions, or bestowal incarnations._” [[UB 37:3.5-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p3_5)]

## Michael’s Prerogative to Adjust Order on “His” Planet

A Master Son, such as Michael of Nebadon has complete latitude as to how and when he and other Sons may adjust their visitations to the worlds. 

> After his elevation to settled sovereignty in a local universe a Paradise Michael is in full control of all other Sons of God functioning in his domain, and he may freely rule in accordance with his concept of the needs of his realms. _A Master Son may at will vary the order of the spiritual adjudication and evolutionary adjustment of the inhabited planets. And such Sons do make and carry out the plans of their own choosing in all matters of special planetary needs, in particular regarding the worlds of their creature sojourn and still more concerning the realm of terminal bestowal, the planet of incarnation in the likeness of mortal flesh._ [[UB 21:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p5_6)] (P 241) (Emphasis added.)

## The World isn’t Coming to an End

Lest anyone entertain notions popular among certain religious groups, let it be understood that our world is not coming to an end. There will be no Armageddon, no end times. We won’t be among an apocalyptic group of 144,000 survivors of a planetary holocaust waiting on a hilltop for seraphic transports. There will certainly be wars, famine, disease and natural disasters; governments will fall, but the plan for our world and its people is for it to evolve toward the stages of light and life. “_A Michael-bestowal world becomes the individual and personal ward of a Master Son and, as such, is wholly subject to his own plans and rulings._” [[UB 20:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p4_5)] The hand of our Master Son can be discerned behind the gift of the Urantia Revelation, a unique and grand experiment in the universe of Nebadon, whose purpose is to prepare the way for the next order of sonship and the next dispensation.

## Timing of The Urantia Revelation

As the revelators were readying the Urantia Papers for publication, they—the new planetary regent, in particular—provided insights into the timing of the revelation, guidance for dissemination of the teachings, and responsibilities of the groups who would bring the book and its teachings to the world: “_We regard The Urantia Book as a feature of the progressive evolution of human society. It is not germane to the spectacular episodes of epochal revolution, even though it may apparently be timed to appear in the wake of one such revolution in human society. The Book belongs to the era immediately to follow the conclusion of the present ideological struggle. That will be the day when men will be willing to seek truth and righteousness. When the chaos of the present confusion has passed, it will be more readily possible to formulate the cosmos of a new and improved era of human relationships. And it is for this better order of affairs on earth that the Book has been made ready._” Next, three tasks were assigned to those willing to assume responsibilities for the dissemination of the revelation: 1) “_An early publication of the Book has been provided so that it may be in hand for the training of leaders and teachers._” 2) “_Its presence is also required to engage the attention of persons of means who may be thus led to provide funds for translations into other languages_. . . . . _the Book must be translated into many tongues._” 3) “_Thousands of study groups must be brought into existence,_. . .” “_You are in association with a revelation of truth which is a part of the natural evolution of religion on this world. The Book is being given to those who are ready for it long before the day of its world-wide mission. Thus will the Book be in readiness when the battle for man’s liberty is finally won and the world is once more made safe for the religion of Jesus and the freedom of mankind._”

## What Do We Have To Show For Our 51 Years Since Publication?

Although we could look back with regret at mistakes made and opportunities wasted, we would be better advised to think as the revelators think: How to evolve our planet toward a higher quality of thinking and enhanced readiness for a new revealer of truth. We have no Dalamatia to build; no Garden to plant, nevertheless, there is urgency implied in the foregoing publication mandate.

We must resolve to address the following:

1. Strive to achieve unity in our groups’ purpose.

2. Realize that time is precious, not to be squandered on pursuits of secondary value.

3. Ensure that our institutions are worthy, bringing men and women to God, and God to men, women and children.

4. Live as one who has worked beside the Master when engaging with believers.

If we sincerely seek to meet these standards, we will be better prepared to participate whenever, and however, the next revelatory chapter opens.

> Carolyn Kendall has been a reader of _The Urantia Book_ since before publication; and along with her parents, brother, and late husband, was a founding member of the First Urantia Society of Chicago. She and her husband Tom served in leadership roles in the Urantia Brotherhood/Fellowship and Urantia Foundation, and she is the mother of five and grandmother of seven. Carolyn has lived in the same house on the street, “Salvington Place,” for forty-five years.
{.is-info}

## References

- Article obtained from: https://urantia-book.org/archive/newsletters/herald/