---
title: "Worshipful Problem Solving"
description: 
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Fellowship, The Urantian, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1990 Carolyn Kendall<br>© 1990 The Urantia Book Fellowship (formerly Urantia Brotherhood)</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Meredith_Sprunger/Prayerful_Problem_Solving">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Prayerful Problem Solving</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_the_urantian#winter/spring-1991-issue-special-conference-issue-ii-1990-general-conference-walking-with-god-snowmass-aspen-colorado">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Winter/Spring 1991 Issue. Special Conference Issue II (1990 General Conference. Walking with God. Snowmass, Aspen, Colorado) — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Lynne_Kulieke/Worshipful_Problem_Solving">
          <span class="pr-2">Worshipful Problem Solving</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


by Carolyn Kendall

The subject of this presentation is “worshipful problem solving,” It is included on page 1095 among the habits which promote religious growth. Before we get into a discussion of solving problems through prayer and worship, let's first establish whether we actually _do_ have problems in this life. Are problems real? Do we exaggerate situations, magnifying them all out of proportion to their importance? What is the human condition on our world? Is it possible to deny suffering and attain a level of blissful oblivion?

In Buddhism, the Second Noble Truth involves the idea of one's _attachment_ to things or to other persons that influences how one reacts; i.e., the death of another doesn't grieve if we're not _attached_ to him; loss of possessions doesn't matter if we're not _attached_ to them; our own death is not important if we're not _attached_ to life, and so on. The Third Noble. Truth teaches that if we overcome desire and attachment by rising above illusions, we will cease to suffer. Buddhism does not deny the existence of suffering, or “dukka”; it teaches an _attitude_ toward suffering where one can become immune to suffering.

In the Old Testament, the author of the book of Job never presumes that suffering is just, or that we should harden our heart to the misery of others. His question: Why, who or what causes it? Is one himself responsible? To atheists, suffering is proof that there is no God of love, no controlling spirit. We live, we suffer, we die, all to no purpose.

> “To the unbelieving materialist, man is simply an evolutionary accident. His hopes of survival are strung on a figment of mortal imagination; his fears, loves, longings, and beliefs are but the reaction of the incidental juxtaposition of certain lifeless atoms of matter. No display of energy nor expression of trust can carry him beyond the grave. The devotional labors and inspirational genius of the best of men are doomed to be extinguished by death, the long and lonely night of eternal oblivion and soul extinction. Nameless despair is man's only reward for living and toiling under the temporal sun of mortal existence. Each day of life slowly and surely tightens the grasp of a pitiless doom which a hostile and relentless universe of matter has decreed shall be the crowning insult to everything in human desire which is beautiful, noble, lofty, and good.” (<a id="a44_869"></a>[UB 102:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/102#p0_1))

Again, are problems real? Yes, in the view of the majority of people, problems are real and terrible on our world. They are not imaginary. The authors of _The Urantia Book_ do not minimize such experiences. Eve is described as never fully recovering from the effects of the 30-day period of mental suffering and spiritual sorrow when Adam had gone off alone in anguish after the default. No one has ever gone through an entire life without some kind of pain, or being confronted with some sort of dire circumstance to be solved. We can't pretend problems don't exist. How to look at them and how to deal with them are the real questions requiring our attention.

> “Many things which happen in the course of a human life are hard to understand, difficult to reconcile with the idea that this is a universe in which truth prevails and in which righteousness triumphs. It so often appears that slander, lies, dishonesty, and unrighteousness — sin — prevails.” (<a id="a48_296"></a>[UB 194:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p3_2))

> “But such is not man's end and eternal destiny; such a vision is but the cry of despair uttered by some wandering soul who has become lost in spiritual darkness, and who bravely struggles on in the face of the mechanistic sophistries of a material philosophy, blinded by the confusion and distortion of a complex learning. And all this doom of darkness and all this destiny of despair are forever dispelled by one brave stretch of faith on the part of the most humble and unlearned of God's children on earth.” ([UB 102:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/102#p0_2))

There is reassurance on [UB 195:5.12-13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p5_12) “As you view the world, remember that the black patches of evil are shown against a white background of ultimate good. You don't see merely white patches which show up against a black background of evil. When there is so much good to proclaim, why...dwell on evil in the world fust because it appears to be a fact? The spiritual values of truth are more uplifting than the phenomenon of evil.” There is a balance to be found here.

Let's look at how Rodan listed the steps in problem solving on <a id="a54_63"></a>[UB 160:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/160#p1_7).

1. You have “to locate the difficulty, isolate the problem, and frankly recognize its nature and gravity.”
2. You have to free your mind of passion, of biasprejudices that interfere with the evaluation of the factors that make up the problem.
3. The solution “requires sincerity and courage.” Only when you are “honest and brave” can you work your way through the confusing maze of many problems.
4. You must be “equipped with... wisdom of mind and charm of personality” in order to “win the support and cooperation” of others. Learn to persuade others; you have to have tact and tolerance.
5. You must isolate yourself frequently in worshipful meditation in order to gather strength and wisdom.

Problems and problem solving can also be broken down into other cross sections. Keeping Rodan's advice in mind, problems may be attacked from three angles:

1. Identifying types of problems and their causes. Using _The Urantia Book_ as guidance, certain beings or other alleged “entities” may be eliminated as the source of problems.
2. Dealing with two types of problems — the ones you can do something about, and the ones you can't do anything about.
3. Preventive maintenance — material and spiritual.

## Material Problems, Their Causes And Prevention

1. _God does not cause problems_. All catastrophic disasters, whether natural or otherwise — earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tornados, floods, hurricanes, drought, famine, war, disease, fires, plane crashes, auto accidents, domestic upheavals, crime — none of these things are caused either directly or indirectly by God. “_The Gods who go on a rampage... Who inflict their judgments of displeasure... these are the Gods of primitive religions; they are not the Gods who live and rule the universe._” (<a id="a71_503"></a>[UB 4:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p5_3)) God does not punish one innocent person because of the mistakes another has committed. Neither does the Thought Adjuster cause personal problems; the Adjuster is an actual fragment — a part — of God the Father.
	We can't predict when natural disasters will occur, only that they _will_ occur. Prudence should teach us not to live on an earthquake fault, downslope from an erupting volcano, downstream from a dam, or on an eroding shore line. One ought not build a home on a sand dune, a flood plain, next door to a nuclear reactor or under high-tension wires. Tornados are sporadic, but more common in some areas than others. Weigh the risks and make decisions with knowledge and discretion. Many accidents can be avoided. Clumsiness and carelessness are things we can do something about.
	Crime and war — other than avoiding living where either are likely to occur — are inevitable consequences of an imperfect world. “_Today, nations are directed by people who have a superabundance of ideas, but are poverty stricken in ideals. That is the explanation of poverty, divorce, war and racial hatreds._” (<a id="a73_314"></a>[UB 111:4.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p4_10)) “_War is an animalistic reaction to misunderstandings and irritations._” (<a id="a73_435"></a>[UB 70:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/70#p1_2)) “_War persists because man is human, evolved from the animals, and all animals are bellicose._” (<a id="a73_575"></a>[UB 70:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/70#p1_7)) “_...[W]hen closely associated uncultured people irritate and offend each other._” (<a id="a73_702"></a>[UB 63:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/63#p4_9)) “The immature individual arouses the antagonisms of his fellows.” ([UB 160:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/160#p3_3)) “_It is the lack of natural brotherly affection that now stands in the way of immediate realization of the brotherhood of man on Urantia._” (<a id="a73_960"></a>[UB 68:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/68#p1_1))
2. _Lucifer, Satan, the Devil or the Fall of Adam and Eve_. None of these beings or events have anything _directly_ to do with the majority of problems that befall the average person. Certainly, this is true of natural disasters, accidents, violence, or social disharmony. There is an _indirect_ relationship between the actions of these being in times past, and some of the conditions that have retarded our planet. For example, as a consequence of the failure of Adam and Eve to leave a sufficient number of their progeny on our world, we are not immune to viral and bacterial diseases. Because of the absence of supermortal judges — due to the Caligastia betrayal and default of Adam and Eve — who would have been competent to rule on the quality of human genetic stocks, our world has experienced the proliferation of all groups, good and bad. Consequently, we suffer an uncommonly large proportion of the mentally ill, mentally retarded, inherited physical diseases, as well as those individuals who engage in self-destructive, anti-social or criminal behavior. As individuals, we cannot reconstitute our own genes to enhance the quality of our lives, but we can make personal choices that could affect the quality of future generations.
	Lucifer rastaken into custody when Michael became sovereign of Nebadon and is now a prisoner on a Jerusem satellite world. Satan visited our world until the time of the preparation of these papers, but he was also apprehended and imprisoned. (<a id="a75_244"></a>[UB 53:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p9_3)) Caligastia, the “Devil,” is still free, but he has no power to enter our minds because of the universal bestowal of Thought Adjusters and the Spirit of Truth. (<a id="a75_447"></a>[UB 53:8.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p8_6)) There is a tradition that the Devil works to drive a wedge between good men — between friends — but that is not in _The Urantia Book_. “_The devil has been given a great deal of credit for evil which does not belong to him...In general, when weak and dissolute mortals are supposed to be under the influence of devils and demons, they are merely being dominated by their own inherent and debased tendencies, being led astray by their own natural propensities._” (<a id="a75_953"></a>[UB 53:8.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/53#p8_9))
3. _Evil spirits and demons are not responsible for our problems_. All of the stray and rebellious midwayers, along with their leader, Beelzebub, have been held prisoner since Pentecost and can no longer invade weak or inferior minds. (<a id="a76_236"></a>[UB 77:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p7_8), <a id="a76_279"></a>[UB 146:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p7_1)) Jesus denounced belief in witches and mandrakes. (<a id="a76_374"></a>[UB 150:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/150#p3_8))
4. _Astrological influences not responsible_. “_The courses of the stars in the heavens have nothing whatever to do with the events of human life on earth._” (<a id="a77_159"></a>[UB 150:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/150#p3_3))
5. _Ghosts not responsible_. “The spirits of the dead do not come back to communicate with their families or their onetime friends among the living,” (<a id="a78_151"></a>[UB 150:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/150#p3_5), <a id="a78_196"></a>[UB 112:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p3_7), <a id="a78_241"></a>[UB 146:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p7_2), <a id="a78_286"></a>[UB 39:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/39#p4_15))
6. _Seraphim are not responsible for painful or coil situations_. However, “_they constantly manipulate the mortal environment for the purpose of augmenting the cosmic insight._”. They “_function as teachers...by guiding the footsteps of the human personality into paths of new and progressive experiences. To accept the guidance of a seraphim rarely means attaining a life of ease._” Rather, “_...you encounter the rugged hills of moral choosing and spiritual progress._” (<a id="a79_474"></a>[UB 113:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/113#p4_3)) In times of peace and prosperity they likely become most active. Jesus warned the apostles: “_Tempt not the angels of your supervision to lead you in troublous ways as a loving discipline designed to save your ease-drifting souls._” (<a id="a79_753"></a>[UB 178:1.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/178#p1_10)) When some new and challenging problem arises unexpectedly requiring unusual decision making, you might suspect your seraphim have had something to do with it. Accept the problem as an opportunity for growth, not something to whine and complain about. Remember that Jesus warned that all who enter the kingdom are not exempt from accidents and catastrophes. Believing in the Father will not keep you safe from trouble; however, such faith assures that you will be unafraid when trouble comes. If you believe, you will enter the pathway to trouble. Jesus did not promise to deliver you from adversity, but he promised to go with you through all of it. (<a id="a79_1451"></a>[UB 159:3.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p3_13))
7. _Psyckic phenomena and UFOs_. From the standpoint of _The Urantia Book_, no mention is made of beings who exert problem-solving influence upon psychics, or of fortune tellers who are able to envision future events. There is no mention of _human_ visitors from other planets — those who supposedly come to advise us concerning our affairs, No mention is made of near-death experiences; the relevance of such experience to human problems cannot be verified.
8. _Contacts from midwayers, seraphim, Thought Adjusters, and higher beings_. Such contacts do not fall into the realm of “psychic phenomena.” An individual who has attained the first circle may be directly contacted by his/her Adjuster. (<a id="a81_239"></a>[UB 110:6.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_15)) If one were a reservist, there might be contact by a midwayer, but there are approximately 1000 reservists and 1100 secondary midwayers who work with the reservists. (<a id="a81_453"></a>[UB 114:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p7_8), <a id="a81_498"></a>[UB 77:8.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p8_10)) If one were a contact reservist, one could be contacted by any kind of being visiting or resident on the planet, who needed the assistance of a human associate. All of these are possible, according to _The Urantia Book_, but also rare, and such beings are never responsible for pain and suffering. One thing these beings never do is abrogate mortal free will. (<a id="a81_904"></a>[UB 5:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p6_8))
9. _Genetic inheritance, envinonment, chanacter, ability and skill_. It has been said that heredity deals the cards, but environment plays them. We are all both victims and winners in the heredity sweepstakes. Abraham's progenitors were of such quality that the Melchizedeks were able to project that in a certain generation, the offspring “_would be characterized by intelligence, initiative, sagacity and sincerity._” (<a id="a82_421"></a>[UB 93:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p5_3)) “_Personality is basically changeless; that which changes-grows — is the moral character... While inherited urges cannot be modified, emotional reactions to the urges can be changed; therefore the moral nature can be modified, character can be improved._” (<a id="a82_722"></a>[UB 140:4.7-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/140#p4_7)) Rodan said, “_Character is something more than mere mind and morals,_” and he recommends marriage as the most effective and ideal social relationship: “_...[I]t is marriage that draws forth those precious impulses and higher motives which are indispensable for the development of a strong character._” (<a id="a82_1070"></a>[UB 160:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/160#p2_6)) Character defects and maladaptation to one's vocation probably account for most of life's problems. Cain killed his half-brother Abel. Their characters and inheritance are compared on <a id="a82_1299"></a>[UB 76:2.1-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/76#p2_1). Had Abel lived to be 25 or 30 , “_his superb inheritance would...have shown itself._” “_A good environment cannot...overcome the character handicaps of a base heredity, a bad environment can...spoil an excellent inheritance during the younger years of life. Good social environment and proper education are indispensable for...getting the most out of a good inheritance._”
	One can avoid much unhappiness and frustration by finding work appropriate to one's interests, training and education. “_Ability is that which you inherit, while skill is what you acquire. Life is not real to one who cannot do some one thing well, expertly. Skill is one of the real sources of the satisfaction of living._” (<a id="a83_326"></a>[UB 160:4.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/160#p4_11)) Jesus trained his three brothers in carpentry so they could support their mother and sisters, and later, their own families. (<a id="a83_499"></a>[UB 128:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/128#p2_2)) It is recommended that one become trained in one or more methods of making a living so that one can get a job when transiently unemployed in one's chosen profession. (<a id="a83_711"></a>[UB 81:6.32](/en/The_Urantia_Book/81#p6_32)) We are told we need better job placement techniques.
	Jesus and John Mark talked about the importance of a good home life and its effect upon the social, intellectual, moral and spiritual development of children. (<a id="a84_161"></a>[UB 177:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/177#p2_5)) In all likelihood, most parents do the best they know how; very few mothers and fathers set out deliberately to ruin their children's lives.
10. _Mental and emotional problems_. Depression seems to afflict more people than other types of mental disorders. Many folks grow up with feelings of helplessness and inferiority. On the island of Crete, Jesus encountered a young man who was dejected. Jesus made an approach to his “soul.” He first asked for help-directions on how to get to the next town. As he started to leave, he turned and offered him guidance. Jesus suggested goals for him, ordered him to stand up like a man, not to slouch, assured him that all the good things in the universe were on his side. “_The sun shines on you the same as on the richest, most powerful man on earth. You're strong; your physical equipment is better than average. Don't be a slave to fear like an animal. Train your mind to work to solve problems. The indwelling spirit will inspire your mind to control itself and activate the body by getting rid of fear._” (<a id="a85_910"></a>[UB 130:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p6_3))
11. _Govemment agencies, financial institutions_. Sometimes we suspect credit card companies, financial institutions, utility companies, or the IRS are out to get us, and sometimes they are through no fault of our own. However, we can avoid difficulties by simply paying bills, insurance premiums, licenses and taxes in a timely manner. Jesus always paid his taxes; he worked to support his own family, and later saw to it that the apostles' families were cared for. He was not oblivious to, or disdainful of, the requirements of life in a complex society.
12. _Health and nutrition_. The leading causes of death are heart disease and cancer. Many of the causes of these and other diseases are avoidable, others aren't — some are hereditary. Good nutrition and health habits are essential. The book warns against deliberately defiling the physical body, as well as against physical and mental poisons which interfere with the Thought Adjuster's work in the mind. (<a id="a87_407"></a>[UB 110:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p1_5))
13. _Social problems_. Many of our problems relate to inequities and misunderstandings between ourselves and our neighbors or fellow employees. During Jesus', Gonod's and Ganid's stopover in Caesarea on the trip to Rome, they encountered a young man who was repairing the steering paddle of their ship. He complained, “_If the Gods are so interested in me, why don't they remove the cruel and unjust foreman of this workshop?” Jesus answered, “Since you know the ways of kindness and value justice, perhaps the 'Gods' have brought him near you so that you can lead him into the better way. As it is, this man is your master because his evil ways control you. Assert your mastery over the situation by the power of your goodness. I predict the good in you will overcome the evil in him. You are more blessed with truth than is the other man; his need should challenge you. You aren't a coward. You wouldn't watch a man drown. Don't let this man's soul flounder in darkness._” <a id="a88_975"></a>[UB 130:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p2_4)

## Worshipful Problem Solving

_The Urantia Book_ has a lot to say about prayer and worship. Sometimes I think people hesitate to pray, lest they do it the “wrong” way. Even when they are in difficulty, or have serious problems, they feel guilty about praying because they haven't been doing it regularly — when everything went well. Chances are, they have been praying and worshiping right along, without being aware that their spiritual thoughts were actually prayer or worship.

Generally speaking, if one demanded of God, “Solve all my material and emotional problems for me” and then sat back and waited, one would be waiting a long time for something to happen. It doesn't work that way because God isn't a genie who responds to commands, The book presents guidelines for prayer and worship. The idea in prayer is to help one prepare for the challenges that are inevitable, to build up spiritual resources _before_ problems arise in order to react with grace and fortitude when they do come.

There are a few general things to know about prayer and worship: The urge to pray is often prompted by the seraphim. (<a id="a96_118"></a>[UB 113:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/113#p4_4)) The Spirit never drives, only leads. (<a id="a96_201"></a>[UB 34:6.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p6_11)) Pray when all goes well, not only in times of trouble. (<a id="a96_302"></a>[UB 146:2.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_12)) There's no need to be overanxious about your common needs. (<a id="a96_409"></a>[UB 146:2.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_16)) The Father knows what you need even before you think to ask. (???) Worship is the measure of the soul's detachment from the material universe, and one's attachment to spiritual realities. (However) worship — contemplation — must alternate with service, contact with material reality. (<a id="a96_741"></a>[UB 143:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/143#p7_3)) Be persistent, always pray, don't become discouraged. Persistence changes your attitude; enlarges your soul's capacity for receptivity. (<a id="a96_923"></a>[UB 144:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p2_3)) There are many specific things we can remember about prayer and worship:

1. _Private_. Make your petitions in secret. Don't let others hear your personal prayers. Soul prayer is a personal matter. (<a id="a98_125"></a>[UB 146:2.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_12)) Jesus was against praying in public, Go into a room and close the door. Or pray outdoors in a natural setting. (<a id="a98_284"></a>[UB 144:3.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p3_14)) Rodan said of Jesus that he goes off by himself to commune with the Father; he practices the isolation of worshipful meditation. (<a id="a98_461"></a>[UB 160:1.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/160#p1_10)) All of Jesus' praying was done in the spirit and heart-silently. (<a id="a98_574"></a>[UB 144:4.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p4_10))
2. _No intermeliaries except Jesus_. Pray directly to the heavenly Father. No human intermediaries are needed. ( <a id="a99_113"></a>[UB 108:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p2_4) ) Adam taught the people of his time never to worship anyone but God. (<a id="a99_228"></a>[UB 74:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/74#p4_5)) Many prayers may not proceed beyond the local universe, except adoration of the Father. (<a id="a99_360"></a>[UB 5:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p3_2)) If you are in doubt as to whether your petition is proper, present your prayers to Jesus; he will present them to the appropriate beings. (<a id="a99_540"></a>[UB 146:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_4)) Ask in his name. (<a id="a99_603"></a>[UB 180:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/180#p6_7))
3. _No language needed_. Words are irrelevant to prayer. God answers the soul's attitude, not the words. (<a id="a100_106"></a>[UB 91:8.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/91#p8_12)) No need for eloquence. (<a id="a100_175"></a>[UB 91:7.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/91#p7_13)) Don't use set, formal prayers; they should be personal and spontaneous expressions. (<a id="a100_305"></a>[UB 144:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p2_2)) Use everyday language, not a solemn style. (<a id="a100_394"></a>[UB 87:6.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/87#p6_14)) One might imagine a dialogue between oneself and God. (<a id="a100_494"></a>[UB 91:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/91#p6_4)) No need for fasting, repetitious phrases, sounds, sacrifices. (<a id="a100_600"></a>[UB 146:2.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_15)) Prayer is sublime thinking. Worship is effortless attention, ideal soul rest, restful spiritual exertion. (<a id="a100_754"></a>[UB 143:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/143#p7_7)) Prayer is the breath of the soul.  (<a id="a100_835"></a>[UB 144:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p2_3)) The Father accepts their sincere worship no matter how crude their concept of Deity. (<a id="a100_966"></a>[UB 142:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/142#p3_3))
4. _Most prayers are heard and ansuered, eventually_. Sincere prayer will be heard. Your wisdom determines the answer. To receive mercy, you must show mercy. The Father forgives before you ask for forgiveness. You will appreciate forgiveness when you have forgiven others. (<a id="a101_274"></a>[UB 146:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_4)) Be silent after prayer to allow the Thought Adjuster to speak to the listening soul. (<a id="a101_405"></a>[UB 146:2.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_17)) The Father speaks to one in an attitude of worship. (1641) The answer to prayer is often in one's changed attitudes. (<a id="a101_570"></a>[UB 118:10.23](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p10_23)) Some prayers are so advanced, they can only be answered in eternity. (<a id="a101_689"></a>[UB 168:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/168#p4_6)) When one becomes fully dedicated to doing the Father's will — when one becomes like God — all petitions will be answered. (<a id="a101_857"></a>[UB 146:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_7))
5. _Ethical prayers_. Prayer must be consistent with known and established natural laws. (<a id="a102_90"></a>[UB 146:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_3)) Prayer cannot delay time or transcend space. (<a id="a102_181"></a>[UB 146:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_5)) Avoid praying for yourself. (<a id="a102_255"></a>[UB 146:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_2)) Jesus rarely prayed for himself. (<a id="a102_334"></a>[UB 144:3.23](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p3_23)) Selfish, material requests die as they are spoken. (<a id="a102_433"></a>[UB 7:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/7#p3_6)) Avoid materialistic praying. Pray for the spiritual progress of others. Pray for the sick and afflicted, but prayer is not a substitute for ministry to them. Pray for those who curse you and persecute you. Pray for divine guidance. Petition for a knowledge of the Father. It is not proper to pray for human knowledge or special skill. (<a id="a102_810"></a>[UB 146:2.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/146#p2_14)) Prayer cannot atone for lack of genuine compassion. (<a id="a102_910"></a>[UB 180:5.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/180#p5_12)) Do not ask God to solve your difficulties, but don't hesitate to ask him for wisdom and spiritual strength. (<a id="a102_1066"></a>[UB 91:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/91#p6_6))
6. _Effect of prayer on the individual_. Prayer cannot cure organic disease, but contributes to the cure of mental or nervous ailments. (<a id="a103_137"></a>[UB 91:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/91#p6_2)). Prayer changes your attitude, not God's. (1638) Prayer makes you less thinking, but more realizing. It expands insight, not knowledge. Prayer sustains, worship is creative. (<a id="a103_355"></a>[UB 143:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/143#p7_5)) Even ill-advised or impossible prayers of one who is sincere expands the soul's capacity. Prayer promotes detachment from the daily routine, monotony, the daily grind. Prayer is an antidote for harmful introspection. It recharges spiritual batteries of the soul. It is the longing look of the child to the Father. The psychologic process of exchanging human will for the divine will. (<a id="a103_785"></a>[UB 144:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p4_9)) Jesus prayed to gather strength for ordinary conflicts, energy for solutions of higher problems of the moral and spiritual nature. (<a id="a103_962"></a>[UB 160:1.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/160#p1_10)) Prayer digs deeper channels so that divine bestowals may flow to the heart and soul. (<a id="a103_1095"></a>[UB 194:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p4_3)) Prayer enriches life. (<a id="a103_1163"></a>[UB 102:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/102#p4_5))
7. _Effect of worship on the individual_. Worship illuminates destiny. (<a id="a104_72"></a>[UB 102:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/102#p4_5)) It brings salvation for pleasure-seeking mortals. (<a id="a104_168"></a>[UB 144:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p4_7)) Worship brings relaxation which renews, illumination that inspires the soul, gives courage to face problems, self-understanding that obliterates debilitating fear, conscious union with divinity — assurance of becoming Godlike. Communion relieves tension, removes conflicts. (<a id="a104_488"></a>[UB 160:1.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/160#p1_12)) Inward effect of worship — one becomes illuminated; the outward effect-one engages in more service. (<a id="a104_636"></a>[UB 106:9.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p9_12)) Worship helps identify with the whole; the son with the Father; time striking step with eternity. (<a id="a104_782"></a>[UB 143:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/143#p7_8)) Tuning in the soul to catch universe broadcasts of the Universal Father. (<a id="a104_901"></a>[UB 144:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p4_8))

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Meredith_Sprunger/Prayerful_Problem_Solving">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Prayerful Problem Solving</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_the_urantian#winter/spring-1991-issue-special-conference-issue-ii-1990-general-conference-walking-with-god-snowmass-aspen-colorado">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Winter/Spring 1991 Issue. Special Conference Issue II (1990 General Conference. Walking with God. Snowmass, Aspen, Colorado) — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Lynne_Kulieke/Worshipful_Problem_Solving">
          <span class="pr-2">Worshipful Problem Solving</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
