---
title: "1 — 20"
description: "The Gospel of Barnabas"
published: true
date: 2024-11-27T23:49:26Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-27T23:49:26Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/Prologue">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Prologue</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/21_40">
          <span class="pr-2">21 — 40</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## 1\. In this first chapter is contained the annunciation of the angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary concerning the birth of Jesus.

In these last years a virgin called Mary, of the lineage of David, of the tribe of Judah, was visited by the angel Gabriel from God. This virgin, living in all holiness without any offence, being blameless and abiding in prayer with fastings, being one day alone, there entered into her chamber the angel Gabriel, and he saluted her, saying: ‘God be with thee, O Mary.’

The virgin was affrighted at the appearance of the angel; but the angel comforted her saying: ‘Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favour with God, who hath chosen thee to be mother of a prophet, whom he will send to the people of Israel in order that they may walk in his laws with truth of heart.’ The virgin answered: ‘Now how shall I bring forth sons, seeing I know not a man?’ The angel answered: ‘O Mary, God who made man without a man is able to generate in thee man without a man, because with him nothing is impossible.’ Mary answered: ‘I know that God is almighty, therefore his will be done.’ The angel answered: ‘Now be conceived in thee the prophet, whom thou shalt name Jesus: and thou shalt keep him from wine and from strong drink and from every unclean meat, because the child is an holy one of God.’ Mary bowed herself with humility, saying: ‘Behold the handmaid of God, be it done according to thy word.’ The angel departed, and the virgin glorified God, saying: Know, O my soul, the greatness of God, and exult, my spirit, in God my Saviour; for he hath regarded the lowliness of his handmaiden, insomuch that I shall be called blessed by all the nations, for he that is mighty hath made me great, and blessed be his holy name. For his mercy extendeth from generation to generation of them that fear him. Mighty hath he made his hand, and he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of his heart. He hath put down the mighty from their seat, and hath exalted the humble. Him who hath been hungry hath he filled with good things, and the rich he hath sent empty away. For he keepeth in memory the promises made to Abraham and to his son for ever.’



## 2\. The warning of the angel Gabriel given to Joseph concerning the conception of the Virgin Mary.

Mary having known the will of God, fearing the people, lest they should take offence at her being great with child, and should stone her as guilty of fornication, chose a companion of her own lineage, a man by name called Joseph, of blameless life: for he as a righteous man feared God and served him with fastings and prayers, living by the works of his hands, for he was a carpenter.

Such a man the virgin knowing, chose him for her companion and revealed to him the divine counsel.

Joseph being a righteous man, when he perceived that Mary was great with child, was minded to put her away because he feared God. Behold, whilst he slept, he was rebuked by the angel of God saying, ‘O Joseph, why art thou minded to put away Mary thy wife? Know that whatsoever hath been wrought in her hath all been done by the will of God. The virgin shall bring forth a son, whom thou shall call by the name Jesus; whom thou shalt keep from wine and strong drink and from every unclean meat, because he is an holy one of God from his mother's womb. He is a prophet of God sent unto the people of Israel, in order that he may convert Judah to his heart, and that Israel may walk in the law of the Lord, as it is written in the law of Moses. He shall come with great power, which God shall give him, and shall work great miracles, whereby many shall be saved.’

Joseph, arising from sleep, gave thanks to God, and abode with Mary all his life, serving God with all sincerity.



## 3\. Wonderful birth of Jesus and appearance of angels praising God.

There reigned at that time in Judaea Herod, by decree of Caesar Augustus, and Pilate was governor in the priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas. Wherefore, by decree of Augustus, all the world was enrolled; wherefore each one went to his own country, and they presented themselves by their own tribes to be enrolled. Joseph accordingly departed from Nazareth, a city of Galilee, with Mary his wife, great with child, to go to Bethlehem (for that it was his city, he being of the lineage of David), in order that he might be enrolled according to the decree of Caesar. Joseph having arrived at Bethlehem, for that the city was small, and great the multitude of them that were strangers there, he found no place, wherefore he took lodging outside the city in a lodging made for a shepherds' shelter. While Joseph abode there the days were fulfilled for Mary to bring forth. The virgin was surrounded by a light exceeding bright, and brought forth her son without pain, whom she took in her arms, and wrapping him in swaddling-clothes, laid him in the manger, because there was no room in the inn. There came with gladness a great multitude of angels to the inn, blessing God and announcing peace to them that fear God. Mary and Joseph praised the Lord for the birth of Jesus, and with greatest joy nurtured him.



## 4\. Angels announce to the shepherds the birth of Jesus, and they, after having found him, announce him.

At that time the shepherds were watching over their flock, as is their custom. And, behold, they were surrounded by an exceeding bright light, out of which appeared to them an angel, who blessed God. The shepherds were filled with fear by reason of the sudden light and the appearance of the angel: ‘Behold, I announce to you a great joy, for there is born in the city of David a child who is a prophet of the Lord; who bringeth great salvation to the house of Israel. The child ye shall find in the manger, with his mother, who blesseth God.’ And when he had said this there came a great multitude of angels blessing God, announcing peace to them that have good will. When the angels were departed, the shepherds spake among themselves, saying: ‘Let us go even unto Bethlehem, and see the word which God by his angel hath announced to us.’ There came many shepherds to Bethlehem seeking the new-born babe, and they found outside the city the child that was born, according to the word of the angel, lying in the manger. They therefore made obeisance to him, and gave to the mother that which they had, announcing to her what they had heard and seen. Mary therefore kept all these things in her heart, and Joseph \[likewise\], giving thanks to God. The shepherds returned to their flocks, announcing to everyone how great a thing they had seen. And so the whole hill-country of Judaea was filled with fear, and every man laid up this word in his heart, saying: ‘What, think we, shall this child be?’



## 5\. Circumcision of Jesus.

When the eight days were fulfilled according to the law of the Lord, as it is written in the book of Moses, they took the child and carried him to the temple to circumcise him. And so they circumcised the child, and gave him the name Jesus, as the angel of the Lord had said before he was conceived in the womb. Mary and Joseph perceived that the child must needs be for the salvation and ruin of many. Wherefore they feared God, and kept the child with fear of God.



## 6\. Three magi are led by a star in the east to Judaea, and, finding Jesus, make obeisance to him and gifts.

In the reign of Herod, king of Judaea, when Jesus was born, three magi in the parts of the east were observing the stars of heaven. Whereupon appeared to them a star of great brightness, wherefore having concluded among themselves, they came to Judaea, guided by the star, which went before them, and having arrived at Jerusalem they asked where was born the King of the Jews. And when Herod heard this he was affrighted, and all the city was troubled. Herod therefore called together the priests and the scribes, saying: ‘Where should Christ be born?’ They answered that he should be born in Bethlehem; for thus it is written by the prophet: ‘And thou, Bethlehem, art not little among the princes of Judah: for out of thee shall come forth a leader, who shall lead my people Israel.’

Herod accordingly called together the magi and asked them concerning their coming: who answered that they had seen a star in the east, which had guided them thither, wherefore they wished with gifts to worship this new King manifested by his star.

Then said Herod: ‘Go to Bethlehem and search out with all diligence concerning the child; and when ye have found him, come and tell it to me, because I also would fain come and worship him.’ And this he spake deceitfully.



## 7\. The visitation of Jesus by magi, and their return to their own country, with the warning of Jesus given to them in a dream.

The magi therefore departed out of Jerusalem, and lo, the star which appeared to them in the east went before them. Seeing the star the magi were filled with gladness. And so having come to Bethlehem, outside the city, they saw the star standing still above the inn where Jesus was born. The magi therefore went thither, and entering the dwelling found the child with his mother, and bending down they did obeisance to him. And the magi presented unto him spices, with silver and gold, recounting to the virgin all that they had seen.

Whereupon, while sleeping, they were warned by the child not to go to Herod; so departing by another way they returned to their own home, announcing all that they had seen in Judaea.



## 8\. Jesus is carried in flight to Egypt, and Herod massacres the innocent children.

Herod seeing that the magi did not return, believed himself mocked of them; whereupon he determined to put to death the child that was born. But behold while Joseph was sleeping there appeared to him the angel of the Lord, saying: ‘Arise up quickly, and take the child with his mother and go into Egypt, for Herod willeth to slay him.’ Joseph arose with great fear, and took Mary with the child, and they went into Egypt, and there they abode until the death of Herod; who, believing himself derided of the magi, sent his soldiers to slay all the new-born children in Bethlehem. The soldiers therefore came and slew all the children that were there, as Herod had commanded them. Whereby were fulfilled the words of the prophet, saying: ‘Lamentation and great weeping are there in Ramah; Rachel lamenteth for her sons, but consolation is not given her because they are not.’



## 9\. Jesus, having returned to Judaea, holds a wondrous disputation with the doctors, having come to the age of twelve years.

When Herod was dead, behold the angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph, saying: ‘Return into Judaea, for they are dead that willed the death of the child.’ Joseph therefore took the child with Mary (he having come to the age of seven years), and came to Judaea; whence, hearing that Archelaus, son of Herod, was reigning in Judaea, he went into Galilee, fearing to remain in Judaea; and they went to dwell at Nazareth.

The child grew in grace and wisdom before God and before men.

Jesus, having come to the age of twelve years, went up with Mary and Joseph to Jerusalem to worship there according to the law of the Lord written in the book of Moses. When their prayers were ended they departed, having lost Jesus, because they thought that he was returned home with their kinsfolk. Mary therefore returned with Joseph to Jerusalem, seeking Jesus among kinsfolk and neighbors. The third day they found the child in the temple, in the midst of the doctors, disputing with them concerning the law. And every one was amazed at his questions and answers, saying: ‘How can there be such doctrine in him, seeing he is so small and hath not learned to read?’

Mary reproved him, saying: ‘Son, what hast thou done to us? Behold I and thy father have sought thee for three days sorrowing.’ Jesus answered: ‘Know ye not that the service of God ought to come before father and mother?’ Jesus then went down with his mother and Joseph to Nazareth, and was subject to them with humility and reverence.



## 10\. Jesus, at the age of thirty years, on Mount Olives, miraculously receiveth the gospel from the angel Gabriel.

Jesus having come to the age of thirty years, as he himself said unto me, went up to Mount Olives with his mother to gather olives. Then at midday as he was praying, when he came to these words: ‘Lord, with mercy...,’ he was surrounded by an exceeding bright light and by an infinite multitude of angels, who were saying: ‘Blessed be God.’ The angel Gabriel presented to him as it were a shining mirror, a book, which descended into the heart of Jesus, in which he had knowledge of what God hath done and what hath said and what God willeth insomuch that everything was laid bare and open to him; as he said unto me: ‘Believe, Barnabas, that I know every prophet with every prophecy, insomuch that whatever I say the whole hath come forth from that book.’

Jesus, having received this vision, and knowing that he was a prophet sent to the house of Israel, revealed all to Mary his mother, telling her that he needs must suffer great persecution for the honour of God, and that he could not any longer abide with her to serve her. Whereupon, having heard this, Mary answered: ‘Son, ere thou wast born all was announced to me; wherefore blessed be the holy name of God.’ Jesus departed therefore that day from his mother to attend to his prophetic office.



## 11\. Jesus miraculously healeth a leper, and goeth into Jerusalem.

Jesus descending from the mountain to come into Jerusalem, met a leper, who by divine inspiration knew Jesus to be a prophet. Therefore, with tears he prayed him, saying: ‘Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on me.’ Jesus answered: ‘What wilt thou, brother, that I should do unto thee?’

The leper answered: ‘Lord, give me health.’

Jesus reproved him, saying: ‘Thou art foolish; pray to God who created thee, and he will give thee health; for I am a man, as thou art.’ The leper answered: ‘I know that thou, Lord, art a man, but an holy one of the Lord. Wherefore pray thou to God and he will give me health.’ Then Jesus, sighing, said: ‘Lord God Almighty, for the love of thy holy prophets give health to this sick man.’ Then, having said this, he said, touching the sick man with his hands in the name of God: ‘O brother, receive thy health!’ And when he had said this the leprosy was cleansed, insomuch that the flesh of the leper was left unto him like that of a child. Seeing which namely, that he was healed, the leper with a loud voice cried out: ‘Come hither, Israel, to receive the prophet whom God sendeth unto thee.’ Jesus prayed him, saying: ‘Brother, hold thy peace and say nothing,’ but the more he prayed him the more he cried out, saying: ‘Behold the prophet! behold the holy one of God!’ At which words many that were going out of Jerusalem ran back, and entered with Jesus into Jerusalem, recounting that which God through Jesus had done unto the leper.



## 12\. First sermon of Jesus delivered to the people: wonderful in doctrine concerning the name of God.

The whole city of Jerusalem was moved by these words, wherefore they all ran together to the temple to see Jesus, who had entered therein to pray, so that they could scarce be contained there. Therefore the priests besought Jesus, saying: ‘This people desireth to see thee and hear thee; therefore ascend to the pinnacle, and if God give thee a word speak it in the name of the Lord.’

Then ascended Jesus to the place whence the scribes were wont to speak. And having beckoned with the hand for silence, he opened his mouth, saying: ‘Blessed be the holy name of God, who of his goodness and mercy willed to create his creatures that they might glorify him. Blessed be the holy name of God, who created the splendour of all the saints and prophets before all things to send him for the salvation of the world, as he spake by his servant David, saying: “Before Lucifer in the brightness of the saints I created thee.” Blessed be the holy name of God, who created the angels that they might serve him. And blessed be God, who punished and reprobated Satan and his followers, who would not reverence him whom God willeth to be reverenced. Blessed be the holy name of God, who created man out of the clay of the earth, and set him over his works. Blessed be the holy name of God, who drove man out of paradise for having transgressed his holy precept. Blessed be the holy name of God, who with mercy looked upon the tears of Adam and Eve, first parents of the human race. Blessed be the holy name of God, who justly punished Cain the fratricide, sent the deluge upon the earth, burned up three wicked cities, scourged Egypt, overwhelmed Pharaoh in the Red Sea, scattered the enemies of his people, chastised the unbelievers, and punished the impenitent. Blessed be the holy name of God, who with mercy looked upon his creatures, and therefore sent them his holy prophets, that they might walk in truth and righteousness before him: who delivered his servants from every evil, and gave them this land, as he promised to our father Abraham and to his son for ever. Then by his servant Moses he gave us his holy law, that Satan should not deceive us; and he exalted us above all other peoples.

‘But, brethren, what do we, to-day, that we be not punished for our sins?’

And then Jesus with greatest vehemence rebuked the people for that they had forgotten the word of God, and gave themselves only to vanity; he rebuked the priests for their negligence in God's service and for their worldly greed; he rebuked the scribes because they preached vain doctrine, and forsook the law of God; he rebuked the doctors because they made the law of God of none effect through their traditions. And in such wise did Jesus speak to the people, that all wept, from the least to the greatest, crying mercy, and beseeching Jesus that he would pray for them; save only their priests and leaders, who on that day conceived hatred against Jesus for having thus spoken against the priests, scribes, and doctors. And they meditated upon his death, but for fear of the people, who had received him as a prophet of God, they spake no word.

Jesus raised his hands to the Lord God and prayed, and the people weeping said: ‘So be it, O Lord, so be it.’ The prayer being ended Jesus descended from the temple; and that day he departed from Jerusalem, with many that followed him.

And the priests spoke evil of Jesus among themselves.



## 13\. The remarkable fear of Jesus and his prayer, and the wonderful comfort of the angel Gabriel.

Some days having passed, Jesus having in spirit perceived the desire of the priests, ascended the Mount of Olives to pray. And having passed the whole night in prayer, in the morning Jesus praying said: ‘O Lord, I know that the scribes hate me, and the priests are minded to kill me, thy servant; therefore, Lord God almighty and merciful, in mercy hear the prayers of thy servant, and save me from their snares, for thou art my salvation. Thou knowest, Lord, that I thy servant seek thee alone, O Lord, and speak thy word; for thy word is truth, which endureth for ever.’

When Jesus had spoken these words, behold there came to him the angel Gabriel, saying: ‘Fear not, O Jesus, for a thousand thousand who dwell above the heaven guard thy garments, and thou shalt not die till everything be fulfilled, and the world shall be near its end.’

Jesus fell with his face to the ground, saying: ‘O great Lord God, how great is thy mercy upon me, and what shall I give thee, Lord, for all that thou hast granted me?’

The angel Gabriel answered: ‘Arise, Jesus, and remember Abraham, who being willing to make sacrifice to God of his only-begotten son Ishmael, to fulfill the word of God, and the knife not being able to cut his son, at my word offered in sacrifice a sheep. Even so therefore shalt thou do, O Jesus, servant of God.

Jesus answered: ‘Willingly, but where shall I find the lamb, seeing I have no money, and it is not lawful to steal it?’

Thereupon the angel Gabriel showed unto him a sheep, which Jesus offered in sacrifice, praising and blessing God, who is glorious for ever.



## 14\. After the fast of forty days, Jesus chooseth twelve apostles.

Jesus descended from the mount, and passed alone by night to the farther side of Jordan, and fasted forty days and forty nights, not eating anything day nor night, making continual supplication to the Lord for the salvation of his people to whom God had sent him. And when the forty days were passed he was an hungered. Then appeared Satan unto him, and tempted him in many words, but Jesus drove him away by the power of words of God. Satan having departed the angels came and ministered unto Jesus that whereof he had need.

Jesus, having returned to the region of Jerusalem, was found again of the people with exceeding great joy, and they prayed him that he would abide with them; for his words were not as those of the scribes, but were with power, for they touched the heart.

Jesus, seeing that great was the multitude of them that returned to their heart for to walk in the law of God, went up into the mountain, and abode all night in prayer, and when day was come he descended from the mountain, and chose twelve, whom he called apostles, among whom is Judas, who was slain upon the cross. Their names are: Andrew and Peter his brother, fisherman; Barnabas, who wrote this, with Matthew the publican, who sat at the receipt of custom; John and James, sons of Zebedee; Thaddaeus and Judas; Bartholomew and Philip; James, and Judas Iscariot the traitor. To these he always revealed the divine secrets; but the Iscariot Judas he made his dispenser of that which was given in alms, but he stole the tenth part of everything.



## 15\. Miracle wrought by Jesus at the marriage, turning the water into wine.

When the feast of tabernacles was nigh, a certain rich man invited Jesus with his disciples and his mother to a marriage. Jesus therefore went, and as they were feasting the wine ran short. His mother accosted Jesus, saying: ‘They have no wine.’ Jesus answered: ‘What is that to me, mother mine?’ His mother commanded the servants that whatever Jesus should command them they should obey. There were there six vessels for water according to the custom of Israel to purify themselves for prayer. Jesus said: ‘Fill these vessels with water.’ The servants did so. Jesus said unto them: ‘In the name of God, give to drink unto them that are feasting.’ The servants thereupon bare unto the master of the ceremonies, who rebuked the attendants saying: ‘O worthless servants, why have ye kept the better wine till now?’ For he knew nothing of all that Jesus had done.

The servants answered: ‘O sir, there is here a holy man of God, for he hath made of water, wine.’ The master of the ceremonies thought that the servants were drunken; but they that were sitting near to Jesus, having seen the whole matter, rose from the table and paid him reverence, saying: ‘Verily thou art an holy one of God, a true prophet sent to us from God!’

Then his disciples believed on him, and many returned to their heart, saying: ‘Praised be God, who hath mercy upon Israel, and visited the house of Judah with love, and blessed be his holy name.



## 16\. Wonderful teaching given by Jesus to his apostles concerning conversion from the evil life.

One day Jesus called together his disciples and went up on to the mountain, and when he had sat down there his disciples came near unto him; and he opened his mouth and taught them, saying: ‘Great are the benefits which God hath bestowed on us, wherefore it is necessary that we should serve him with truth of heart. And forasmuch as new wine is put into new vessels, even so ought ye to become new men, if ye will contain the new doctrine that shall come out of my mouth. Verily I say unto you, that even as a man cannot see with his eyes the heaven and the earth at one and the same time, so it is impossible to love God and the world.

‘No man can in any wise serve two masters that are at enmity one with the other; for if the one shall love you, the other will hate you. Even so I tell you in truth that ye cannot serve God and the world, for the world lieth in falsehood, covetousness, and malignity. Ye cannot therefore find rest in the world, but rather persecution and loss. Wherefore serve God and despise the world, for from me ye shall find rest for your souls, Hear my words, for I speak unto you in truth.

‘Verily, blessed are they that mourn this earthly life, for they shall be comforted.

‘Blessed are the poor who truly hate the delights of the world, for they shall abound in the delights of the kingdom of God.

‘Verily, blessed are they that eat at the table of God, for the angles shall minister unto them.

‘Ye are journeying as pilgrims. Doth the pilgrim encumber himself with palaces and fields and other earthly matters upon the way? Assuredly not: but he beareth things light and prized for their usefulness and convenience upon the road. This now should be an example unto you; and if ye desire another ensample I will give it you, in order that ye may do all that I tell you.

‘Weigh not down your hearts with earthly desires, saying: ‘Who shall clothe us?“ or ”Who shall give us to eat?“ But behold the flowers and the trees, with the birds, which God our Lord clotheth and nourisheth with greater glory than all the glory of Solomon. And he is able to nourish you, even God who created you and called you to his service; who for forty years caused the manna to fall from heaven for his people Israel in the wilderness, and did not suffer their clothing to wax old or perish, they being six hundred and forty thousand men, besides women and children. Verily I say unto you, that heaven and earth shall fail, yet shall not fail his mercy unto them that fear him. But the rich of the world in their prosperity are hungry and perish. There was a rich man whose incomings increased, and he said, ”What shall I do, O my soul? I will pull down my barns because they are small, and I will build new and greater ones; therefore thou shalt triumph my soul!” Oh, wretched man! for that night he died. He ought to have been mindful of the poor, and to have made himself friends with the alms of unrighteous riches of this world; for they bring treasures in the kingdom of heaven.

‘Tell me, I pray you, if ye should give your money into the bank to a publican, and he should give unto you tenfold and twentyfold, would ye not give to such a man everything that ye had? But I say unto you, verily, that whatsoever ye shall forgive and shall forsake for love of God, ye receive it back an hundredfold, and life everlasting. See then how much ye ought to be content to serve God.



## 17\. In this chapter is clearly perceived the unbelief of Christians, and the true faith of Mumin.

When Jesus had said this, Philip answered: ‘We are content to serve God, but we desire, however, to know God. For Isaiah the prophet said: “Verily thou art a hidden God,” and God said to Moses his servant: “I am that which I am.”

Jesus answered: ‘Philip, God is a good without which there is naught good; God is a being without which there is naught that is; God is a life without which there is naught that liveth; so great that he filleth all and is everywhere. He alone hath no equal. He hath had no beginning, nor will he ever have an end, but to everything hath he given a beginning and to everything shall he give an end. He hath no father nor mother; he hath no sons, nor brethren, nor companions. And because God hath no body, therefore he eateth not, sleepeth not, dieth not, walketh not, moveth not, but abideth eternally without human similitude, for that he is incorporeal, uncompounded, immaterial, of the most simple substance. He is so good that he loveth goodness only; he is so just that when he punisheth or pardoneth it cannot be gainsaid. In short, I say unto thee, Philip, that here on earth thou canst not see him nor know him perfectly; but in his kingdom thou shalt see him for ever: wherein consisteth all our happiness and glory.’

Philip answered: ‘Master, what sayest thou? It is surely written in Isaiah that God is our father; how, then, hath he no sons?’

Jesus answered: ‘There are written in the prophets many parables, wherefore thou oughtest not to attend to the letter, but to the sense. For all the prophets, that are one hundred and forty-four thousand, whom God hath sent into the world, have spoken darkly. But after me shall come the Splendour of all the prophets and holy ones, and shall shed light upon the darkness of all that the prophets have said, because he is the messenger of God.’ And having said this, Jesus sighed and said: ‘Have mercy on Israel, O Lord God and look with pity upon Abraham and upon his seed, in order that they may serve thee with truth of heart.

His disciples answered: ‘So be it, O Lord our God!’

Jesus said: ‘Verily I say unto you, the scribes and doctors have made void the law of God with their false prophecies, contrary to the prophecies of the true prophets of God: Wherefore God is wroth with the house of Israel and with this faithless generation.’ His disciples wept at these words, and said: ‘Have mercy, O God, have mercy upon the temple and upon the holy city, and give it not into contempt of the nations that they despise not thy holy covenant.’ Jesus answered: ‘So be it, Lord God of our fathers.’



## 18\. Here is shown forth the persecution of the servants of God by the world, and God's protection saving them.

Having said this, Jesus said: ‘Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, that ye may be my disciples. If then the world shall hate you, ye shall be truly my disciples; for the world hath been ever an enemy of servants of God. Remember the holy prophets that have been slain by the world, even as in the time of Elijah ten thousand prophets were slain by Jezebel, insomuch that scarcely did poor Elijah escape, and seven thousand sons of prophets who were hidden by the captain of Ahab's host. Oh, unrighteous world, that knowest not God! Fear not therefore ye, for the hairs of your head are numbered so that they shall not perish. Behold the sparrows and other birds, whereof falleth not one feather without the will of God. Shall God, then, have more care of the birds than of man, for whose sake he hath created everything. Is there any man, perchance, who careth more for his shoes than for his own son? Assuredly not. Now how much less ought ye to think that God would abandon you, while taking care of the birds! And why speak I of the birds? A leaf of a tree falleth not without the will of God.

‘Believe me, because I tell you the truth, that the world will greatly fear you if ye shall observe my words. For if it feared not to have its wickedness revealed it would not hate you, but it feareth to be revealed, therefore it will hate you and persecute you. If ye shall see your words scorned by the world lay it not to heart, but consider how that God is greater than you; who is in such wise scorned by the world that his wisdom is counted madness. If God endureth the world with patience, wherefore will ye lay it to heart, O dust and clay of the earth? In your patience ye shall possess your soul. Therefore if one shall give you a blow on one side of the face, offer him the other that he may smite it. Render not evil for evil, for so do all the worst animals; but render good for evil, and pray God for them that hate you. Fire is not extinguished with fire, but rather with water; even so I say unto you that ye shall not overcome evil with evil, but rather with good. Behold God, who causeth the sun to come upon the good and evil, and likewise the rain. So ought ye to do good to all; for it is written in the law: “Be ye holy, for I your God am holy; be ye pure, for I am pure; and be ye perfect, for I am perfect.” Verily I say unto you that the servant studieth to please his master, and so he putteth not on any garment that is displeasing to his master. Your garments are your will and your love. Beware, then, not to will or to love a thing that is displeasing to God, our Lord. Be ye sure that God hateth the pomps and lusts of the world, and therefore hate ye the world.’



## 19\. Jesus foretelleth his betrayal, and, descending from the mountain, healeth ten lepers.

When Jesus had said this, Peter answered: ‘O teacher, behold we have left all to follow thee, what shall become of us?’

Jesus answered: ‘Verily ye in the day of judgment shall sit beside me, giving testimony against the twelve tribes of Israel.’

And having said this Jesus sighed, saying: ‘O Lord, what thing is this? for I have chosen twelve, and one of them is a devil.’

The disciples were sore grieved at this word; whereupon he who writeth secretly questioned Jesus with tears, saying: ‘O master, will Satan deceive me, and shall I then become reprobate?’

Jesus answered: ‘Be not sore grieved, Barnabas; for those whom God hath chosen before the creation of the world shall not perish. Rejoice, for thy name is written in the book of life.

Jesus comforted his disciples, saying: ‘Fear not, for he who shall hate me is not grieved at my saying, because in him is not the divine feeling.’

At his words the chosen were comforted. Jesus made his prayers, and his disciples said: ‘Amen, so be it, Lord God almighty and merciful.’

Having finished his devotions, Jesus came down from the mountain with his disciples and met ten lepers, who from afar off cried out: ‘Jesus, son of David, have mercy on us!”

Jesus called them near to him, and said unto them: ‘What will ye of me, O brethren?’

They all cried out: ‘Give us health!’

Jesus answered: ‘Ah, wretched that ye are, have ye so lost your reason for that ye say: “Give us health!” See ye not me to be a man like yourselves. Call unto our God that hath created you and he that is almighty and merciful will heal you.

With tears the lepers answered: ‘We know that thou art man like us, but yet an holy one of God and a prophet of the Lord; wherefore pray thou to God, and he will heal us.

Thereupon the disciples prayed Jesus, saying: ‘Lord, have mercy upon them.’ Then groaned Jesus and prayed to God, saying: ‘Lord God almighty and merciful, have mercy and hearken to the words of thy servant: and for love of Abraham our father and for thy holy covenant have mercy on the request of these men, and grant them health.’ Whereupon Jesus, having said this, turned himself to the lepers and said: ‘Go and show yourselves to the priests according to the law of God.’

The lepers departed, and on the way were cleansed. Whereupon one of them, seeing that he was healed, returned to find Jesus, and he was an Ishmaelite. And having found Jesus he bowed himself, doing reverence unto him, and saying: ‘Verily thou art an holy one of God,’ and with thanks he prayed him that he would receive him for servant. Jesus answered: ‘Ten have been cleansed; where are the nine?’ And he said to him that was cleansed: ‘I am not come to be served, but to serve; wherefore go to thine home, and recount how much God hath done in thee, in order that they may know that the promises made to Abraham and his son, with the kingdom of God, are drawing nigh.’ The cleansed leper departed, and having arrived in his own neighborhood recounted how much God through Jesus had wrought in him.



## 20\. Miracle on the sea wrought by Jesus, and Jesus declares where the prophet is received.

Jesus went to the sea of Galilee, and having embarked in a ship sailed to his city of Nazareth; whereupon there was a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was nigh unto sinking. And Jesus was sleeping upon the prow of the ship. Then drew near to him his disciples, and awoke him, saying: ‘O master, save thyself, for we perish!’ They were encompassed with very great fear, by reason of the great wind that was contrary and the roaring of the sea. Jesus arose, and raising his eyes to heaven, said: ‘O Elohim Sabaoth, have mercy upon thy servants.’ Then, when Jesus had said this, suddenly the wind ceased, and the sea became calm. Wherefore the seamen feared, saying: ‘And who is this, that the sea and the wind obey him?’

Having arrived at the city of Nazareth the seamen spread through the city all that Jesus had wrought, whereupon the house where Jesus was, was surrounded by as many as dwelt in the city. And the scribes and doctors having presented themselves unto him, said: ‘We have heard how much thou hast wrought in the sea and Judea: give us therefore some sign here in thine own country.’

Jesus answered: ‘This faithless generation seek a sign, but it shall not be given them, because no prophet is received in his own country. In the time of Elijah there were many widows in Judea but he was not sent to be nourished save unto a widow of Sidon. Many were the lepers in the time of Elisha in Judea, nevertheless only Naaman the Syrian was cleansed.’

Then were the citizens enraged and seized him and carried him on to the top of a precipice to cast him down. But Jesus walking through the midst of them, departed from them.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/Prologue">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Prologue</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/21_40">
          <span class="pr-2">21 — 40</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
