---
title: "200 — 222"
description: "The Gospel of Barnabas"
published: true
date: 2024-11-27T23:49:26Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-27T23:49:26Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/181_200">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">181 — 200</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## 201.

Jesus having entered into the temple, the scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery. They said among themselves: ‘If he saves her, it is contrary to the law of Moses, and so we have him as guilty, and if he condemn her it is contrary to his own doctrine, for he preacheth mercy.’ Wherefore they came to Jesus and said: ‘Master, we have found this woman in adultery. Moses commanded that \[such\] should be stoned: what then sayest thou?’

Thereupon Jesus stooped down and with his finger made a mirror on the ground wherein every one saw his own iniquities. As they still pressed for the answer, Jesus lifted up himself and, pointing to the mirror with his finger, said: ‘He that is without sin among you, let him be first to stone her.’ And again he stooped down, shaping the mirror.

The men, seeing this, went out one by one, beginning from the eldest, for they were ashamed to see their abominations.

Jesus having lifted up himself, and seeing no one but the woman, said: ‘Woman, where are they that condemned thee?’

The woman answered, weeping: ‘Lord, they are departed; and if thou wilt pardon me, as God liveth, I will sin no more.’

Then said Jesus: ‘Blessed be God! Go thy way in peace and sin no more, for God hath not sent me to condemn thee.’

Then, the scribes and Pharisees being assembled, Jesus said to them: ‘Tell me: if one of you had an hundred sheep, and should lose one of them, would ye not go to seek it, leaving the ninety and nine? And when ye found it, would ye not lay it upon your shoulders and, having called together your neighbours, say unto them: “Rejoice with me, for I have found the sheep which I had lost?” Assuredly ye would do so.

‘Now tell me, shall our God love less man, for whom he hath made the world? As God liveth, even so there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth; because sinners make known God's mercy.’



## 202.

‘Tell me, by whom is the physician more loved: by them that have never had any sickness, or by them whom the physician hath healed of grievous sickness?’

Said the Pharisees to him: ‘And how shall he that is whole love the physician? assuredly he will love him only for that he is not sick; and not having knowledge of sickness he will love the physician but little.’

Then with vehemence of spirit Jesus spake, saying: ‘As God liveth, your own tongues condemn your pride, inasmuch as our God is loved more by the sinner that repenteth, knowing the great mercy of God upon him, than by the righteous. For the righteous hath not knowledge of the mercy of God. Wherefore there is more rejoicing in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth than over ninety and nine righteous persons.

‘Where are the righteous in our time? As God liveth in whose presence my soul standeth, great is the number of the righteous unrighteous; their condition being like to that of Satan.’

The scribes and Pharisees answered: ‘We are sinners, wherefore God will have mercy on us.’ And this they said tempting him; for the scribes and Pharisees count it the greatest insult to be called sinners.

Then said Jesus: ‘I fear that ye be righteous unrighteous. For if ye have sinned and deny your sin, calling yourselves righteous, ye are unrighteous; and if in your heart ye hold yourselves righteous, and with your tongue ye say that ye are sinners, then are ye doubly righteous unrighteous.’

Accordingly the scribes and Pharisees hearing this were confounded and departed, leaving Jesus with his disciples in peace, and they went into the house of Simon the leper, whose leprosy he \[had\] cleansed. The citizens had gathered together the sick unto the house of Simon and prayed Jesus for the healing of the sick.

Then Jesus, knowing that his hour was near, said: ‘Call the sick, as many as there be, because God is mighty and merciful to heal them.’

They answered: ‘We know not that there be any other sick folk here in Jerusalem.’

Jesus weeping answered: ‘O Jerusalem, O Israel, I weep over thee, for thou knowest not thy visitation; because I would fain have gathered thee to the love of God thy creator, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and thou wouldst not.’ Wherefore God saith thus unto thee—



## 203.

‘“O city, hard-hearted and perverse of mind, I have sent to thee my servant, to the end that he may convert thee to thine heart, and thou mayest repent; but thou, O city of confusion, hast forgotten all that I did upon Egypt and upon Pharaoh for love of thee, O Israel. Many times weepest thou that my servant may heal thy body of sickness; and thou seekest to slay my servant because he seeketh to heal thy soul of sin.

‘“Shalt thou, then, alone remain unpunished by me? Shalt thou, then, live eternally? And shall thy pride deliver thee from my hands? Assuredly not. For I will bring princes with an army against thee, and they shall surround thee with might, and in such wise will I give thee over into their hands that thy pride shall fall down into hell.

‘“I will not pardon the old men or the widows, I will not pardon the children, but I will give you all to famine, the sword, and derision, and the temple whereon I have looked with mercy, I will make desolate with the city, insomuch that ye shall be for a fable, a derision, and a proverb among the nations. So is my wrath abiding upon thee, and mine indignation sleepeth not.”’



## 204.

Having said this, Jesus said again: ‘Know ye not that there be other sick folk? As God liveth, they be fewer in Jerusalem that have their soul sound than they that be sick in body. And in order that ye may know the truth, I say unto you, O sick folk, in the name of God, let your sickness depart from you!

And when he had said this, immediately they were healed.

The men wept when they heard of the wrath of God upon Jerusalem, and prayed for mercy; when Jesus said: “If Jerusalem shall weep for her sins and do penance, walking in my ways,” saith God, “I will not remember her iniquities any more, and I will not do unto her any of the evil which I have said. But Jerusalem weepeth for her ruin and not for her dishonouring of me, wherewith she hath blasphemed my name among the nations. Therefore is my fury kindled much more. As I live eternally, if Job, Abraham, Samuel, David, and Daniel my servants, with Moses, should pray for this people, my wrath upon Jerusalem will not be appeased.” And having said this, Jesus retired into the house, while every one remained in fear.



## 205.

While Jesus was supping with his disciples in the house of Simon the leper, behold Mary the sister of Lazarus entered into the house, and, having broken a vessel, poured ointment over the head and garment of Jesus. Seeing this, Judas the traitor was fain to hinder Mary from doing such a work, saying: ‘Go and sell the ointment and bring the money that I may give it to the poor.’

Said Jesus: ‘Why hinderest thou her? Let her be, for the poor ye shall have always with you, but me ye shall not have always.

Judas answered: ‘O master, this ointment might be sold for three hundred pieces of money: now see how many poor folk would be helped.’

Jesus answered: ‘O Judas, I know thine heart: have patience, therefore, and I will give thee all.’

Everyone ate with fear, and the disciples were sorrowful, because they knew that Jesus must soon depart from them. But Judas was indignant, because he knew that he was losing thirty pieces of money for the ointment not sold, seeing he stole the tenth part of all that was given to Jesus.

He went to find the high priest, who assembled in council of priests, scribes, and Pharisees; to whom Judas spake saying: ‘What will ye give me, and I will betray into your hands Jesus, who would fain make himself king of Israel?’

They answered: ‘Now how wilt thou give him into our hand?’

Said Judas: ‘When I shall know that he goeth outside the city to pray I will tell you, and will conduct you to the place where he shall be found; for to seize him in the city will be impossible without a sedition.’

The high priest answered: ‘If thou wilt give him into our hand we will give thee thirty pieces of gold and thou shalt see how well I will treat thee.’



## 206.

When day was come, Jesus went up to the temple with a great multitude of people. Whereupon the high priest drew near, saying: ‘Tell me, O Jesus, hast thou forgotten all that thou didst confess, that thou art not God, nor son of God, nor even the Messiah?’

Jesus answered: ‘No, of a surety, I have not forgotten; for this is my confession which I shall bear before the judgment-seat of God on the day of judgment. For all that is written in the book of Moses is most true, inasmuch as God our creator is \[God\] alone, and I am God's servant and desire to serve God's messenger whom ye call Messiah.’

Said the high priest: ‘Then what booteth it to come to the temple with so great a multitude of people? Seekest thou, perchance, to make thyself king of Israel? Beware lest some danger befall thee!’

Jesus answered: ‘If I sought mine own glory and desired my portion in this world, I had not fled when the people of Nain would fain have made me king. Believe me, verily, that I seek not anything in this world.’

Then said the high priest: ‘We want to know a thing concerning the Messiah.’ And then the priests, scribes, and Pharisees made a circle round about Jesus.

Jesus answered: ‘What is that thing which thou seekest to know about the Messiah? Perchance it is the lie? Assuredly I will not tell thee the lie. For if I had said the lie I had been adored by thee, and by the scribes \[and\] Pharisees with all Israel: but because I tell you the truth ye hate me and seek to kill me.’

Said the high priest: ‘Now we know that thou hast the devil at thy back; for thou art a Samaritan, and hast not respect unto the priest of God.’



## 207.

Jesus answered: ‘As God liveth, I have not the devil at my back, but I seek to cast out the devil. Wherefore, for this cause the devil stirreth up the world against me, because I am not of this world, but I seek that God may be glorified, who hath sent me into the world. Hearken therefore to me, and I will tell you who hath the devil at his back. As God liveth, in whose presence my soul standeth, he who worketh after the will of the devil, he hath the devil at his back, who hath put on him the bridle of his will and ruleth him at his pleasure, making him to run into every iniquity.

‘Even as a garment changeth its name when it changeth its owner, although it is all the same cloth: so also men, albeit they are all of one material, are different by reason of the works of him who worketh in the man.

‘If I (as I know) have sinned, wherefore do ye not rebuke me as a brother, instead of hating me as an enemy? Verily the members of a body succour one another when they are united with the head, and they that are cut off from the head give it no succour. For the hands of one body do not feel the pain of another body's feet, but that of the body in which they are united. As God liveth, in whose presence my soul standeth, he who feareth and loveth God his Creator hath the feeling of mercy over them \[over\] whom God his head hath mercy: and seeing that God willeth not the death of the sinner, but waiteth for each one to repent, if ye were of that body wherein I am incorporate, as God liveth, ye would help me to work according to mine head.



## 208.

‘If I work iniquity, reprove me, and God will love you because ye shall be doing his will, but if none can reprove me of sin it is a sign that ye are not sons of Abraham as ye call yourselves, nor are ye incorporate with that head wherein Abraham was incorporate. As God liveth, so greatly did Abraham love God, that he not only brake in pieces the false idols and forsook his father and mother, but was willing to slay his own son in obedience to God.

The high priest answered: ‘This I ask of thee, and I do not seek to slay thee, wherefore tell us: Who was this son of Abraham?’

Jesus answered: ‘The zeal of thine honour, O God, enflameth me, and I cannot hold my peace. Verily I say, the son of Abraham was Ishmael, from whom must be descended the Messiah promised to Abraham, that in him should all the tribes of the earth be blessed.’

Then was the high priest wroth, hearing this, and cried out: ‘Let us stone this impious fellow, for he is an Ishmaelite, and hath spoken blasphemy against Moses and against the law of God.’

Whereupon every scribe and Pharisee, with the elders of the people, took up stones to stone Jesus, who vanished from their eyes and went out of the temple. And then, through the great desire that they had to slay Jesus, blinded with fury and hatred, they struck one another in such wise that there died a thousand men; and they polluted the holy temple. The disciples and believers, who saw Jesus go out of the temple (for from them he was not hidden), followed him to the house of Simon.

Thereupon Nicodemus came thither and counselled Jesus to go out of Jerusalem beyond the brook Cedron, saying: ‘Lord, I have a garden with a house beyond the brook Cedron, I pray thee, therefore, go thither with some of thy disciples, to tarry there until this hatred of our priests be past; for I will minister to you what is necessary. And the multitude of disciples leave thou here in the house of Simon and in my house, for God will provide for all.’

And this Jesus did, desiring only to have with him the twelve first called apostles.



## 209.

At this time, while the Virgin Mary, mother of Jesus, was standing in prayer, the angel Gabriel visited her and narrated to her the persecution of her son, saying: ‘Fear not, Mary, for God will protect him from the world.’ Wherefore Mary, weeping, departed from Nazareth, and came to Jerusalem to the house of Mary Salome, her sister, seeking her son.

But since he had secretly retired beyond the brook Cedron she was not able to see him any more in this world; save after the deed of shame, for that the angel Gabriel, with the angels Michael, Rafael, and Uriel, by command of God brought him to her.



## 210.

When the confusion in the temple ceased by the departure of Jesus, the high priest ascended on high, and having beckoned for silence with his hands he said: ‘Brethren, what do we? See ye not that he hath deceived the whole world with his diabolical art? Now, how did he vanish, if he be not a magician? Assuredly, if he were an holy one and a prophet, he would not blaspheme against God and against Moses \[his\] servant, and against the Messiah, who is the hope of Israel. And what shall I say? He hath blasphemed all our priesthood, wherefore verily I say unto you, if he be not removed from the world Israel will be polluted, and our God will give us to the nations. Behold now, how by reason of him this holy temple hath been polluted.’

And in such wise did the high priest speak that many forsook Jesus, wherefore the secret persecution was converted into an open one, insomuch that the high priest went in person to Herod, and to the Roman governor, accusing Jesus that he desired to make himself king of Israel, and of this they had false witnesses.

Thereupon was held a general council against Jesus, forasmuch as the decree of the Romans made them afraid. For so it was that twice the Roman Senate had sent a decree concerning Jesus: in one decree it was forbidden, on pain of death, that anyone should call Jesus of Nazareth, the prophet of the Jews, either God or Son of God; in the other it forbade, under capital sentence, that anyone should contend concerning Jesus of Nazareth, prophet of the Jews. Wherefore, for this cause, there was a great division among them. Some desired that they should write again to Rome against Jesus; others said that they should leave Jesus alone, regardless of what he said, as of a fool; others adduced the great miracles that he wrought.

The high priest therefore spake that under pain of anathema none should speak a word in defence of Jesus; and he spake to Herod, and to the governor, saying: ‘In any case we have an ill venture in our hands, for if we slay this sinner we have acted contrary to the decree of Caesar, and, if we suffer him to live and he make himself king, how will the matter?’ Then Herod arose and threatened the governor, saying: ‘Beware lest through thy favouring of that man this country be rebellious: for I will accuse thee before Caesar as a rebel.’ Then the governor feared the Senate and made friends with Herod (for before this they had hated one another unto death), and they joined together for the death of Jesus, and said to the high priest: ‘Whenever thou shalt know where the malefactor is, send to us, for we will give thee soldiers.’ This was done to fulfil the prophecy of David who had foretold of Jesus, prophet of Israel, saying: ‘The princes and kings of the earth are united against the holy one of Israel, because he announceth the salvation of the world.’

Thereupon, on that day, there was a general search for Jesus throughout Jerusalem.



## 211.

Jesus, being in the house of Nicodemus beyond the brook Cedron, comforted his disciples, saying: ‘The hour is near that I must depart from the world; console yourselves and be not sad, seeing that where I go I shall not feel any tribulation.

‘Now, shall ye be my friends if ye be sad at my welfare? Nay, assuredly, but rather enemies. When the world shall rejoice, be ye sad, because the rejoicing of the world is turned into weeping; but your sadness shall be turned into joy and your joy shall no one take from you; for the rejoicing that the heart feeleth in God its creator not the whole world can take away. See that ye forget not the words which God hath spoken to you by my mouth. Be ye my witnesses against every one that shall corrupt the witness that I have witnessed with my gospel against the world, and against the lovers of the world.



## 212.

Then lifting up his hands to the Lord, he prayed, saying: ‘Lord our God, God of Abraham, God of Ishmael and Isaac. God of our fathers have mercy upon them that thou hast given me, and save them from the world. I say not, take them from the world, because it is necessary that they shall bear witness against them that shall corrupt my gospel. But I pray thee to keep them from evil, that on the day of thy judgment they may come with me to bear witness against the world and against the house of Israel that hath corrupted thy testament, Lord God, mighty and jealous, that takest vengeance upon idolatry against the sons of idolatrous fathers even unto the fourth generation, do thou curse eternally every one that shall corrupt my gospel that thou gavest me, when they write that I am thy son. For I, clay and dust, am servant of thy servants, and never have I thought my self to be thy good servant; for I cannot give thee aught in return for that which thou hast given me, for all things are thine. Lord God, the merciful, that shewest mercy unto a thousand generations upon them that fear thee, have mercy upon them which believe my words that thou hast given me. For even as thou art true God, so thy word which I have spoken is true; for it is thine, seeing I have ever spoken as one that readeth, who cannot read save that which is written in the book that he readeth: even so have I spoken that which thou hast given me.

‘Lord God the Saviour, save them whom thou hast given me, in order that Satan may not be able to do aught against them, and save not only them, but every one that shall believe in them.

‘Lord, bountiful and rich in mercy, grant to thy servant to be in the congregation of thy Messenger on the day of judgment; and not me only, but every one whom thou hast given me, with all them that shall believe on me through their preaching. And this do, Lord, for thine own sake, that Satan boast not himself against thee, Lord.

‘Lord God, who by thy providence providest all things necessary for thy people Israel, be mindful of all the tribes of the earth, which thou didst create the world. Have mercy on the world and send speedily thy Messenger, that Satan thine enemy may lose his empire.’ And having said this, Jesus said three times: ‘So be it, Lord, great and merciful!’

And they answered, weeping: ‘So be it,’ all save Judas, for he believed nothing.



## 213.

The day having come for eating the lamb, Nicodemus sent the lamb secretly to the garden for Jesus and his disciples, announcing all that had been decreed by Herod with the governor and the high priest.

Whereupon Jesus rejoiced in spirit, saying: ‘Blessed be thy holy name, O Lord, because thou hast not separated me from the number of thy servants that have been persecuted by the world and slain. I thank thee, my God, because I have fulfilled thy work.’ And turning to Judas, he said to him: ‘Friend, wherefore tarriest thou? My time is nigh, wherefore go and do that which thou must do.’

The disciples thought that Jesus was sending Judas to buy something for the day of the Passover: but Jesus knew that Judas was betraying him, wherefore, desiring to depart from the world, he so spake.

Judas answered: ‘Lord, suffer me to eat, and I will go.’

‘Let us eat,’ said Jesus, for I have greatly desired to eat this lamb before I am parted from you.’ And having arisen, he took a towel and girded his loins, and having put water in a basin, he set himself to wash his disciples' feet. Beginning from Judas, Jesus came to Peter. Said Peter: ‘Lord, wouldst thou wash my feet?’

Jesus answered: ‘That which I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know hereafter.’

Peter answered: ‘Thou shalt never wash my feet.’

Then Jesus rose up, and said: ‘Neither shalt thou come in my company on the day of judgment.’

Peter answered: ‘Wash not only my feet, Lord, but my hands and my head.’

When the disciples were washed and were seated at table to eat, Jesus said: ‘I have washed you, yet are ye not all clean, forasmuch as all the water of the sea will not wash him that believeth me not.’ This said Jesus, because he knew who was betraying him. The disciples were sad at these words, when Jesus said again: ‘Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me, insomuch that I shall be sold like a sheep; but woe unto him, for he shall fulfil all that our father David said of such an one, that “he shall fall into the pit which he had prepared for others.”’

Whereupon the disciples looked one upon another, saying with sorrow: ‘Who shall be the traitor?’

Judas then said: ‘Shall it be I, O Master?’

Jesus answered: ‘Thou hast told me who it shall be that shall betray me.’ And the eleven apostles heard it not.

When the lamb was eaten, the devil came upon the back of Judas, and he went forth from the house, Jesus saying to him again: ‘Do quickly that which thou must do.’



## 214.

Having gone forth from the house, Jesus retired into the garden to pray, according as his custom was to pray, bowing his knees an hundred times and prostrating himself upon his face. Judas, accordingly, knowing the place where Jesus was with his disciples, went to the high priest, and said: ‘If ye will give me what was promised, this night will I give into your hand Jesus whom ye seek: for he is alone with eleven companions.’

The high priest answered: ‘How much seekest thou?’

Said Judas, ‘Thirty pieces of gold.’

Then straightway the high priest counted unto him the money, and sent a Pharisee to the governor to fetch soldiers, and to Herod, and they gave a legion of them, because they feared the people; wherefore they took their arms, and with torches and lanterns upon staves went out of Jerusalem.



## 215.

When the soldiers with Judas drew near to the place where Jesus was, Jesus heard the approach of many people, wherefore in fear he withdrew into the house. And the eleven were sleeping.

Then God, seeing the danger of his servant, commanded Gabriel, Michael, Rafael, and Uriel, his ministers, to take Jesus out of the world.

The holy angels came and took Jesus out by the window that looketh toward the South. They bare him and placed him in the third heaven in the company of angels blessing God for evermore.



## 216.

Judas entered impetuously before all into the chamber whence Jesus had been taken up. And the disciples were sleeping. Whereupon the wonderful God acted wonderfully, insomuch that Judas was so changed in speech and in face to be like Jesus that we believed him to be Jesus. And he, having awakened us, was seeking where the Master was. Whereupon we marvelled, and answered: ‘Thou, Lord, art our master; hast thou now forgotten us?’

And he, smiling, said: ‘Now are ye foolish, that know not me to be Judas Iscariot!’

And as he was saying this the soldiery entered, and laid their hands upon Judas, because he was in every way like to Jesus.

We having heard Judas' saying, and seeing the multitude of soldiers, fled as beside ourselves.

And John, who was wrapped in a linen cloth, awoke and fled, and when a soldier seized him by the linen cloth he left the linen cloth and fled naked. For God heard the prayer of Jesus, and saved the eleven from evil.



## 217.

The soldiers took Judas and bound him, not without derision. For he truthfully denied that he was Jesus; and the soldiers, mocking him, said: ‘Sir, fear not, for we are come to make thee king of Israel, and we have bound thee because we know that thou dost refuse the kingdom.’

Judas answered: ‘Now have ye lost your senses! Ye are come to take Jesus of Nazareth, with arms and lanterns as \[against\] a robber; and ye have bound me that have guided you, to make me king!’

Then the soldiers lost their patience, and with blows and kicks they began to flout Judas, and they led him with fury into Jerusalem.

John and Peter followed the soldiers afar off; and they affirmed to him who writeth that they saw all the examination that was made of Judas by the high priest, and by the council of the Pharisees, who were assembled to put Jesus to death. Whereupon Judas spake many words of madness, insomuch that every one was filled with laughter, believing that he was really Jesus, and that for fear of death he was feigning madness. Whereupon the scribes bound his eyes with a bandage, and mocking him said: ‘Jesus, prophet of the Nazarenes,’ (for so they called them who believed in Jesus), ‘tell us, who was it that smote thee?’ And they buffeted him and spat in his face.

When it was morning there assembled the great council of scribes and elders of the people; and the high priest with the Pharisees sought false witness against Judas, believing him to be Jesus: and they found not that which they sought. And why say I that the chief priests believed Judas to be Jesus? Nay, all the disciples, with him who writeth, believed it; and more, the poor virgin mother of Jesus, with his kinsfolk and friends, believed it, insomuch that the sorrow of every one was incredible. As God liveth, he who writeth forgot all that Jesus had said: how that he should be taken up from the world, and that he should suffer in a third person, and bthat he should not die until near the end of the world. Wherefore he went with the mother of Jesus and with John to the cross.

The high priest caused Judas to be brought before him bound, and asked him of his disciples and his doctrine.

Whereupon Judas, as though beside himself, answered nothing to the point. The high priest then adjured him by the living God of Israel that he would tell him the truth.

Judas answered: ‘I have told you that I am Judas Iscariot, who promised to give into your hands Jesus the Nazarene; and ye, by what art I know not, are beside yourselves, for ye will have it by every means that I am Jesus.’

The high priest answered: ‘O perverse seducer, thou hast deceived all Israel, beginning from Galilee even unto Jerusalem here, with thy doctrine and false miracles: and now thinkest thou to flee the merited punishment that befitteth thee by feigning to be mad? As God liveth, thou shalt not escape it!’ And having said this he commanded his servants to smite him with buffetings and kicks, so that his understanding might come back into his head. The derision which he then suffered at the hands of the high priest's servants is past belief. For they zealously devised new inventions to give pleasure to the council. So they attired him as a juggler, and so treated him with hands and feet that it would have moved the very Canaanites to compassion if they had beheld that sight.

But the chief priests and Pharisees and elders of the people had their hearts so exasperated against Jesus that, believing Judas to be really Jesus, they took delight in seeing him so treated.

Afterwards they led him bound to the governor, who secretly loved Jesus. Whereupon he, thinking that Judas was Jesus, made him enter into his chamber, and spake to him, asking him for what cause the chief priests and the people had given him into his hands.

Judas answered: ‘If I tell thee the truth, thou wilt not believe me; for perchance thou art deceived as the (chief) priests and the Pharisees are deceived.’

The governor answered (thinking that he wished to speak concerning the Law): ‘Now knowest thou not that I am not a Jew? But the (chief) priests and the elders of thy people have given thee into my hand; wherefore tell us the truth, that I may do what is just. For I have power to set thee free and to put thee to death.’

Judas answered: ‘Sir, believe me, if thou put me to death, thou shalt do a great wrong, for thou shalt slay an innocent person; seeing that I am Judas Iscariot, and not Jesus, who is a magician, and by his art hath so transformed me.’

When he heard this the governor marvelled greatly, so that he sought to set him at liberty. The governor therefore went out, and smiling said: ‘In the one case, at least, this man is not worthy of death, but rather of compassion.’ ‘This man saith,’ said the governor, ‘that he is not Jesus, but a certain Judas who guided the soldiery to take Jesus, and he saith that Jesus the Galilean hath by his art magic so transformed him. Wherefore, if this be true, it were a great wrong to kill him, seeing that he were innocent. But if he is Jesus and denieth that he is, assuredly he hath lost his understanding, and it were impious to slay a madman.’

Then the chief priests and elders of the people, with the scribes and Pharisees, cried out with shouts, saying: ‘He is Jesus of Nazareth, for we know him; for if he were not the malefactor we would not have given him into thy hands. Nor is he mad; but rather malignant, for with this device he seeketh to escape from our hands, and the sedition that he would stir up if he should escape would be worse than the former.’

Pilate (for such was the governor's name), in order to rid himself of such a case, said: ‘He is a Galilean, and Herod is King of Galilee: wherefore it pertaineth not to me to judge such a case, so take ye him to Herod.’

Accordingly they led Judas to Herod, who of a long time had desired that Jesus should go to his house. But Jesus had never been willing to go to his house, because Herod was a Gentile, and adored the false and lying gods, living after the manner of unclean Gentiles. Now when Judas had been led thither, Herod asked him of many things, to which Judas gave answers not to the purpose, denying that he was Jesus.

Then Herod mocked him, with all his court, and caused him to be clad in white as the fools are clad, and sent him back to Pilate, saying to him, ‘Do not fail in justice to the people of Israel!’

And this Herod wrote, because the chief priests and scribes and the Pharisees had given him a good quantity of money. The governor having heard that this was so from a servant of Herod, in order that he also might gain some money, feigned that he desired to set Judas at liberty. Whereupon he caused him to be scourged by his slaves, who were paid by the scribes to slay him under the scourges. But God, who had decreed the issue, reserved Judas for the cross, in order that he might suffer that horrible death to which he had sold another. He did not suffer Judas to die under the scourges, notwithstanding that the soldiers scourged him so grievously that his body rained blood. Thereupon, in mockery they clad him in an old purple garment, saying: ‘It is fitting to our new king to clothe him and crown him: so they gathered thorns and made a crown, like those of gold and precious stones which kings wear on their heads. And this crown of thorns they placed upon Judas' head, putting in his hand a reed for scepter, and they made him sit in a high place. And the soldiers came before him, bowing down in mockery, saluting him as King of the Jews. And they held out their hands to receive gifts, such as new kings are accustomed to give; and receiving nothing they smote Judas, saying: ‘Now, how art thou crowned, foolish king, if thou wilt not pay thy soldiers and servants?’

The chief priests with the scribes and Pharisees, seeing that Judas died not by the scourges, and fearing lest Pilate should set him at liberty, made a gift of money to the governor, who having received it gave Judas to the scribes and Pharisees as guilty unto death. Whereupon they condemned two robbers with him to the death of the cross.

So they led him to Mount Calvary, where they used to hang malefactors, and there they crucified him naked, for the greater ignominy.

Judas truly did nothing else but cry out: ‘God, why hast thou forsaken me, seeing the malefactor hath escaped and I die unjustly?’

Verily I say that the voice, the face, and the person of Judas were so like to Jesus, that his disciples and believers entirely believed that he was Jesus; wherefore some departed from the doctrine of Jesus, believing that Jesus had been a false prophet, and that by art magic he had done the miracles which he did: for Jesus had said that he should not die till near the end of the world; for that at that time he should be taken away from the world.

But they that stood firm in the doctrine of Jesus were so encompassed with sorrow, seeing him die who was entirely like to Jesus, that they remembered not what Jesus had said. And so in company with the mother of Jesus they went to Mount Calvary, and were not only present at the death of Judas, weeping continually, but by means of Nicodemus and Joseph of Abarimathia they obtained from the governor the body of Judas to bury it. Whereupon, they took him down from the cross with such weeping as assuredly no one would believe, and buried him in the new sepulchre of Joseph; having wrapped him up in an hundred pounds of precious ointments.



## 218.

Then returned each man to his house. He who writeth, with John and James his brother, went with the mother of Jesus to Nazareth.

Those disciples who did not fear God went by night \[and\] stole the body of Judas and hid it, spreading a report that Jesus was risen again; whence great confusion arose. The high priest then commanded, under pain of Anathema, that no one should talk of Jesus of Nazareth. And so there arose a great persecution, and many were stoned and many beaten, and many banished from the land, because they could not hold their peace on such a matter.

The news reached Nazareth how that Jesus, their fellow-citizen, having died on the cross was risen again. Whereupon, he that writeth prayed the mother of Jesus that she would be pleased to leave off weeping, because her son was risen again. Hearing this, the Virgin Mary, weeping, said: ‘Let us go to Jerusalem to find my son. I shall die content when I have seen him.’



## 219.

The Virgin returned to Jerusalem with him who writeth, and James and John, on that day on which the decree of the high priest went forth.

Whereupon, the Virgin, who feared God, albeit she knew the decree of the high priest to be unjust, commanded those who dwelt with her to forget her son. Then how each one was affected!—God who discerneth the heart of men knoweth that between grief at the death of Judas whom we believed to be Jesus our master, and the desire to see him risen again, we, with the mother of Jesus, were consumed.

So the angels that were guardians of Mary ascended to the third heaven, where Jesus was in the company of angels and recounted all to him.

Wherefore Jesus prayed God that he would give him power to see his mother and his disciples. Then the merciful God commanded his four favorite angels, who are Gabriel, Michael, Rafael, and Uriel, to bear Jesus into his mother's house, and there keep watch over him for three days continually, suffering him only to be seen by them that believed in his doctrine.

Jesus came, surrounded with splendour, to the room where abode Mary the Virgin with her two sisters, and Martha and Mary Magdalen and Lazarus, and him who writeth, and John and James and Peter. Whereupon, through fear they fell as dead. And Jesus lifted up his mother and the others from the ground, saying: ‘Fear not, for I am Jesus; and weep not for I am alive and not dead.’ They remained every one for a long time beside himself at the presence of Jesus, for they altogether believed that Jesus was dead. Then the Virgin, weeping, said: ‘Tell me, my son, wherefore God, having given thee power to raise the dead, suffered thee to die, to the shame of thy kinsfolk and friends, and to the shame of thy doctrine? For every one that loveth thee hath been as dead.’



## 220.

Jesus replied, embracing his mother: ‘Believe me, mother, for verily I say to thee that I have not been dead at all; for God hath reserved me till near the end of the world.’ And having said this he prayed the four angels that they would manifest themselves, and give testimony how the matter had passed.

Thereupon the angels manifested themselves like four shining suns, insomuch that through fear every one again fell down as dead.

Then Jesus gave four linen cloths to the angels that they might cover themselves, in order that they might be seen and heard to speak by his mother and her companions. And having lifted up each one, he comforted them, saying: ‘These are the ministers of God: Gabriel, who announceth God's secrets; Michael, who fighteth against God's enemies; Rafael, who receiveth the souls of them that die; and Uriel, who will call every one to the judgment of God at the last day.’

Then the four angels narrated to the Virgin how God had sent for Jesus, and had transformed Judas, that he might suffer the punishment to which he had sold another.

Then said he who writeth: ‘O Master, is it lawful for me to question thee now, as it was lawful for me when thou dwelledst with us?’

Jesus answered: ‘Ask what thou pleasest, Barnabas, and I will answer thee.’

Then said he who writeth: ‘O Master, seeing that God is merciful, wherefore hath he so tormented us, making us to believe that thou wert dead? And thy mother hath so wept for thee that she hath been nigh to death; and thou, who art an holy one of God, on thee hath God suffered to fall the calumny that thou wert slain amongst robbers on the Mount Calvary?’

Jesus answered: ‘Believe me, Barnabas, that every sin, however small it be, God punisheth with great punishment, seeing that God is offended at sin. Wherefore, since my mother and my faithful disciples that were with me loved me a little with earthly love, the righteous God hath willed to punish this love with the present grief, in order that it may not be punished in the flames of Hell. And though I have been innocent in the world, since men have called me “God,” and “Son of God,” God, in order that I be not mocked of the demons on the day of judgment, hath willed that I be mocked of men in this world by the death of Judas, making all men to believe that I died upon the cross. And this mocking shall continue until the advent of Mohammed, the messenger of God, who, when he shall come, shall reveal this deception to those who believe in God's law.’

Having thus spoken, Jesus said: ‘Thou art just, O Lord our God, because to thee only belongeth honour and glory without end.’


## 221.

And Jesus turned himself to him who writeth, and said: ‘See, Barnabas, that by all means thou write my gospel concerning all that hath happened through my dwelling in the world. And write in like manner that which hath befallen Judas, in order that the faithful may be undeceived, and every one may believe the truth.’

Then answered he who writeth: ‘All will I do, if God will, O Master; but how it happened unto Judas, I know not, for I saw not all.’

Jesus answered: ‘Here are John and Peter who have seen all, and they will tell you all that has passed.’

And then Jesus commanded us to call his faithful disciples that they might see him. Then did James and John call together the seven disciples with Nicodemus and Joseph, and many other of the seventy-two, and they ate with Jesus.

The third day Jesus said: ‘Go to the Mount of Olives with my mother, for there will I ascend again unto heaven, and ye will see who shall bear me up.’

So there went all, saving twenty-five of the seventy-two disciples, who for fear had fled to Damascus. And as they all stood in prayer, at mid-day came Jesus with a great multitude of angels who were praising God: and the splendour of his face made them sore afraid, and they fell with their faces to the ground. But Jesus lifted them up, comforting them, and saying: ‘Be not afraid, I am your master.’

And he reproved many who believed him to have died and risen again, saying: ‘Do ye then hold me and God for liars? For God hath granted to me to live almost unto the end of the world, even as I said unto you. Verily I say unto you, I died not, but Judas the traitor. Beware, for Satan will make every effort to deceive you, but be ye my witnesses in all Israel, and throughout the world, of all things that ye have heard and seen.’

And having thus spoken, he prayed God for the salvation of the faithful, and the conversion of sinners. And, his prayer ended, he embraced his mother, saying: ‘Peace be unto thee, my mother, rest thou in God who created thee and me.’ And having thus spoken, he turned to his disciples, saying: ‘May God's grace and mercy be with you.’

Then before their eyes the four angels carried him up into heaven.



## 222.

After Jesus had departed, the disciples scattered through the different parts of Israel and of the world, and the truth, hated of Satan, was persecuted, as it always is, by falsehood. For certain evil men, pretending to be disciples, preached that Jesus died and rose not again. Others preached that he really died, but rose again. Others preached, and yet preach, that Jesus is the Son of God, among whom is Paul deceived. But we, as much as I have written, that preach we to those who fear God, that they may be saved in the last day of God's Judgment. Amen.


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/181_200">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">181 — 200</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
