---
title: "21 — 40"
description: "The Gospel of Barnabas"
published: true
date: 2024-11-27T23:49:26Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-27T23:49:26Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/1_20">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">1 — 20</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/41_60">
          <span class="pr-2">41 — 60</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## 21\. Jesus healeth a demoniac, and the swine are cast into the sea. Afterwards he healeth the daughter of the Canaanites.

Jesus went up to Capernaum, and as he drew near to the city behold there came out of the tombs one that was possessed of a devil, and in such wise that no chain could hold him, and he did great harm to the man.

The demons cried out through his mouth, saying: ‘O holy one of God, why art thou come before the time to trouble us?’ And they prayed him that he would not cast them forth.

Jesus asked them how many they were. They answered “Six thousand six hundred and sixty-six.’ When the disciples heard this they were affrighted, and prayed Jesus that he would depart. Then said Jesus: ‘Where is your faith? It is necessary that the demon should depart, and not I.’ The demons therefore cried: ‘We will come out, but permit us to enter into those swine.’ There were feeding there near to the sea, about ten thousand swine belonging to the Canaanites. Thereupon Jesus said: ‘Depart, and enter into the swine.’ With a roar the demons entered into the swine, and cast them headlong into the sea. Then fled into the city they that fed the swine, and recounted all that had been brought to pass by Jesus.

Accordingly the men of the city came forth and found Jesus and the man that was healed. The men were filled with fear and prayed Jesus that he would depart out of their borders. Jesus accordingly departed from them and went up into the parts of Tyre and Sidon.

And lo! a woman of Canaan with her two sons, who had come forth out of her own country to find Jesus. Having therefore seen him come with his disciples, she cried out: ‘Jesus, son of David, have mercy on my daughter, who is tormented of the devil!

Jesus did not answer even a single word, because they were of the uncircumcised people. The disciples were moved to pity, and said: ‘O master, have pity on them! Behold how much they cry out and weep!’

Jesus answered: ‘I am not sent but unto the people of Israel.’ Then the woman, with her sons, went before Jesus, weeping and saying: ‘O son of David, have mercy on me!’ Jesus answered: ‘It is not good to take the bread from the children's hands and give it to the dogs.’ And this said Jesus by reason of their uncleanness, because they were of the uncircumcised people.

The woman answered: ‘O Lord, the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their masters' table.’ Then was Jesus seized with admiration at the words of the woman, and said: ‘O woman, great is thy faith.’ And having raised his hands to heaven he prayed to God, and then he said: ‘O woman, thy daughter is freed, go thy way in peace.’ The woman departed, and returning to her home found her daughter, who was blessing God. Wherefore the woman said: ‘Verily there is none other God than the God of Israel.’ Whereupon all her kinsfolk joined themselves unto the law of \[God\], according to the law written in the book of Moses.



## 22\. Miserable condition of the uncircumcised in that a dog is better than they.

The disciples questioned Jesus on that day, saying: ‘O master, why didst thou make such answer to the woman, saying that they were dogs?’

Jesus answered: ‘Verily I say unto you that a dog is better than an uncircumcised man.’ Then were the disciples sorrowful, saying: ‘Hard are these words, and who shall be able to receive them?’

Jesus answered: ‘If ye consider, O foolish ones, what the dog doth, that hath no reason, for the service of his master, ye will find my saying to be true. Tell me, doth the dog guard the house of his master, and expose his life against the robber? Yea, assuredly. But what receiveth he? Many blows and injuries with little bread, and he always showeth to his master a joyful countenance. Is this true?’

‘True it is, O master,’ answered the disciples.

Then said Jesus: ‘Consider now how much God hath given to man, and ye shall see how unrighteous he is in not observing the covenant of God made with Abraham his servant. Remember that which David said to Saul king of Israel, against Goliath the Philistine: “My lord,” said David, “while thy servant was keeping thy servant's flock there came the wolf, the bear, and the lion and seized thy servant's sheep: whereupon thy servant went and slew them, rescuing the sheep. And what is this uncircumcised one but like unto them? Therefore will thy servant go in the name of the Lord God of Israel, and will slay this unclean one that blasphemeth the holy people of God.”

Then said the disciples: ‘Tell us, O master, for what reason man must needs be circumcised?”

Jesus answered: ‘Let it suffice you that God hath commanded it to Abraham, saying: “Abraham, circumcise thy foreskin and that of all thy house, for this is a covenant between me and thee for ever.”’



## 23\. Origin of circumcision, and covenant of God with Abraham, and damnation of the uncircumcised.

And having said this, Jesus sat nigh unto the mountain which they looked upon. And his disciples came to his side to listen to his words. Then said Jesus: ‘Adam the first man having eaten, by fraud of Satan, the food forbidden of God in paradise, his flesh rebelled against the spirit; whereupon he swore, saying: “By God, I will cut thee!” And having broken a piece of rock, he seized his flesh to cut it with the sharp edge of the stone: whereupon he was rebuked by the angel Gabriel. And he answered: “I have sworn by God to cut it; I will never be a liar!”

‘Then the angel showed him the superfluity of his flesh, and that he cut off. And hence, just as every man taketh flesh for the flesh of Adam, so is he bound to observe in his sons, and from generation to generation came down the obligation of circumcision. But in the time of Abraham there were but few circumcised upon the earth, because that idolatry was multiplied upon the earth. Whereupon God told to Abraham the fact concerning circumcision, and made this covenant, saying: “The soul that shall not have his flesh circumcised, I will scatter him from among my people for ever.”’

The disciples trembled with fear at these words of Jesus, for with vehemence of spirit he spake. Then said Jesus: ‘Leave fear to him that hath not circumcised his foreskin, for he is deprived of paradise.’ And having said this, Jesus spake again, saying: ‘The spirit in many is ready in the service of God, but the flesh is weak. The man therefore that feareth God ought to consider what the flesh is, and where it had its origin, and whereto it shall be reduced. Of the clay of the earth created God flesh, and into it he breathed the breath of life, with an inbreathing therein. And therefore when the flesh shall hinder the service of God it ought to be spurned like clay and trampled on, forasmuch as he that hateth his soul in this world shall keep it in life eternal.

‘What the flesh is at this present its desires make manifest— that it is a harsh enemy of all good: for it alone desireth sin.

‘Ought then man for the sake of satisfying one of his enemies to leave off pleasing God, his creator? Consider ye this: All the saints and prophets have been enemies of their flesh for service of God: wherefore readily and with gladness they went to their death, so as not to offend against the law of God given by Moses his servant, and I go and serve the false and lying gods.

‘Remember Elijah, who fled through desert places of the mountains, eating only grass, clad in goats' skin. Ah, how many days he supped not! Ah, how much cold he endured! Ah, how many showers drenched him and \[that\] for the space of seven years, wherein endured that fierce persecution of the unclean Jezebel!

‘Remember Elisha, who ate barley-bread, and wore the coarsest raiment. Verily I say unto you that they, not fearing to spurn the flesh, were feared with great terror by the king and princes. This should suffice for the spurning of the flesh, O men. But if ye will gaze at the sepulchres, ye shall know what flesh is.’



## 24\. Notable example how one ought to flee from banqueting and feasting.

Having said this, Jesus wept, saying: ‘Woe to those who are servants to their flesh, for they are sure not to have any good in the other life, but only torments for their sins. I tell you that there was a rich glutton who paid no heed to aught but gluttony, and so every day held a splendid feast. There stood at his gate a poor man by name Lazarus, who was full of wounds, and was fain to have those crumbs that fell from the glutton's table. But no one gave them to him; nay, all mocked him. Only the dogs had pity on him, for they licked his wounds. It came to pass that the poor man died, and the angels carried him to the arms of Abraham our father. The rich man also died, and the devils carried him to the arms of Satan; whereupon, undergoing the greatest torment, he lifted up his eyes and from afar saw Lazarus in the arms of Abraham. Then cried the rich man: “O father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, who upon his fingers may bring me a drop of water to cool my tongue, which is tormented in this flame.”

‘Abraham answered: “Son, remember that thou receivedst thy good in the other life and Lazarus his evil: wherefore now thou shalt be in torment, and Lazarus in consolation.”

‘The rich man cried out again, saying: “O father Abraham, in my house there are three brethren of mine. Therefore send Lazarus to announce to them how much I am suffering, in order that they may repent and not come hither.”

‘Abraham answered: “They have Moses and the prophets, let I them hear them.”

‘The rich man answered: “Nay, father Abraham; but if one dead shall arise they will believe.”

‘Abraham answered: “Whoso believeth not Moses and the prophets will not believe even the dead if they should arise.”

‘See then whether the poor are blessed,’ said Jesus, ‘who have patience, and only desire that which is necessary, hating the flesh. O wretched they, who bear others to the burial, to give their flesh for food of worms, and do not learn the truth. So far from it that they live here like immortals, for they build great houses and purchase great revenues and live in pride.”



## 25\. How one ought to despise the flesh, and how one ought to live in the world.

Then said he who writeth: ‘O master, true are thy words and therefore have we forsaken all to follow thee. Tell us then, how we ought to hate our flesh: for to kill oneself is not lawful, and living we needs must give it its livelihood.’

Jesus answered: ‘Keep thy flesh like a horse, and thou shalt live securely. For unto a horse food is given by measure and labour without measure, and the bridle is put on him that he may walk at thy will, he is tied up that he may not annoy anyone, he is kept in a poor place, and beaten when he is not obedient: so do thou, then, O Barnabas, and thou shalt live always with God.

‘And be not offended at my words, for David the prophet did the same thing, as he confesseth, saying: “I am as an horse before thee: and am always by thee.”

‘Now tell me, whether is poorer he who is content with little, or he who desireth much? Verily I say unto you, that if the world had but a sound mind no one would amass anything for himself, but all would be in common. But in this is known its madness, that the more it amasseth the more it desireth. And as much as it amasseth, for the fleshly repose of others doth it amass the same. Therefore let one single robe suffice for you, cast away your purse, carry no wallet, no sandals on your feet; and do not think, saying: “What shall happen to us?” but have thought to do the will of God, and he will provide for your need, insomuch that nothing shall be lacking unto you.

‘Verily I say unto you, that the amassing much in this life giveth sure witness of not having anything to receive in the other. For he that hath Jerusalem for his native country buildeth not houses in Samaria, for that there is enmity between these cities. Understand ye?’

‘Yea,’ answered the disciples.



## 26\. How one ought to love God. And in this chapter is contained the wonderful contention of Abraham with his father.

Then said Jesus: ‘There was a man on a journey who, as he was walking, discovered a treasure in a field that was to be sold for five pieces of money. Straightway the man, when he knew this, sold his cloak to buy that field. Is that credible?”

The disciples answered: ‘He who would not believe this is mad.’

Thereupon Jesus said: ‘Ye will be mad if ye give not your senses to God to buy your soul, wherein resideth the treasure of love; for love is a treasure incomparable. For he that loveth God hath God for his own; and whoso hath God hath everything.’

Peter answered: ‘O master, how ought one to love God with true love? Tell thou us.’

Jesus replied: ‘Verily I say unto you that he who shall not hate his father and his mother, and his own life, and children and wife for love of God, that such an one is not worthy to be loved of God.’

Peter answered: ‘O master, it is written in the law of God in the book of Moses: “Honour thy father, that thou mayest live long upon the earth.” And further he saith: “Cursed be the son that obeyeth not his father and his mother”; wherefore God commanded that such a disobedient son should be by the wrath of the people stoned before the gate of the city. And now how biddest thou us to hate father and mother?’

Jesus replied: ‘Every word of mine is true, because it is not mine, but God's, who hath sent me to the house of Israel. Therefore I say unto you that all that which ye possess God hath bestowed it upon you: and so, whether is the more precious, the gift or the giver? When thy father and thy mother, with every other thing is a stumbling-block to thee in the service of God, abandon them as enemies. Did not God say to Abraham: “Go forth from the house of thy father and of thy kindred, and come to dwell in the land which I will give to thee and to thy seed?” And wherefore did God say this, save because the father of Abraham was an image-maker, who made and worshipped false gods? Whence there was enmity between them insomuch that the father wished to burn his son.’

Peter answered: ‘True are thy words, wherefore I pray thee tell us how Abraham mocked his father.’

Jesus replied: ‘Abraham was seven years old when he began to seek God. So one day he said to his father: “Father, what made man?”

‘The foolish father answered: “Man; for I made thee, and my father made me.”

Abraham answered: “Father, it is not so; for I have heard an old man weeping and saying: ‘O my God, wherefore hast thou not given me children?’”

‘His father replied: “It is true, my son, that God helpeth man to make man, but he putteth not his hand thereto; it is only necessary that man come to pray to his God and to give him lambs and sheep, and his God will help him.”

‘Abraham answered: “How many gods are there, father?”

‘The old man replied: “They are infinite in number, my son.”

‘Then said Abraham: “O father, what shall I do if I shall serve one god and another shall wish me evil because I serve him not? In any wise there will come discord between them, and so war will arise among the gods. But if perchance the god that willeth me evil shall slay my own god, what shall I do? It is certain that he will slay me also.”

‘The old man, laughing, answered: “O son, have no fear, for no god maketh war upon another god; nay, in the great temple there are a thousand gods with the great god Baal; and I am now nigh seventy years old, and yet never have I seen that one god hath smitten another god. And assuredly all men do not serve one god, but one man one, and another another.”

‘Abraham answered: “So, then, they have peace among themselves?”

‘Said his father: “They have.”

‘Then said Abraham: “O father, what be the gods like?”

‘The old man answered: “Fool, every day I make a god, which I sell to others to buy bread, and thou knowest not what the gods are like!” And then at that moment he was making an idol. “This,” said he, “is of palm wood, that one is of olive, that little one is of ivory: see how fine it is! Does it not seem as though it were alive? Assuredly, it lacks but breath!”

‘Abraham answered: “And so, father, the gods are without breath? Then how do they give breath? And being without life, how give they life? It is certain, father, that these are not God.”

‘The old man was wroth at these words, saying: “If thou wert of age to understand, I would break thy head with this axe: But hold thy peace, because thou hast not understanding!”

‘Abraham answered: “Father, if the gods help to make man, how can it be that man should make the gods? And if the gods are made of wood, it is a great sin to burn wood. But tell me, father, how is it that, when thou hast made so many gods, the gods have not helped thee to make so many other children that thou shouldest become the most powerful man in the world?”

‘The father was beside himself, hearing his son speak so; the son went on: “Father, was the world for some time without men?”

‘“Yes,” answered the old man, “and why?”

“Because,” said Abraham, “I should like to know who made the first God.”

‘“Now go out of my house!” said the old man, “and leave me to make this god quickly, and speak no words to me; for, when thou art hungry thou desirest bread and not words.”

‘Said Abraham: “A fine god, truly, that thou cuttest him as thou wilt, and he defendeth not himself!”

‘Then the old man was angry, and said: “All the world saith that it is a god, and thou, mad fellow, sayest that it is not. By my gods, if thou wert a man I could kill thee!” And having said this, he gave blows and kicks to Abraham, and chased him from the house.’



## 27\. In this chapter is clearly seen how improper is laughter in men: also the prudence of Abraham.

The disciples laughed over the madness of the old man, and stood amazed at the prudence of Abraham. But Jesus reproved them, saying: ‘Ye have forgotten the words of the prophet, who saith: “Present laughter is a herald of weeping to come,” and further, “Thou shalt not go where is laughter, but sit where they weep, because this life passeth in miseries.” Then said Jesus: ‘In the time of Moses, know ye not that for laughing and mocking at others God turned into hideous beasts many men of Egypt: Beware that in anywise ye laugh not at anyone, for ye shall surely weep \[for it\].’

The disciples answered: ‘We laughed over the madness of the old man.’

Then said Jesus: ‘Verily I say unto you, every like loveth his like, and therein findeth pleasure. Therefore, if ye were not mad ye would not laugh at madness.’

They answered: ‘May God have mercy on us.’

Said Jesus: ‘So be it.’

Then said Philip: ‘O master, how came it to pass that Abraham's father wished to burn his son?’

Jesus answered: ‘One day, Abraham having come to the age of twelve years, his father said to him: ‘To-morrow is the festival of all the gods; therefore we shall go to the great temple and bear a present to my god, great Baal. And thou shalt choose for thyself a god, for thou art of age to have a god.”

‘Abraham answered with guile: “Willingly, O my father.” And so betimes in the morning they went before every one else to the temple. But Abraham bare beneath his tunic an axe hidden. Whereupon, having entered into the temple, as the crowd increased Abraham hid himself behind an idol in a dark part of the temple. His father, when he departed, believed that Abraham had gone home before him, wherefore he did not stay to seek him.



## 28.

‘When every one had departed from the temple, the priests closed the temple and went away. Then Abraham took the axe and cut off the feet of all the idols, except the great god Baal. At its feet he placed the axe, amid the ruins which the statues made, for they, through being old and composed of pieces, fell in pieces. Thereupon, Abraham, going forth from the temple, was seen by certain men, who suspected him of having gone to thieve something from the temple. So they laid hold on him, and having arrived at the temple, when they saw their gods so broken in pieces, they cried out with lamentation: “Come quickly, O men, and let us slay him who hath slain our gods!” There ran together there about ten thousand men, with the priests, and questioned Abraham of the reason why he had destroyed their gods.

‘Abraham answered: “Ye are foolish! Shall then a man slay God? It is the great God that hath slain them. See you not that axe which he hath near his feet? Certain it is that he desireth no fellows.”

‘Then arrived there the father of Abraham, who, mindful of the many discourses of Abraham against their gods, and recognizing the axe wherewith Abraham had broken in pieces the idols, cried out: “It hath been this traitor of a son of mine, who hath slain our gods! for this axe is mine.” And he recounted to them all that had passed between him and his son.

‘Accordingly the man collected a great quantity of wood, and having bound Abraham's hands and feet put him upon the wood, and put fire underneath.

‘Lo! God, through his angel, commanded the fire that it should not burn Abraham his servant. The fire blazed up with great fury, and burned about two thousand men of those who had condemned Abraham to death. Abraham verily found himself free, being carried by the angel of God near to the house of his father, without seeing who carried him and thus Abraham escaped death.’



## 29.

Then said Philip: ‘Great is the mercy of God upon whoso loveth him. Tell us, O master, how Abraham came to the knowledge of God.’

Jesus answered: ‘Having arrived nigh unto the house of his father, Abraham feared to go into the house; so he removed some distance from the house and sat under a palm tree, where thus abiding by himself he said: “It needs must be that there is a God who hath life and power more than man, since he maketh man, and man without God could not make man.” Thereupon, looking round upon the stars, the moon, and the sun, he thought that they had been God. But after considering their variableness with their movements, he said: “It needs must be that God move not, and that clouds hide him not: otherwise men would be brought to naught.” Whereupon, remaining thus in suspense, he heard himself called by name, “Abraham!” And so, turning round and not seeing anyone on any side, he said: “I have surely heard myself called by name, ‘Abraham.’” Thereupon, two other times in like manner, he heard himself called by name, “Abraham!”

‘He answered: “Who calleth me!”

‘Then he heard it said: “I am the angel of God, Gabriel.”

‘Therefore was Abraham filled with fear; but the angel comforted him, saying: “Fear not, Abraham, for that thou art friend of God; wherefore, when thou didst break in pieces the gods of men, thou wert chosen of the God of the angels and prophets; insomuch that thou art written in the book of life.”

‘Then said Abraham: “What ought I to do, to serve the God of the angels and holy prophets?”

‘The angel answered: “Go to that fount and wash thee, for God willeth to speak with thee.”

‘Abraham answered: “Now, how ought I to wash me?”

‘Then the angel presented himself unto him as a beautiful youth, and washed himself in the fount, saying: “Do thou in turn likewise to thyself, O Abraham.” When Abraham had washed himself, the angel said: “Go up that mountain, for God willeth to speak to thee there.”

‘He ascended the mountain as the angel said to Abraham, and having sat down upon his knees he said to himself: “When will the God of the angels speak to me?”

‘He heard himself called with a gentle voice: “Abraham!”

‘Abraham answered Him: “Who calleth me?”

‘The voice answered: “I am thy God, O Abraham.”

‘Abraham, filled with fear, bent his face to earth, saying: “How shall thy servant hearken unto thee, who is dust and ashes!”

‘Then said God: “Fear not, but rise up, for I have chosen thee for my servant, and I will to bless thee and make thee increase into a great people. Therefore go thou forth from the house of thy father and of thy kindred, and come to dwell in the land which I will give to thee and to thy seed.”

‘Abraham answered: “All will I do, Lord; but guard me that none other god may do me hurt.”

‘Then spake God, saying: “I am God alone, and there is none other God but me. I strike down, and make whole; I slay, and give life; I lead down to hell, and I bring out thereof, and none is able to deliver himself out of my hands.” Then God gave him the covenant of circumcision; and so our father Abraham knew God.’

And having said this, Jesus lifted up his hands, saying ‘To thee be honour and glory, O God. So be it!’



## 30.

Jesus went to Jerusalem, near unto the Senofegia ( = Tabernacles), a feast of our nation. The scribes and Pharisees having perceived this, took counsel to catch him in his talk.

Whereupon, there came to him a doctor, saying: ‘Master, what must I do to have eternal life?’

Jesus answered: ‘How is it written in the law?’

The tempter answered, saying: ‘Love the Lord thy God, and thy neighbor. Thou shalt love thy God above all things, with all thy heart and thy mind, and thy neighbor as thyself.’

Jesus answered: ‘Thou hast answered well: therefore go and do thou so, I say, and thou shalt have eternal life.’

He said unto him: ‘And who is my neighbor?’

Jesus answered, lifting up his eyes: ‘A man was going down from Jerusalem to go unto Jericho, a city rebuilt under a curse. This man on the road was seized by robbers, wounded and stripped; whereupon they departed, leaving him half dead. It chanced that a priest passed by that place, and he, seeing the wounded man, passed on without greeting him. In like manner passed a Levite, without saying a word. It chanced that there passed \[also\] a Samaritan, who, seeing the wounded man, was moved to compassion, and alighted from his horse, and took the wounded man and washed his wounds with wine, and anointed them with ointment, and binding up his wounds for him and comforting him, he set him upon his own horse. Whereupon, having arrived in the evening at the inn, he gave him into the charge of the host. And when he had risen on the morrow, he said: “Take care of this man, and I will pay thee all.” And having presented four gold pieces to the sick man for the host, he said: “Be of good cheer, for I will speedily return and conduct thee to my own home.”’

‘Tell me,’ said Jesus, ‘which of these was the neighbor?’

The doctor answered: ‘He who showed mercy.’

Then said Jesus: ‘Thou has answered rightly; therefore go and do thou likewise.’

The doctor departed in confusion.



## 31.

Then drew near unto Jesus the priests, and said: ‘Master, is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar?’ Jesus turned round to Judas, and said: ‘Hast thou any money?’ And taking a penny in his hand, Jesus turned himself to the priests, and said to them: ‘This penny hath an image: tell me, whose image is it?’

They answered: ‘Caesar's.’

‘Give therefore,’ said Jesus, ‘that which is Caesar's to Caesar, and that which is God's give it to God.’

Then they departed in confusion.

And behold there drew nigh a centurion, saying: ‘Lord, my son is sick; have mercy on my old age!’

Jesus answered: ‘The Lord God of Israel have mercy on thee!’

The man was departing; and Jesus said: ‘Wait for me, for I will come to thine house, to make prayer over thy son.’

The centurion answered: ‘Lord, I am not worthy that thou, a prophet of God, shouldest come unto my house, sufficient unto me is the word that thou hast spoken for the healing of my son; for thy God hath made thee lord over every sickness, even as his angel said unto me in my sleep.’

Then Jesus marvelled greatly, and turning to the crowd, he said: ‘Behold this stranger, for he hath more faith than all that I have found in Israel.’ And turning to the centurion, he said: ‘Go in peace, because God, for the great faith that he hath given thee, hath granted health to thy son.’

The centurion went his way, and on the road he met his servants, who announced to him how his son was healed.

The man answered: ‘At what hour did the fever leave him?’

They said: ‘Yesterday, at the sixth hour, the heat departed from him.’

The man knew that when Jesus said: ‘The Lord God of Israel have mercy on thee,’ his son received his health. Whereupon the man believed in our God, and having entered into his house, he brake in pieces all his own gods, saying: ‘There is only the God of Israel, the true and living God.’ Therefore said he: ‘None shall eat of my bread that worshippeth not the God of Israel.’



## 32.

One skilled in the law invited Jesus to supper, in order to tempt him. Jesus came thither with his disciples, and many scribes, to tempt him, waited for him in the house. Whereupon, the disciples sat down to table without washing their hands. The scribes called Jesus, saying: ‘Wherefore do not thy disciples observe the traditions of our elders, in not washing their hands before they eat bread?’

Jesus answered: ‘And I ask you, for what cause have ye annulled the precept of God to observe your traditions? Ye say to the sons of poor fathers: “Offer and make vows unto the temple.” And they make vows of that little wherewith they ought to support their fathers. And when their fathers wish to take money, the sons cry out: “This money is consecrated to God”; whereby the fathers suffer. O false scribes, hyprocrites, doth God use this money? Assuredly not, for God eateth not, as he saith by his servant David the prophet: “Shall I then eat the flesh of bulls and drink the blood of sheep? Render unto me the sacrifice of praise, and offer unto me thy vows; for if I should be hungry I will not ask aught of thee, seeing that all things are in my hands, and the abundance of paradise is with me.” Hypocrites! ye do this to fill your purse, and therefore ye tithe rue and mint. Oh miserable ones! for unto others ye show the most clear way, by which ye will not go.

‘Ye scribes and doctors lay upon the shoulders of others weights of unbearable weight, but ye yourselves the while are not willing to move them with one of your fingers.

‘Verily I say unto you, that every evil hath entered into the world under the pretext of the elders. Tell me, who made idolatry to enter into the world, if not the usage of the elders? For there was a king who exceedingly loved his father, whose name was Baal. Whereupon, when the father was dead, his son for his own consolation, caused to be made an image like unto his father, and set it up in the marketplace of the city. And he made a decree that every one who approached that statue within a space of fifteen cubits should be safe, and no one on any account should do him hurt. Hence the malefactors, by reason of the benefit they received therefrom, began to offer to the statue roses and flowers, and in a short time the offerings were changed into money and food, insomuch that they called it god, to honour it. Which thing from custom was transformed into a law, insomuch that the idol of Baal spread through all the world; and how much doth God lament this by the prophet Isaiah, saying: “Truly this people worshippeth me in vain, for they have annulled my law given to them by my servant Moses, and follow the traditions of their elders.”

‘Verily I say unto you, that to eat bread with unclean hands defileth not a man, because that which entereth into the man defileth not the man, but that which cometh out of the man defileth the man.’

Thereupon, said one of the scribes: ‘If I shall eat pork, or other unclean meats, will they not defile my conscience?’

Jesus answered: ‘Disobedience will not enter into the man, but will come out of the man, from his heart; and therefore will he be defiled when he shall eat forbidden food.’

Then said one of the doctors: ‘Master, thou hast spoken much against idolatry as though the people of Israel had idols, and so thou hast done us wrong.’

Jesus answered: ‘I know well that in Israel to-day there are not statues of wood; but there are statues of flesh.’

Then answered all the scribes in wrath: ‘And so we are idolaters?’

Jesus answered: ‘Verily I say unto you, the precept saith not “Thou shalt worship,” but “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and with all thy heart, and with all thy mind.” Is this true?’ said Jesus.

‘It is true,’ answered every one.



## 33.

Then said Jesus: ‘Verily all that which a man loveth, for which he leaveth everything else but that, is his god. And so the fornicator hath for his image the harlot, the glutton and drunkard hath for image his own flesh, and the covetous hath for his image silver and gold, and so likewise every other sinner.’

Then said he who had invited him: ‘Master, which is the greatest sin?’

Jesus answered: ‘Which is the greatest ruin of a house?’

Everyone was silent, when Jesus with his finger pointed to the foundation, and said: ‘If the foundation give way, immediately the house falleth in ruin, in such wise that it is necessary to build it up anew: but if every other part give way it can be repaired. Even so then say I to you, that idolatry is the greatest sin, because it depriveth a man entirely of faith, and consequently of God; so that he can have no spiritual affection. But every other sin leaveth to man the hope of obtaining mercy: and therefore I say that idolatry is the greatest sin.’

All stood amazed at the speaking of Jesus, for they perceived that it could not in any wise be assailed.

Then Jesus continued: ‘Remember that which God spake and which Moses and Joshua wrote in the law, and ye shall see how grave is this sin. Said God, speaking to Israel: “Thou shalt not make to thyself any image of those things which are in heaven nor of those things which are under the heaven, nor shalt thou make it of those things which are above the earth, nor of those which are above the water, nor of those which are under the water. For I am thy God, strong and jealous, who will take vengeance for this sin upon the fathers and upon their children even unto the fourth generation.” Remember how, when our people had made the calf, and when they had worshipped it, by commandment of God Joshua and the tribe of Levi took the sword and slew of them one hundred and twenty thousand of those that did not crave mercy of God. Oh, terrible judgment of God upon the idolaters!’



## 34.

There stood before the door one who had his right hand shrunken in such fashion that he could not use it. Whereupon Jesus, having lift up his heart to God, prayed, and then said: ‘In order that ye may know that my words are true, I say, “In the name of God, man, stretch out thine infirm hand.” He stretched it out whole, as if it had never had aught ill with it.

Then with fear of God they began to eat. And having eaten somewhat, Jesus said again: ‘Verily I say unto you, that it were better to burn a city than to leave there an evil custom. For on account of such is God wroth with the princes and kings of the earth, to whom God hath given the sword to destroy iniquities.’

Afterwards said Jesus: ‘When thou are invited, remember not to set thyself in the highest place, in order that if a greater friend of the host come the host say not unto thee: “Arise and sit lower down!” which were a shame to thee. But go and sit in the meanest place, in order that he who invited thee may come and say: “Arise, friend, and come and sit here, above!” For then shalt thou have great honour: for every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.

‘Verily I say unto you, that Satan became not reprobate for other sin than for his pride. Even as saith the prophet Isaiah, reproaching him with these words: “How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, that wert the beauty of the angels, and didst shine like the dawn: truly to earth is fallen thy pride!”

‘Verily I say unto you, that if a man knew his miseries, he would always weep here on earth and account himself most mean, beyond every other thing. For no other cause did the first man with his wife weep for a hundred years without ceasing, craving mercy of God, for they knew truly whither they had fallen through their pride.’

And having said this, Jesus gave thanks; and that day it was published through Jerusalem how great things Jesus had said, with the miracle he had wrought, insomuch that the people gave thanks to God blessing his holy name.

But the scribes and priests, having understood that he spake against the traditions of the elders, were kindled with greater hatred. And like Pharaoh they hardened their heart; wherefore they sought occasion to slay him, but found it not.



## 35.

Jesus departed from Jerusalem, and went to the desert beyond Jordan: and his disciples that were seated round him said to Jesus: ‘O master, tell us how Satan fell through pride, for we have understood that he fell through disobedience, and because he always tempteth man to do evil.’

Jesus answered: ‘God having created a mass of earth, and having left it for twenty-five thousand years without doing aught else; Satan, who was as it were priest and head of the angels, by the great understanding that he possessed, knew that God of that mass of earth was to take one hundred and forty and four thousand signed with the mark of prophecy, and the messenger of God, the soul of which messenger he had created sixty thousand years before aught else. Therefore, being indignant, he instigated the angels, saying: “Look ye, one day God shall will that this earth be revered by us. Wherefore consider that we are spirit, and therefore it is not fitting so to do.”

‘Many therefore forsook God. Whereupon said God, one day when all the angels were assembled: “Let each one that holds me for his lord straightway do reverence to this earth.”

‘They that loved God bowed themselves, but Satan, with them that were of his mind, said: “O Lord, we are spirit, and therefore it is not just that we should do reverence to this clay.” Having said this, Satan became horrid and of fearsome look, and his followers became hideous; because for their rebellion God took away from them the beauty wherewith he had endued them in creating them. Whereat the holy angels, when, lifting their heads, they saw how terrible a monster Satan had become, and his followers, cast down their face to earth in fear.

‘Then said Satan: “O Lord, thou hast unjustly made me hideous, but I am content thereat, because I desire to annul all that thou shalt do. And the other devils said: ”Call him not Lord, O Lucifer, for thou art Lord.”

‘Then said God to the followers of Satan: “Repent ye, and recognize me as God, your creator.”

‘They answered: “We repent of having done thee any reverence, for that thou art not just; but Satan is just and innocent, and he is our Lord.”

‘Then said God: “Depart from me, O ye cursed, for I have no mercy on you.”

‘And in his departing Satan spat upon that mass of earth, and that spittle the angel Gabriel lifted up with some earth, so that therefore now man has the navel in his belly.’



## 36.

The disciples stood in great amazement at the rebellion of the angels.

Then said Jesus: ‘Verily I say unto you, that he who maketh not prayer is more wicked than Satan, and shall suffer greater torments. Because Satan had, before his fall, no example of fearing, nor did God so much as send him any prophet to invite him to repentance: but man—now that all the prophets are come except the messenger of God who shall come after me, because so God willeth, and that I may prepare his way—and man, I say, albeit he have infinite examples of the justice of God, liveth carelessly without any fear, as though there were no God. Even as of such spake the prophet David: “The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God. Therefore are they corrupt and become abominable, without one of them doing good.”

‘Make prayer unceasingly, O my disciples, in order that ye may receive. For he who seeketh findeth, and he who knocketh to him it is opened, and he who asketh receiveth. And in your prayer do not look to much speaking, for God looketh on the heart; as he said through Solomon: “O my servant, give me thine heart.” Verily I say unto you, as God liveth, the hyprocrites make much prayer in every part of the city in order to be seen and held for saints by the multitude: but their heart is full of wickedness, and therefore they do not mean that which they ask. It is needful that thou mean thy prayer if thou wilt that God receive it. Now tell me: who would go to speak to the Roman governor or to Herod, except he first have made up his mind to whom he is going, and what he is going to do? Assuredly none. And if man doeth so in order to speak with man, what ought man to do in order to speak with God, and ask of him mercy for his sins, while thanking him for all that he hath given him?

‘Verily I say unto you, that very few make true prayer, and therefore Satan hath power over them, because God willeth not those who honour him with their lips: who in the temple ask \[with\] their lips for mercy, and their heart crieth out for justice. Even as he saith to Isaiah the prophet, saying: “Take away this people that is irksome to me, because with their lips they honour me, but their heart is far from me.” Verily I say unto you, that he that goeth to make prayer without consideration mocketh God.

‘Now who would go to speak to Herod with his back towards him, and before him speak well of Pilate the governor, whom he hateth to the death? Assuredly none. Yet no less doth the man who goeth to make prayer and prepareth not himself. He turneth his back to God and his face to Satan, and speaketh well of him. For in his heart is the love of iniquity, whereof he hath not repented.

‘If one, having injured thee, should with his lips say to thee. “Forgive me,” and with his hands should strike thee a blow, how wouldest thou forgive him? Even so shall God have, mercy on those who with their lips say: “Lord, have mercy on us, and with their heart love iniquity and think on fresh sins.’



## 37.

The disciples wept at the words of Jesus and besought him, saying: ‘Lord, teach us to make prayer.’

Jesus answered: ‘Consider what ye would do if the Roman governor seized you to put you to death, and that same do ye when ye go to make prayer. And let your words be these: “O Lord our God, hallowed be thy holy name, thy kingdom come in us, thy will be done always, and as it is done in heaven so be it done in earth; give us the bread for every day, and forgive us our sins, as we forgive them that sin against us, and suffer us not to fall into temptations, but deliver us from evil, for thou art alone our God, to whom pertaineth glory and honour for ever.’



## 38.

Then answered John: ‘Master, let us wash ourselves as God

commanded by Moses.’

Jesus said: ‘Think ye that I am come to destroy the law and

the prophets? Verily I say unto you, as God liveth, I am not come to

destroy it, but rather to observe it. For every prophet hath observed

the law of God and all that God by the other prophets hath spoken.

As God liveth, in whose presence my soul standeth, no one that

breaketh one least precept can be pleasing to God, but shall be least

in the kingdom of God, for he shall have no part there. Moreover I

say unto you, that one syllable of the law of God cannot be broken

without the gravest sin. But I do you to wit that it is necessary to

observe that which God saith by Isaiah the prophet, with these

words: “Wash you and be clean, take away your thoughts from

mine eyes.”

‘Verily I say unto you, that all the water of the sea will not wash

him who with his heart loveth iniquities. And furthermore I say unto

you, that no one will make prayer pleasing to God if he be not washed,

but will burden his soul with sin like to idolatry.

‘Believe me, in sooth, that if man should make prayer to God

as is fitting, he would obtain all that he should ask. Remember

Moses the servant of God, who with his prayer scourged Egypt,

opened the Red Sea, and there drowned Pharaoh and his host.

Remember Joshua, who made the sun stand still, Samuel, who

smote with fear the innumerable host of the Philistines, Elijah, who

made the fire to rain from heaven, Elisha raised a dead man, and so

many other holy prophets, who by prayer obtained all that they

asked. But those men truly did not seek their own in their matters,

but sought only God and his honour.’



## 39.

Then said John: ‘Well hast thou spoken, O master, but we lack to know how man sinned through pride.’

Jesus answered: ‘When God had expelled Satan, and the angel Gabriel had purified that mass of earth whereon Satan spat, God created everything that liveth, both of the animals that fly and of them that walk and swim, and he adorned the world with all that it hath. One day Satan approached unto the gates of paradise, and, seeing the horses eating grass, he announced to them that if that mass of earth should receive a soul there would be for them grievous labour; and that therefore it would be to their advantage to trample that piece of earth in such wise that it should be no more good for anything. The horses aroused themselves and impetuously set themselves to run over that piece of earth which lay among lilies and roses. Whereupon God gave spirit to that unclean portion of earth upon which lay the spittle of Satan, which Gabriel had taken up from the mass; and raised up the dog, who, barking, filled the horses with fear, and they fled. Then God gave his soul to man, while all the holy angels sang: “Blessed be thy holy name, O God our Lord.”

‘Adam, having sprung up upon his feet, saw in the air a writing that shone like the sun, which said: “There is only one God, and Mohammed is the messenger of God.” Whereupon Adam opened his mouth and said: “I thank thee, O Lord my God, that thou hast deigned to create me; but tell me, I pray thee, what meaneth the message of these words: ”Mohammed is messenger of God.“ Have there been other men before me?”

‘Then said God: “Be thou welcome, O my servant Adam, I tell thee that thou art the first man whom I have created. And he whom thou hast seen \[mentioned\] is thy son, who shall come into the world many years hence, and shall be my messenger, for whom I have created all things; who shall give light to the world when he shall come; whose soul was set in a celestial splendour sixty thousand years before I made anything.”

‘Adam besought God, saying: “Lord, grant me this writing upon the nails of the fingers of my hands.” Then God gave to the first man upon his thumbs that writing; upon the thumb-nail of the right hand it said: “There is only one God, and upon the thumb-nail of the left it said: “Mohammed is messenger of God.” Then with fatherly affection the first man kissed those words, and rubbed his eyes, and said: “Blessed be that day when thou shalt come to the world.”

‘Seeing the man alone, God said: “It is not well that he should remain alone.” Wherefore he made him to sleep, and took a rib from near his heart, filling the place with flesh. Of that rib made he Eve, and gave her to Adam for his wife. He set the twain of them as lords of Paradise, to whom he said: “Behold I give unto you every fruit to eat, except the apples and the corn” whereof he said: “Beware that in no wise ye eat of these fruits, for ye shall become unclean, insomuch that I shall not suffer you to remain here, but shall drive you forth, and ye shall suffer great miseries.”



## 40.

‘When Satan had knowledge of this he became mad with indignation. And so he drew near to the gate of paradise, whereat stood on guard a horrid serpent, which had legs like a camel, and the nails of his feet cut like a razor on every side. To him said the enemy: “Suffer me to enter into paradise.”

‘The serpent answered: “And how shall I suffer thee to enter, God having commanded me to drive thee out?”

‘Satan answered: “Thou seest how much God loveth thee, since he hath set thee outside of paradise to keep guard over a lump of clay, which is man. Wherefore, if thou bring me into paradise I will make thee so terrible that every one shall flee thee, and so at thy pleasure thou shalt go and stay.”

‘Then said the serpent: “And how shall I set thee within?”

‘Said Satan. “Thou art great: therefore open thy mouth, and I will enter into thy belly, and so thou entering into paradise shalt place me near to those two lumps of clay that are newly walking upon the earth.”

‘Then the serpent did so, and placed Satan near to Eve, for Adam, her husband, was sleeping. Satan presented himself before the woman like a beauteous angel, and said to her “Wherefore eat ye not of those apples and of corn?”

‘Eve answered: “Our God hath said to us that eating thereof we shall be unclean, and therefore he will drive us from paradise.”

‘Satan answered: “He saith not the truth. Thou must know that God is wicked and envious, and therefore he brooketh no equals, but keepeth every one for a slave. And so he hath thus spoken unto you, in order that ye may not become equal to him. But if thou and thy companion do according to my counsel, ye shall eat of those fruits even as of the others, and ye shall not remain subject to others, but like God ye shall know good and evil, and ye shall do that which ye please, because ye shall be equal to God.”

‘Then Eve took and ate of those \[fruits\]. And when her husband awoke she told all that Satan had said; and he took of them, his wife offering them, and did eat. Whereupon, as the food was going down, he remembered the words of God; wherefore, wishing to stop the food, he put his hand into his throat, where every man has the mark.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/1_20">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">1 — 20</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/41_60">
          <span class="pr-2">41 — 60</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
