---
title: "61 — 80"
description: "The Gospel of Barnabas"
published: true
date: 2024-11-27T23:49:26Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-27T23:49:26Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/41_60">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">41 — 60</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/81_100">
          <span class="pr-2">81 — 100</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## 61.

Having thus said, Jesus washed himself, with his disciples, according to the law of God written in the book of Moses; and then they prayed. And the disciples seeing him thus sad spake not at all to him that day, but each stood terror-struck at his words.

Then Jesus opening his mouth after the evening \[prayer\], said: ‘What father of a family if he knew that a thief meant to break into his house, would sleep? None assuredly; for he would watch and stand prepared to slay the thief. Do ye not know then that Satan is as a roaring lion that goeth about seeking whom he may devour. Thus he seeketh to make man sin. Verily I say unto you, that if man would act as the merchant he should have no fear in that day, because he would be well prepared. There was a man who gave money to his neighbors that they might trade with it, and the profit should be divided in a just proportion. And some traded well, so that they doubled the money. But some used the money in the service of the enemy of him who gave them the money, speaking evil of him. Tell me now, when the neighbor shall call the debtors to account how shall the matter go? Assuredly he will reward those who traded well, but against the others his anger shall vent itself in reproaches. And then he will punish them according to the law. As God liveth, in whose presence my soul standeth, the neighbor is God, who has given to man all that he hath, with life itself, so that, \[man\] living well in this world, God may have praise, and man the glory of paradise. For those who live well double their money by their example, because sinners, seeing their example, are converted to repentance; wherefore men who live well shall be rewarded with a great reward. But wicked sinners, who by their sins halve what God has given them, by their lives spent in the service of Satan the enemy of God, blaspheming God and giving offence to others,—tell me what shall be their punishment?’

‘It shall be without measure,’ said the disciples.



## 62.

Then said Jesus: ‘He who would live well should take example from the merchant who locketh up his shop, and guardeth it day and night with great diligence. And selling again the things which he buyeth he is fain to make a profit; for if he perceiveth that he will lose thereby he will not sell, no, not to his own brother. Thus then should ye do; for in truth your soul is a merchant, and the body is the shop: wherefore what it receiveth from outside, through the senses, is bought and sold by it. And the money is love. See then that with your love ye do not sell nor buy the smallest thought by which ye cannot profit. But let thought, speech, and work be all for love of God; for so shall ye find safety in that day. Verily I say unto you, that many make ablutions and go to pray, many fast and give alms, many study and preach to others, whose end is abominable before God; because they cleanse the body and not the heart, they cry with the mouth not with the heart; they abstain from meats, and fill themselves with sins; they give to others things not good for them, in order that they may be held good; they study that they may know to speak, not to work; they preach to others against that which they do themselves, and thus are condemned by their own tongue. As God liveth, these do not know God with their hearts; for if they knew him they would love him; and since whatsoever a man hath he hath received it from God, even so should he spend all for the love of God.’



## 63.

After certain days Jesus passed near unto a city of the Samaritans; and they would not let him enter the city, nor would they sell bread to his disciples. Wherefore said James and John: Master may it please thee that we pray God that he send down fire from heaven upon these people?’

Jesus answered: ‘Ye know not by what spirit ye are led, that ye so speak. Remember that God determined to destroy Nineveh because he did not find one who feared God in that city; the which was so wicked that God, having called Jonah the prophet to send him to that city, he would fain for fear of the people have fled to Tarsus, wherefore God caused him to be cast into the sea, and received by a fish and cast up nigh to Nineveh. And he preaching there, that people was converted to repentance, so that God had mercy on them.

Woe unto them that call for vengeance; for on themselves it shall come, seeing that every man hath in himself cause for the vengeance of God. Now tell me, have ye created this city with this people? O madmen that ye are, assuredly no. For all creatures united together could not create a single new fly from nothing, and this it is to create. If the blessed God who hath created this city now sustaineth it, why desire ye to destroy it? Why didst thou not say: “May it please thee, master, that we pray to the Lord our God that this people may be converted to penitence?” Assuredly this is the proper act of a disciple of mine, to pray to God for those who do evil. Thus did Abel when his brother Cain, accursed of God, slew him. Thus did Abraham for Pharaoh, who took from him his wife, and whom, therefore, the angel of God did not slay, but only struck with infirmity. Thus did Zechariah when, by decree of the impious king, he was slain in the temple. Thus did Jeremiah, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and David, with all the friends of God and holy prophets. Tell me, if a brother were stricken with frenzy, would you slay him because he spoke evil and struck those who came near him? Assuredly ye would not do so; but rather would ye endeavor to restore his health with medicines suitable to his infirmity.’



## 64.

‘As God liveth, in whose presence my soul standeth, a sinner is of infirm mind when he persecuteth a man. For tell me, is there anyone who would break his head for the sake of tearing the cloak of his enemy? Now how can he be of sane mind who separateth himself from God, the head of his soul, in order that he may injure the body of his enemy?

‘Tell me, O man, who is thy enemy? Assuredly thy body, and every one who praiseth thee. Wherefore if thou wert of sane mind thou wouldst kiss the hand of those who revile thee, and present gifts to those who persecute thee and strike thee much; because, O man, because the more that for, thy sins thou art reviled and persecuted in this life the less shalt thou be in the day of judgment. But tell me, O man, if the saints and prophets of God have been persecuted and defamed by the world even though they were innocent, what shall be done to thee, O sinner? And if they endured all with patience, praying for their persecutors, what shouldst thou do, O man, who art worthy of hell? Tell me, O my disciples, do ye not know that Shimei cursed the servant of God, David the prophet, and threw stones at him? Now what said David to those who would fain have killed Shimei? “What is it to thee, O Joab, that thou wouldst kill Shimei? let him curse me, for this is the will of God, who will turn this curse into a blessing.” And thus it was; for God saw the patience of David and delivered him from the persecution of his own son, Absalom.

Assuredly not a leaf stirreth without the will of God. Wherefore, when thou art in tribulation do not think of how much thou hast borne, nor of him who afflicted thee; but consider how much for thy sins thou art worthy to receive at the hand of the devils of hell. Ye are angry with this city because it would not receive us, nor sell bread to us. Tell me, are these people your slaves? Have ye given them this city? Have ye given them their corn? Or have ye helped them to reap it? Assuredly no; for ye are strangers in this land, and poor men. What thing is this then that thou sayest?’

The two disciples answered: ‘Lord, we have sinned; may God have mercy on us.’

And Jesus answered: ‘So be it.’



## 65.

The Passover drew near, wherefore Jesus, with his disciples, went up to Jerusalem. And he went to the pool call ‘Probatica.’ And the bath was so called because the angel of God every day troubled the water, and whosoever first entered the water after its movement was cured of every kind of infirmity. Wherefore a great number of sick persons remained beside the pool, which had five porticoes. And Jesus saw there an impotent man, who had been there thirty-and-eight years, sick with a grievous infirmity. Whereupon Jesus, knowing this by divine inspiration, had compassion on the sick man, and said to him: ‘Wilt thou be made whole?’

The impotent man answered: ‘Sir, I have no man when the angel troubleth the water to put me into it, but while I am coming another steppeth down before me and entereth therein.’

Then Jesus lifted up his eyes to heaven and said: ‘Lord our God, God of our fathers, have mercy upon this impotent man.’

And having said this, Jesus said: ‘In God's name, brother, be thou whole; rise and take up thy bed.’

Then the impotent man arose, praising God, and carried his bed upon his shoulders, and went to his house praising God.’

Those who saw him cried: ‘It is the sabbath day; it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed.’

He answered: ‘He that made whole said unto me, “Pick up thy bed, and go thy way to thy home.”

Then asked they him: ‘Who is he?’

He answered: ‘I know not his name.’

Whereupon, among themselves they said: ‘It must have been Jesus the Nazarene.’ Others said: ‘Nay, for he is a holy one of God, whereas he who has done this thing is a wicked man, for he causeth the sabbath to be broken.’

And Jesus went into the temple, and a great multitude drew nigh unto him to hear his words; whereat the priests were consumed with envy.



## 66.

One of them came to him, saying: ‘Good master, thou teachest well and truly; tell me therefore, in paradise what reward shall God give us?’

Jesus answered: ‘Thou callest me good, and knowest not that God alone is good, even as said Job, the friend of God: “A child of a day old is not clean; yea, even the angels are not faultless in God's presence.” Moreover he said: “The flesh attracteth sin, and sucketh up iniquity even as a sponge sucketh up water.”

Wherefore the priest was silent, being confounded. And Jesus said: ‘Verily I say unto you, naught is more perilous than speech. For so said Solomon: “Life and death are in the power of the tongue.” And he turned to his disciples, and said: ‘Beware of those who bless you, because they deceive you. With the tongue Satan blessed our first parents, but miserable was the outcome of his words. So did the sages of Egypt bless Pharaoh. So prophets bless Ahab, but false were their praises, so that the praised one perished with the praisers. Wherefore not without cause did God say by Isaiah the prophet: “My people, those that bless thee deceive thee.”

‘Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees; woe unto you, priests and Levites, because ye have corrupted the sacrifice of the Lord, so that those who come to sacrifice believe that God eateth cooked flesh like unto a man.’



## 67.

‘For ye say unto them: “Bring of your sheep and bulls and lambs to the temple of your God, and eat not all, but give a share to your God of that which he hath given you”; and ye do not tell them of the origin of sacrifice, that it is for a witness of the life granted to the son of our father Abraham, so that the faith and obedience of our father Abraham, with the promises made to him by God and the blessing given to him, should never be forgotten. But by Ezekiel the prophet saith God: “Remove from me these your sacrifices, your victims are abominable to me.” For the time draweth near when that shall be done of which our God spake by Hosea the prophet, saying: “I will call chosen the people not chosen.” And as he saith in Ezekiel the prophet: “God shall make a new covenant with his people, not according to the covenant which he gave to your fathers, which they observed not and he shall take from them a heart of stone, and give them a new heart”: and all this shall be because ye walk not now in his law. And ye have the key and open not: rather do ye block the road for those who would walk in it.’

The priest was departing to report all to the high priest, who stood nigh unto the sanctuary, but Jesus said: ‘Stay, for I will answer thy question.’



## 68.

‘Thou askest me to tell thee what God will give us in paradise. Verily I say unto you, that those who think of the wages love not the master. A shepherd who hath a flock of sheep, when he seeth the wolf coming, prepareth to defend them; contrariwise, the hireling when he seeth the wolf leaveth the sheep and fleeth. As God liveth, in whose presence I stand, if the God of our fathers were your God ye would not have thought of saying: “What will God give me?” But ye would have said, as did David his prophet: “What shall I give unto God for all that he hath given unto me?”

‘I will speak to you by a parable that ye may understand. There was a king who found by the wayside a man stripped by thieves, who had wounded him unto death. And he had compassion on him, and commanded his slaves to bear that man to the city and tend him; and this they did with all diligence. And the king conceived a great love for the sick man, so that he gave him his own daughter in marriage, and made him his heir. Now assuredly this king was most merciful; but the man beat the slaves, despised the medicines, abused his wife, spake evil of the king, and caused his vassals to rebel against him. And when the king required any service, he was wont to say: “What will the king give me as reward?” Now when the king heard this, what did he do to so impious a man?’

They all replied: ‘Woe to him, for the king deprived him of all, and cruelly punished him.’ Then said Jesus: ‘O priests, and scribes, and Pharisees, and thou high-priest that hearest my voice, I proclaim to you what God hath said to you by his prophet Isaiah: “I have nourished slaves and exalted them, but they have despised me.” ‘The king is our God, who found Israel in this world full of miseries, and gave him therefore to his servants Joseph, Moses and Aaron, who tended him. And our God conceived such love for him that for the sake of the people of Israel he smote Egypt, drowned Pharaoh, and discomfited an hundred and twenty kings of the Canaanites and Madianites; he gave him his laws, making him heir of all that \[land\] wherein our people dwelleth.

‘But how doth Israel bear himself? How many prophets hath he slain; how many prophecies hath he contaminated; how hath he violated the law of God: how many for that cause have departed from God and gone to serve idols, through your offence, O priests! And how do ye dishonor God with your manner of life! And now ye ask me: “What will God give us in paradise?” Ye ought to have asked me: What will be the punishment that God will give you in hell; and then what ye ought to do for true penitence in order that God may have mercy on you: for this I can tell you, and to this end am I sent to you.’



## 69.

‘As God liveth, in whose presence I stand, ye will not receive adulation from me, but truth. Wherefore I say unto you, repent and turn to God even as our fathers did after sinning, and harden not your heart.’

The priests were consumed with rage at this speech, but for fear of the common people they spake not a word.

And Jesus continued, saying: ‘O doctors, O scribes, O pharisees, O priests, tell me. Ye desire horses like knights, but ye desire not to go forth to war; ye desire fair clothing like women, but ye desire not to spin and nurture children; ye desire the fruits of the field, and ye desire not to cultivate the earth; ye desire the fishes of the sea, but ye desire not to go a fishing; ye desire honour as citizens, but ye desire not the burden of the republic; and ye desire tithes and first fruits as priests, but ye desire not to serve God in truth. What then shall God do with you, seeing ye desire here every good without any evil? Verily I say to you that God will give you a place where ye will have every evil without any good.’

And when Jesus had said this, there was brought unto him a demoniac who could not speak nor see, and was deprived of hearing. Whereupon Jesus, seeing their faith, raised his eyes to heaven and said: ‘Lord God of our fathers, have mercy on this sick man and give him health, in order that this people may know that thou hast sent me.’

And having said this Jesus commanded the spirit to depart, saying: ‘In the power of the name of God our Lord, depart, evil one, from the man!’

The spirit departed and the dumb man spoke, and saw with his eyes. Whereupon every one was filled with fear, but the scribes said: ‘In the power of Beelzebub, prince of the demons, he casteth out the demons’

Then said Jesus: ‘Every kingdom divided against itself destroyeth itself, and house falleth upon house. If in the power of Satan, Satan be cast out, how shall his kingdom stand? And if your sons cast out Satan with the scripture that Solomon the prophet gave them, they testify that I cast out Satan in the power of God. As God liveth, blasphemy against the Holy Spirit is without remission in this and in the other world; because the wicked man of his own will reprobates himself, knowing the reprobation.’

And having said this Jesus went out of the temple. And the common people magnified him, for they brought all the sick folk whom they could gather together, and Jesus having made prayer gave to all their health: whereupon on that day in Jerusalem the Roman soldiery, by the working of Satan, began to stir up the common people, saying that Jesus was the God of Israel, who was come to visit his people.



## 70.

Jesus departed from Jerusalem after the Passover, and entered into the borders of Caesarea Philippi. Whereupon, the angel Gabriel having told him of the sedition which was beginning among the common people, he asked his disciples, saying: ‘What do men say of me?’

They said: ‘Some say that thou art Elijah, others Jeremiah, and others one of the old prophets.’

Jesus answered: ‘And ye; what say ye that I am?’

Peter answered: ‘Thou art Christ, son of God.’

Then was Jesus angry, and with anger rebuked him, saying: ‘Begone and depart from me, because thou art the devil and seekest to cause me offence!’

And he threatened the eleven, saying: ‘Woe to you if ye believe this, for I have won from God a great curse against those who believe this.’

And he was fain to cast away Peter; whereupon the eleven besought Jesus for him, who cast him not away, but again rebuked him, saying: ‘Beware that never again thou say such words, because God would reprobate thee!’

Peter wept, and said: ‘Lord, I have spoken foolishly: beseech God that he pardon me.’

Then said Jesus: ‘If our God willed not to show himself to Moses his servant, nor to Elijah whom he so loved, nor to any prophet, will ye think that God should show himself to this faithless generation? But know ye not that God hath created all things of nothing with one single word, and all men have had their origin out of a piece of clay? Now, how shall God have likeness to man? Woe to those who suffer themselves to be deceived of Satan!’

And having said this, Jesus besought God for Peter, the eleven and Peter weeping, and saying: ‘So be it, so be it, O blessed Lord our God.’

Afterwards Jesus departed and went into Galilee, in order that this vain opinion which the common folk began to hold concerning him might be extinguished.



## 71.

Jesus having arrived in his own country, it was spread through all the region of Galilee how that Jesus the prophet was come to Nazareth. Whereupon with diligence sought they the sick and brought them to him, beseeching him that he would touch them with his hands. And so great was the multitude that a certain rich man sick of the palsy, not being able to get himself carried through the door, had himself carried up to the roof of the house in which Jesus was, and having caused the roof to be uncovered, and himself let down by sheets in front of Jesus. Jesus stood for a moment in hesitation, and then he said: ‘Fear not, brother, for thy sins are forgiven thee.’

Everyone was offended hearing this, and they said: ‘And who is this who forgiveth sins?’

Then said Jesus: ‘As God liveth, I am not able to forgive sins, nor is any man, but God alone forgiveth. But as servant of God I can beseech him for the sins of others: and so I have besought him for this sick man, and I am sure that God hath heard my prayer. Wherefore, that ye may know the truth, I say to this sick man: “In the name of the God of our fathers, the God of Abraham and his sons, rise up healed!” And when Jesus had said this the sick man rose up healed, and glorified God.

Then the common people besought Jesus that he would beseech God for the sick who stood outside. Whereupon Jesus went out unto them, and, having lifted up his hands, said: ‘Lord God of hosts, the living God, the true God, the holy God, that never will die; have mercy upon them!’ Whereupon every one answered: ‘Amen.’ And this having been said, Jesus laid his hands upon the sick folk, and they all received their health.

Thereupon they magnified God, saying: ‘God hath visited us by his prophet, and a great prophet hath God sent unto us.’



## 72.

At night Jesus spake in secret with his disciples, saying: ‘Verily I say unto you that Satan desireth to sift you as wheat; but I have besought God for you, and there shall not perish of you save he that layeth snares for me.’ And this he said of Judas, because the angel Gabriel said to him how that Judas had hand with the priests, and reported to them all that Jesus spake.

With tears drew near unto Jesus he who writeth this, saying: ‘O master, tell me, who is he that should betray thee?’

Jesus answered, saying: ‘O Barnabas, this is not the hour for thee to know him, but soon will the wicked one reveal himself, because I shall depart from the world.’

Then wept the apostles, saying: ‘O master, wherefore wilt thou forsake us? It is much better that we should die than be forsaken of thee!’

Jesus answered: ‘Let not your heart be troubled, neither be ye fearful: for I have not created you, but God our creator who hath created you will protect you. As for me, I am now come to the world to prepare the way for the messenger of God, who shall bring salvation to the world. But beware that ye be not deceived, for many false prophets shall come, who shall take my words and contaminate my gospel.’

Then said Andrew: ‘Master, tell us some sign, that we may know him.’

Jesus answered: ‘He will not come in your time, but will come some years after you, when my gospel shall be annulled, insomuch that there shall be scarcely thirty faithful. At that time God will have mercy on the world, and so he will send his messenger, over whose head will rest a white cloud, whereby he shall be known of one elect of God, and shall be by him manifested to the world. He shall come with great power against the ungodly, and shall destroy idolatry upon the earth. And it rejoiceth me because that through him our God shall be known and glorified, and I shall be known to be true; and he will execute vengeance against those who shall say that I am more than man. Verily I say to you that the moon shall minister sleep to him in his boyhood, and when he shall be grown up he shall take her in his hands. Let the world beware of casting him out because he shall slay the idolaters, for many more were slain by Moses, the servant of God, and Joshua, who spared not the cities which they burnt, and slew the children; for to an old wound one applieth fire.

‘He shall come with truth more clear than that of all the prophets, and shall reprove him who useth the world amiss. The towers of the city of our father shall greet one another for joy: and so when idolatry shall be seen to fall to the ground and confess me a man like other men, verily I say unto you the messenger of God shall be come.’



## 73.

‘Verily I say unto you, that if Satan shall try whether ye be friends of God—because no one assaileth his own cities,—if Satan should have his will over you he would suffer you to glide at your own pleasure; but because he knoweth that ye be enemies to him he will do every violence to make you perish. But fear not ye, for he will be aginst you as a dog that is chained, because God hath heard my prayer.’

John answered: ‘O master, not only for us, but for them that shall believe the gospel, tell us how the ancient tempter layeth wait for man.’

Jesus answered: ‘In four ways tempteth that wicked one. The first is when he tempteth by himself, with thoughts. The second is when he tempteth with words and deeds by means of his servants; the third is when he tempteth with false doctrine; the fourth is when he tempteth with false visions. Now how cautious ought men to be, and all the more according as he hath in his favour the flesh of man, which loveth sin as he who hath fever loveth water. Verily I say unto you, that if a man fear God he shall have victory over all, as saith David his prophet: “God shall give his angels charge over thee, who shall keep thy ways, so that the devil shall not cause thee to stumble. A thousand shall fall on thy left hand, and ten thousand on thy right hand, so that they shall not come nigh thee.”

‘Furthermore, our God with great love promised to us by the same David to keep us, saying: “I give unto thee understanding, which shall teach thee; and in thy ways wherein thou shalt walk I will cause Mine eye to rest upon thee.”

‘But what shall I say? He hath said by Isaiah: “Can a mother forget the child of her womb? But I say unto thee, that when he forget, I will not forget thee.”

‘Tell me, then, who shall fear Satan, having for guard the angels and for protection the living God? Nevertheless, it is necessary, as saith the prophet Solomon, that “Thou, my son, that art come to fear the Lord, prepare thy soul for temptations.” Verily I say unto you, that a man ought to do as the banker who examineth money, examining his thoughts, that he sin not against God his creator.’



## 74.

‘There have been and are in the world men who hold not thought for sin; who are in the greatest error. Tell me, how sinned Satan? It is certain that he sinned in the thought that he was more worthy than man. Solomon sinned in thinking to invite to a feast all the creatures of God, whereupon a fish corrected him by eating all that he had prepared. Wherefore, not without cause, saith David our father, that “to ascend in one's heart setteth one in the valley of tears.” And wherefore doth God cry by Isaiah his prophet, saying: “Take away your evil thoughts from mine eyes?” And to what purpose saith Solomon: “With all thy keeping, keep thine heart?” As God liveth, in whose presence standeth my soul, all is said against the evil thoughts wherewith sin is committed, for without thinking it is not possible to sin. Now tell me, when the husbandman planteth the vineyard doth he set the plants deep? Assuredly yea. Even so doth Satan, who in planting sin doth not stop at the eye or the ear, but passeth into the heart, which is God's dwelling. As he spake by Moses his servant, saying: “I will dwell in them, in order that they may walk in my law.”

‘Now tell me, if Herod the king should give you a house to keep in which he desired to dwell, would ye suffer Pilate, his enemy, to enter there or to place his goods therein? Assuredly no. Then how much less ought ye to suffer Satan to enter into your heart, or to place his thoughts therein; seeing that our God hath given you your heart to keep, which is his dwelling. Observe, therefore, that the banker considereth the money, whether the image of Caesar is right, whether the silver is good or false, and whether it is of due weight: wherefore he turneth it over much in his hand. Ah, mad world! How prudent thou art in thy business, so that in the last day thou wilt reprove and judge the servants of God of negligence and carelessness, for without doubt thy servants are more prudent than the servants of God. Tell me, now, who is he who examineth a thought as the banker a silver coin? Assuredly no one.’



## 75.

Then said James: ‘O master, how is the examination of a thought like unto \[that of\] a coin?’

Jesus answered: ‘The good silver in the thought is piety, because every impious thought cometh of the devil. The right image is the example of the holy ones and prophets, which we ought to follow; and the weight of the thought is the love of God by which all ought to be done. Whereupon the enemy will bring there impious thoughts against your neighbor, \[thoughts\] conformed to the world, to corrupt the flesh; \[thoughts\] of earthly love to corrupt the love of God.’

Bartholomew answered: ‘O master, what ought we to do to think little, in order that we may not fall into temptation?’

Jesus answered: ‘Two things are necessary for you. The first is to exercise yourselves much, and the second is to talk little: for idleness is a sink wherein is gathered every unclean thought, and too much talking is a sponge which picketh up iniquities. It is, therefore, necessary not only your working should hold the body occupied, but also that the soul be occupied with prayer. For it needeth never to cease from prayer.

‘I tell you for an example: There was a man who paid ill, wherefore none that knew him would go to till his fields. Whereupon he, like a wicked man, said: “I will go to the market-place to find idle ones who are doing nothing, and will therefore come to till my vines.” This man went forth from his house, and found many strangers who were standing in idleness, and had no money. To them he spake, and led them to his vineyard. But verily none that knew him and had work for his hands went thither.

‘He is Satan, that one who payeth ill; for he giveth labour and man receiveth for it the eternal fires in his service. Wherefore he hath gone forth from paradise, and goeth in search of labourers. Assuredly he setteth to his labours those who stand in idleness whosoever they be, but much more those who know him not. It is not in any wise enough for anyone to know evil in order to escape it, but it behoveth to work at good in order to overcome it.’



## 76.

‘I tell you for an example. There was a man who had three vineyards, which he let out to three husbandmen. Because the first knew not how to cultivate the vineyard the vineyard brought forth only leaves. The second taught the third how the vines ought to be cultivated; and he most excellently hearkened to his words; and he cultivated his, as he told him, insomuch that the vineyard of the third bore much. But the second left his vineyard uncultivated, spending his time solely in talking. When the time was come for paying the rent to the lord of the vineyard, the first said: “Lord, I know not how thy vineyard ought to be cultivated: therefore I have not received any fruit this year.”

‘The lord answered: “O fool, dost thou dwell alone in the world, that thou hast not asked counsel of my second vinedresser, who knoweth well how to cultivate the land? Certain it is that thou shalt pay me.”

‘And having said this he condemned him to work in prison until he should pay his lord; who moved with pity at his simplicity liberated him, saying: “Begone, for I will not that thou work longer at my vineyard; it is enough for thee that I give thee thy debt.”

‘The second came, to whom the lord said: “Welcome, my vinedresser! Where are the fruits that thou owest me? Assuredly, since thou knowest well how to prune the vines, the vineyard that I let out to thee must needs have borne much fruit.”

‘The second answered: “O lord, thy vineyard is backward because I have not pruned the wood nor worked up the soil; but the vineyard hath not borne fruit, so I cannot pay thee.”

‘Whereupon the lord called the third and with wonder said: “Thou saidst to me that this man, to whom I let out the second vineyard, taught thee perfectly to cultivate the vineyard which I let out to thee. How then can it be that the vineyard I let out to him should not have borne fruit, seeing it is all one soil?”

‘The third answered: “Lord, the vines are not cultivated by talking only, but he needs must sweat a shirt every day who willeth to make it bring forth its fruit. And how shall thy vineyard of thy vinedresser bear fruit, O lord, if he doth naught but waste the time in talking? Sure it is, O lord, that if he had put into practice his own words, \[while\] I who cannot talk so much have given thee the rent for two years, he would have given thee the rent of the vineyard for five years.”

‘The lord was wroth, and said with scorn to the vinedresser: “And so thou hast wrought a great work in not cutting away the wood and levelling the vineyard, wherefore there is owing to thee a great reward!” And having called his servants he had him beaten without any mercy. And then he put him into prison under the keeping of a cruel servant who beat him every day, and never was willing to set him free for prayers of his friends.’



## 77.

‘Verily I say unto you, that on the day of judgment many shall say to God: “Lord, we have preached and taught by thy law.” Against them even the stones shall cry out, saying: “When ye preached to others, with your own tongue ye condemned yourselves, O workers of iniquity.”

‘As God liveth,’ said Jesus, ‘he who knoweth the truth and worketh the contrary shall be punished with such grievous penalty that Satan shall almost have compassion on him. Tell me, now, hath our God given us the law for knowing or for working? Verily I say unto you, that all knowledge hath for end that wisdom which worketh all it knoweth.

‘Tell me, if one were sitting at table and with his eyes beheld delicate meats, but with his hands should choose unclean things and eat those, would not he be mad?’

‘Yea, assuredly,’ said the disciples.

Then said Jesus: ‘O mad beyond all madmen art thou, O man, that with thine understanding knowest heaven, and with thine hands choosest earth; with thine understanding knowest God, and with thine affection desirest the world; with thine understanding knowest the delights of paradise, and with thy works choosest the miseries of hell. Brave soldier, that leaveth the sword and carrieth the scabbard to fight! Now, know ye not that he who walketh by night desireth light, not only to see the light, but rather to see the good road, in order that he may pass safely to the inn? O miserable world, to be a thousand times despised and abhorred! Since our God by his holy prophets hath ever willed to grant it to know the way to go to his country and his rest: but thou, wicked one, not only willest not to go, but, which is worse, hast despised the light! True is the proverb of the camel, that it liketh not clear water to drink, because it desireth not to see its own ugly face. So doth the ungodly who worketh ill; for he hateth the light lest his evil works should be known. But he who receiveth wisdom, and not only worketh not well, but, which is worse, employeth it for evil, is like to him who should use the gifts as instruments to slay the giver.’



## 78.

‘Verily I say unto you, that God had not compassion on the fall of Satan, but yet \[had compassion\] on the fall of Adam. And let this suffice you to know the unhappy condition of him who knoweth good and doeth evil.’

Then said Andrew: ‘O master, it is a good thing to leave learning aside, so as not to fall into such condition.’

Jesus answered: ‘If the world is good without the sun, man without eyes, and the soul without understanding, then is it good not to know. Verily I say unto you, that bread is not so good for the temporal life as is learning for the eternal life. Know ye not that it is a precept of God to learn? For thus saith God: “Ask of thine elders, and they shall teach thee.” And of the law saith God: “See that my precept be before thine eyes, and when thou sit test down, and when thou walkest, and at all times meditate thereon.” Whether, then, it is good not to learn, ye may now know. Oh, unhappy he who despiseth wisdom, for he is sure to lose eternal life.’

James answered: ‘O master, we know that Job learned not from a master, nor Abraham; nevertheless they became holy ones and prophets.’

Jesus answered: ‘Verily I say unto you, that he who is of the bridegroom's house needeth not to be invited to the marriage, because he dwelleth in the house where the marriage is held; but they that are far from the house. Now know ye not that the prophets of God are in the house of God's grace and mercy, and so have the law of God manifest in them: as David our father saith on this matter: “The law of his God is in his heart; therefore his path shall not be digged up.” Verily I say unto you that our God in creating man not only created him righteous, but inserted in his heart a light that should show to him that it is fitting to serve God. Wherefore, even if this light be darkened after sin, yet is it not extinguished. For every nation hath this desire to serve God, though they have lost God and serve false and lying gods. Accordingly it is necessary that a man be taught of the prophets of God, for they have clear the light to teach the way to go to paradise, our country, by serving God well: just as it is necessary that he who hath his eyes diseased should be guided and helped.’



## 79.

James answered: ‘And how shall the prophets teach us if they are dead; and how shall he be taught who hath not knowledge of the prophets?’

Jesus answered: ‘Their doctrine is written down, so that it ought to be studied, for \[the writing\] is to thee for a prophet. Verily, verily, I say unto thee that he who despiseth the prophecy despiseth not only the prophet, but despiseth also God who hath sent the prophet. But concerning such as know not the prophet, as are the nations, I tell you that if there shall live in those regions any man who liveth as his heart shall show him, not doing to others that which he would not receive from others, and giving to his neighbor that which he would receive from others, such a man shall not be forsaken of the mercy of God. Wherefore at death, if not sooner, God will show him and give him his law with mercy. Perchance ye think that God hath given the law for love of the law? Assuredly this is not true, but rather hath God given his law in order that man might work good for love of God. And so if God shall find a man who for love of him worketh good, shall he perchance despise him? Nay, surely, but rather will he love him more than those to whom he hath given the law. I tell you for an example: There was a man who had great possessions; and in his territory he had desert land that only bore unfruitful things. And so, as he was walking out one day through such desert land, he found among such unfruitful plants a plant that had delicate fruits. Whereupon this man said: “Now how doth this plant here bear these so delicate fruits? Assuredly I will not that it be cut down and put on the fire with the rest.” And having called his servants he made them dig it up and set it in his garden. Even so, I tell you, that our God shall preserve from the flames of hell those who work righteousness wheresoever they be.’



## 80.

‘Tell me, where dwelt Job but in Uz among idolaters? And at the time of the flood, how writeth Moses? Tell me, He saith: “Noah truly found grace before God.” Our father Abraham had a father without faith, for he made and worshipped false idols. Lot abode among the most wicked men on earth. Daniel as a child, with Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, were taken captive by Nebuchadnezzar in such wise that they were but two years old when they were taken; and they were nurtured among the multitude of idolatrous servants. As God liveth, even as the fire burneth dry things and converteth them into fire, making no difference between olive and cypress and palm; even so our God hath mercy on every one that worketh righteously, making no difference between Jew, Scythian, Greek, or Ishmaelite. But let not thine heart stop there, O James, because where God hath sent the prophet it is necessary entirely to deny thine own judgment and to follow the prophet, and not to say: “Why saith he thus?” “Why doth he thus forbid and command?” But say: “Thus God willeth. Thus God commandeth.” Now what said God to Moses when Israel despised Moses? “They have not despised thee, but they have despised me.”

‘Verily I say unto you, that man ought to spend all the time of his life not in learning how to speak or to read, but in learning how to work well. Now tell me, who is that servant of Herod who would not study to please him by serving him with all diligence? Woe unto the world that studieth only to please a body that is clay and dung, and studieth not but forgetteth the service of God who hath made all things; who is blessed for evermore.’

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/41_60">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">41 — 60</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Gospel_of_Barnabas/81_100">
          <span class="pr-2">81 — 100</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
