---
title: "Chapter I"
description: "Sayings of the Jewish Fathers"
published: true
date: 2025-2-7T10:37:31Z
tags: Judaism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-7T10:37:31Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Sayings_of_the_Jewish_Fathers/Introduction">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Introduction</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Sayings_of_the_Jewish_Fathers">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Sayings_of_the_Jewish_Fathers/2">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter II</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p11">[<sup><small>p. 11</small></sup>]</span>

Some passages of doubtful genuineness are printed in italics. Omissions of the manuscript of Chapters I-V are supplied in smaller type.

1\. Moses received the Thorah from Sinai, and he delivered it to Jehoshua', and Jehoshua' to the elders, and the elders to the prophets, and the prophets delivered it to the men of the Great Synagogue. They said three things: Be deliberate in judgment; and raise up many disciples; and make a fence to the Thorah. <span id="p12">[<sup><small>p. 12</small></sup>]</span> 2\. Shime'on ha-Çaddiq was of the remnants of the Great Synagogue. He used to say, On three things the world is stayed; on the Thorah, and on the Worship, and on the bestowal of Kindnesses. <span id="p13">[<sup><small>p. 13</small></sup>]</span> 3\. Antigonus of Soko received from Shime'on ha-Çaddiq. He used to say, Be not as slaves that minister to the lord with a view to receive recompense; but be as slaves that minister to the lord without a view to receives recompense; and let the fear of Heaven be upon you. <span id="p14">[<sup><small>p. 14</small></sup>]</span> 4\. Jose ben Jo'ezer of Çeredah and Jose ben Jochanan of Jerusalem received from them. Jose ben Jo'ezer of Çeredah said, Let thy house be a meeting-house for the wise; and powder thyself in the dust of their feet; and drink their words with thirstiness. <span id="p15">[<sup><small>p. 15</small></sup>]</span> 5\. Jose ben Jochanan of Jerusalem said, Let thy house be opened wide; and let the needy be thy household; and prolong not converse with woman.

6\. _His own wife, they meant, much less his neighbour's_ <span id="p16">[<sup><small>p. 16</small></sup>]</span> _wife.) Hence the wise have said, Each time that the man prolongs converse with the woman he causes evil to himself, and desists from words of Thorah, and in the end he inherits Gehinnom_.

7\. Jehoshua' ben Perachia and Matthai the Arbelite received from them. Jehoshua' ben Perachiah said, Make unto thyself a master; and possess thyself of an associate; and judge every man in the scale of merit.

8\. Matthai the Arbelite said, Withdraw from an evil neighbour; and associate not with the wicked;. and grow not thoughtless of retribution. <span id="p17">[<sup><small>p. 17</small></sup>]</span> 9\. Jehudah ben Tabai and Shime'on ben Shatach received from them. Jehudah ben Tabai said, Make not thyself as them that predispose the judges; and while the litigants stand before thee, let them be in thine eyes as guilty; and when dismissed from before thee let them be in thine eyes as righteous, because that they have received the doom upon them. <span id="p18">[<sup><small>p. 18</small></sup>]</span> 10\. Shime'on ben Shatach said, Make full examination of the witnesses; but be guarded in thy words, perchance from them they may learn to lie.

11\. Shema'iah and Abtalion received from them. Shema'iah said, Love work; and hate lordship; and make not thyself known to the government. <span id="p19">[<sup><small>p. 19</small></sup>]</span> 12\. Abtalion said, Ye wise, be guarded in your words; perchance ye may incur the debt of exile, and be exiled to the place of evil waters; and the disciples that come after you may drink and die, and the Name of Heaven be profaned. <span id="p20">[<sup><small>p. 20</small></sup>]</span> 13\. Hillel and Shammai received from them. Hillel said, Be of the disciples of Aharon; loving peace, and pursuing <span id="p21">[<sup><small>p. 21</small></sup>]</span> peace; loving mankind, and bringing them nigh to the Thorah. <span id="p22">[<sup><small>p. 22</small></sup>]</span> 14\. He used to say, A name made great is a name destroyed; he who increases not decreases; and he who will <span id="p23">[<sup><small>p. 23</small></sup>]</span> not learn (_or_ teach) deserves slaughter; and he who serves himself with the tiara perishes.

15\. He used to say, If I am not for myself who is for me? and being for my own self what am I? If not now when?

16\. Shammai said, Make thy Thorah an ordinance; say <span id="p24">[<sup><small>p. 24</small></sup>]</span> little and do much; and receive every man with a pleasant expression of countenance.

17\. Rabban Gamliel said, Make to thyself a master, and be quit of doubt; and tithe not much by estimation.

18\. Shime'on his son said, All my days I have grown up <span id="p25">[<sup><small>p. 25</small></sup>]</span> amongst the wise, and have not found aught good for a man but silence; not learning but doing is the groundwork; and whoso multiplies words occasions sin.

19\. Rabban Shime'on ben Gamliel said, On three things the world stands; on Judgment, and on Truth, and on Peace.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Sayings_of_the_Jewish_Fathers/Introduction">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Introduction</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Sayings_of_the_Jewish_Fathers">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Judaism/Sayings_of_the_Jewish_Fathers/2">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter II</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
