# Only God is Good

“As Jesus was starting on his way, a young man ran up, knelt before him, and asked him, 'Good Master, what must I do to receive eternal life?' 'Why do you call me good?' Jesus asked of him, 'No one is good except God alone.'” (Mark, 10:17,18)

These words are repeated in The Urantia Book.“Why do you call me good? None is good but God.” (2091) There are similar statements scattered throughout the book. “Greatness is synonymous with divinity. God is supremely great and good. Greatness and goodness cannot be divorced. They are forever made one in God.” (317) “All goodness takes its origin in the Father.” (381) “God is the source and destiny of all that is good and beautiful and true.” (1431)

On the Damascus road, the apostle Paul had an incredible conversion experience. “Suddenly a light from the sky flashed around him. He fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to him, 'Saul! Saul! Why do you persecute me?' 'Who are you, Lord?' he asked. 'I am Jesus, whom you persecute. Get you up and go into the city where you will be told what you must do.'”(Acts 9:3-5) Paul was blind for three days.

Many people have dramatic experiences of a religious or spiritual nature that have a profound effect upon their lives. Often such experiences are the turning point in their lives and form the foundation upon which they build their faith. Others, and I suspect the vast majority, never, in all their lives, experience anything of a spiritual or religious nature that they can truthfully say is out of the ordinary. I number myself among this silent majority.

About 15 years ago, quite a few of my church-going friends became caught up in the charismatic movement that swept through mainstream Christian Churches of all denominations. During the worship sessions in which songs of praise played a big part in stirring up emotions, many people did experience something out of the ordinary. Often this led to them proclaiming themselves as born again Christians. Being baptized by the Spirit, slain by the Spirit, speaking in tongues, interpreting the tongues language, being healed by the Spirit from long standing afflictions, all these were common phenomena that occurred when people gathered together to indulge in the format of charismatic worship. In actuality, to have such experiences was the badge of membership, not to have them was often taken to indicate that something was wrong with a person, possibly the presence of unforgiven secret sin.

I remember trying hard to speak in tongues. The minister of my church, which was orthodox Episcopalian (Anglican), told me he had the same problem but learned to do it by just opening his mouth and letting out whatever non-sensical sounds came into his mind. He said he did this mainly when driving his car and found it tremendously uplifting, a form of uninhibited worship by which he praised God unreservedly. He said it takes a bit of practice but if I would stick with it, it would happen. Feeling 'out of it', I decided to give it a go and soon accumulated a vocabulary of non-sensical sounds that were pretty impressive. Was I really speaking in tongues? I did not really feel uplifted and was unsure about it being uninhibited worship. So I recorded one of my sessions. Listening to a playback, I heard the words 'shonkina, shonkina, shonshon kina kina,' non-sensical enough undoubtedly, but which I recognised as from the war cry of my school football team of some sixty or more years previously. Flunked again!

I read The Urantia Book for several years before ever contacting another reader. As I got to know more and more fellow readers, I again found that I was often the odd man out, not having had any remarkable experiences associated with my acceptance of the book as revelatory and its teachings as the guiding principle of my life. As a Christian of many, many years standing, and also a student of the spoken word of Jesus as found in the synoptic gospels, I was familiar with those introductory words I have quoted from the gospel of Mark. Their import did not really register until I found them repeated in several different ways in The Urantia Book. The one that really awakened me to their profundity was, “All goodness takes its origin in the Father.”

I have often thought about a statement that occurs on the book's very last page, “The great challenge to modern man is to achieve better communication with the divine Monitor that dwells within the human mind. Man's greatest adventure in the flesh consists in the well balanced and sane effort to advance the borders of self-consciousness out through the dim realms of embryonic soul-consciousness—contact with the divine presence. Such an experience constitutes God-consciousness....” What could I, a failed charismatic, one who had never heard voices, never had a vision, never been healed, not even a single, out-of-the-ordinary experience, what could I do to answer this challenge. Then it struck me. Maybe I was not a failure after all. If all goodness takes its origin in God and the spirit of God dwells within my mind, then every good thought I have ever had was a direct communication from the divine Monitor! Each such thought was a personal revelation from God to me!

This theme is developed in a most full and extraordinary way in the closing four pages of The Urantia Book. It cites evidence that the mind of mankind is not wholly material, that it really is host to an indwelling spirit presence. This is what lifts them above the confinement of behavior patterns emanating from the heritage of the electro-chemical animal vehicle in which their mind resides. Three separate evidences are cited that this is so (2094):

1. Humanitarian fellowship—love. The purely animal mind may be gregarious for self-protection, but only the spirit-indwelt intellect is unselfishly altruistic and unconditionally loving.

Having had extensive experience working with animals, I've long felt it valid to conclude that instances of apparent altruistic behavior in animals are always comprehensible in terms of pure instinct. In contrast, it seems totally impossible to account for altruistic human behavior in this way.

2. Interpretation of the universe—wisdom. Only the spirit-indwelt mind can comprehend that the universe is friendly to the individual.

It requires a lot of hard thinking to agree unconditionally with this conclusion. I believe that we can only do so when we learn to think as Jesus did. Ganid was to ponder upon this problem when Jesus told him: “Ganid, I have absolute confidence in my heavenly Father's overcare; I am  consecrated to doing the will of my Father in heaven. I do not believe that real harm can befall me; I do not believe that my lifework can really be jeopardized by anything my enemies might wish to visit upon me, and surely we have no violence to fear from our friends. I am absolutely assured that the entire universe is friendly to me—this all-powerful truth I insist on believing with a wholehearted trust in spite of all appearances to the contrary.” (1469)

It does not appear to be an over-statement to say that only a spirit-indwelt mind can comprehend that the universe is that friendly. When I finally learned this, I felt that maybe I had not entirely flunked life's course in religious experience.

3. Spiritual evaluation of life—worship. Only the spirit-indwelt man can realize the divine presence and seek to attain a fuller experience in and with this foretaste of divinity.

The recognition of good in ourselves provides self-substantiating evidence for the divine presence within. How then do we attain a fuller experience with this foretaste of divinity. We are reminded that “morality is the ESSENTIAL pre-existent soil of personal God-consciousness.” (2096) Take note of the word “essential.” Without morality we are hamstrung, we cannot progress, we cannot attain that better communication with the divine Monitor that we seek. What is it that defiles a man, wrecks his morality? Questioned about this, Jesus said: “But hearken while I tell you the truth concerning those things which morally defile and spiritually contaminate men. I declare it is not that which enters the body by the mouth or gains access to the mind through the eyes and ears, that defiles the man. Man is only defiled by that evil which may originate within the heart, and which finds expression in the words and deeds of such unholy persons. Do you not know it is from the heart that there come forth evil thoughts, wicked projects of murder, theft, and adulteries, together with jealousy, pride, anger, revenge, railings, and false witness? And it is just such things that defile men, and not that they eat bread with ceremonially unclean hands.” (1712)

The book tells us that the moral nature is superanimal but sub-spiritual, that the moral zone intervenes between the animal and human types of mind as morontia functions between the material and spiritual spheres of personality attainment. (2096) So, though we humans are only just out of the trees, it appears that we do have special attributes. In fact, it is our capacity for self-consciousness that differentiates us from the animal kingdom (1479), but we need more than just self-consciousness. We need to be open to the whisperings of the Adjutant Mind Spirits who prepare us for that first moral choice that signals our readiness for the arrival of the divine Monitor. (1186) Without this presence, we cannot unselfishly and spiritually love, we cannot properly appraise moral values, we cannot recognize spiritual meanings, and we have difficulty in discerning that which is truly good or truly evil. The book even says our very survival is in great measure dependent on consecrating our will to accepting the guidance of our indwelling spirit-value sorter. (2094/5) No wonder then that we are exhorted to achieve better communication with this gift from God.

This last Paper, The Faith of Jesus, is one of the most profound in the whole of The Urantia Book. In it, I discovered a revelation that helps to make my relationship with the divine Monitor more real, more intense, more personal. Only in this Paper is the Thought Adjuster referred to as my divine lover, my interpreter, and my value-sorter. But it goes a lot further. It says that this divine Monitor is “the child of the Center and Source of all absolute values of divine and eternal reality.” (2094)

Describing my Thought Adjuster as a child adds a new dimension to our relationship, for all children are learners. I, too, am a child of the Universal Father. Hence, my Thought Adjuster and I have a relationship that is a sharing partnership of “learning togetherness.” In it, I learn to participate in the nature of God, while my Thought Adjuster learns to participate in the nature of man. That sounds like a bad deal for my Thought Adjuster, but if that was really true, then it would not be happening. And, in discussing Michael's mission to Urantia,  incarnated as Jesus of Nazareth, did not Immanuel say:

“...exhibit in your short life in the flesh, as it has never been seen in all Nebadon, the transcendent possibilities attainable by a God-knowing human during the short career of human existence...the achievement of God seeking man and finding him and the phenomenon of man seeking God and finding him....” (1329)

Regardless of the reality, having my Thought Adjuster described as a child of God makes it somehow closer, more friendly, nearer to my level—or, at least, to my potential level. Of course I should have already  known this for, at the beginning of the book, I was told, “Man goes forth searching for a friend while that very friend lives within his own heart.” (45) Some of these things take time to sink in.

# Parable of a Parrot

from the Urantial Network Message Board


Once, long ages ago, the Buddha was born as a friendly little parrot.  He lived happily in the forest and delighted in flying among the tangled branches of the huge forest trees.  Wherever he went, he greeted other creatures with joy. He was a happy bird, glad to be alive and glad to have been given the gift of flight.

One day the skies over his forest home darkened and, without warning, a terrible storm thundered down, flashing and roaring among the ancient trees.  The wind howled, lightning crackled, and one old tree burst into flames.  Soon the whole forest began to blaze as sparks flew everywhere.  Terrified animals ran wildly in every direction, seeking safety from the burning flames and choking, acrid smoke.

When the little parrot smelled the smoke, he flung himself out bravely into the fury of the storm, crying out loudly as he flew, “Fire! Fire! Run to the river!”  But though the animals heard his voice and many did make it to the safety of the river, what could the others do, trapped as they were by the flames and smoke?  So, rather than flying off to safety himself, he continued circling over the raging fire, seeking some means of helping those who were trapped below.

A desperate idea came to him.  Darting down to the river that flowed at the forest's edge, he dipped his body and wings into the dark water and then flew back to the fire, which was now raging like an inferno.  Unmindful of the leaping flames, he dropped down low and rapidly shook his wings, releasing the few precious drops of water which still clung to his feathers.  They tumbled down like little jewels into the heart of the blaze. Again he flew to the river and dipped in body and wings and again he flew back over the flames.  Again and again he flew between the river and the forest, many, many times.  His feathers grew greasy and ragged and black and his eyes burned red as coals.  His lungs ached and his mind danced dizzily with the spinning sparks, but still the brave little parrot flew on.  “What, after all, can a bird do in times like these,” he said himself, “but fly?  So fly I shall.  And I won't stop if there's even a chance I can save a single life.”

Now some of the godly beings of the higher realms, relaxing in their palaces of ivory and gold, saw the little parrot below them as he flew among the leaping flames. Between mouthfuls of sweet foods, they pointed him out.  And some of them began to laugh. “What a foolish little bird!” they said. “Trying to put out a raging fire with just a few sprinkles of water from his wings.  Whoever heard of such a thing.  Why, it's absurd!”

But one of the gods found himself strangely moved by what he saw. Taking the form of a golden eagle, he let himself be drawn down into the parrot's fiery path.   The little parrot was just nearing the flames again when suddenly a huge eagle with eyes like molten gold appeared at his side. “Go back, little bird!  Your task is hopeless!” pronounced the eagle in a solemn and majestic voice. “What can a few drops of water do against a blaze like this? Turn around and save yourself before it is too late!” But the little parrot would not listen. He only continued to fly doggedly on through the flames. He could hear the great eagle flying above him now as the heat grew fiercer, still calling out, “Stop! Stop! Foolish little parrot! Save yourself! Save yourself!” But the little parrot only continued on. “Why, I don't need a great, shining eagle to give me advice like that!” he thought to himself. “My own mother, the dear bird, could have told me such things long ago. Advice,” he coughed, “I don't need advice. I just need someone to pitch in and help!”

And the great eagle, seeing the little parrot flying  steadily on through the searing flames, thought with shame of his own privileged kind. He could see the carefree gods looking down above as if life was just a game for others to live. He could hear their laughter still echoing, while many creatures cried out in fear and pain from the flames just below. All at once, he no longer wanted to be a god or an eagle or anything else. He simply wanted to be like that brave little parrot, and to help. “I will help!” he said. And, flushed with these new feelings, he began to weep.  Streams and streams of sparkling tears poured from his eyes and washed down in waves like cooling rain upon the fire, upon the forest, upon the animals, and upon the little parrot himself.

Deluged with the god's shimmering tears, the flames died down and the smoke began to clear. The little parrot himself, washed and bright, rocketed above the sky like a little feathered sun. He laughed aloud, “Now that's more like it!” Tears dripped quietly from all the burned branches and scorched buds, which began to send forth green shoots and stems and leaves.

Teardrops sparkled on the parrot's wings, too, and dropped down like petals upon the burned and blackened ground.  Green grass began to push up from among the still glowing cinders. Then all the animals looked at one another in amazement. All were whole and well.  Up in the clear blue sky they could see their friend, the little parrot, looping and soaring and flying happily on and on. “Hurray!” they suddenly cried, “Hurray for the brave little parrot and for this sudden, miraculous rain!”       

# Who was Rodan?

Condensed from Papers 160 & 161 of  The Urantia Book


Rodan is introduced in Part 4 of The Urantia Book as a Greek philosopher from Alexandria. The two Papers about Rodan and his discussions with the apostles, Nathaniel and Thomas, stand out as distinctive from the remainder of Part 4 in such a way as to invite speculation as to their real authorship and purpose.

They contain a message specifically adapted to the urgent needs of the closing stages of this twentieth century. Some believe that they originate from Michael himself. Others think that Rodan is a pseudonym, perhaps for the famous Philo of Alexandria, who had a great influence upon early Christianity, and that his teachings have been updated by the Midwayers.

Whatever the truth of the matter, there is a personal message for all of us in these papers. What follows is a condensation of their content.

Rodan informs us that human life consists in three great drives—urges, desires, and lures. To acquire a strong character, the commonplace lures of existence must be transferred from conventional and established ideas to the higher realms of unexplored ideas and undiscovered ideals. (i.e. ideas and ideals having true spiritual value.)

The more complex civilization becomes, the more difficult will become the art of living. The more rapid the changes in social usage, the more complicated will become the task of character development.  And if social change becomes sufficiently rapid, which it has in this century, the evolution of the art of living will fail to keep pace, and humanity will quickly revert to satisfying primitive urges and the attainment of immediate desires. Humanity will thus remain immature and society will fail to fully develop.

Social maturity is proportional to mankind's willingness to surrender the gratification of immediate desires, established beliefs, and conventional ideas in order to pursue the unexplored possibilities and the undiscovered goals of idealistic spiritual realities. Mankind not only possesses capacity for the recognition of values and the comprehension of meanings, but is also conscious  of the meaning of meanings— has self-conscious insight. But emancipation of the mind and soul cannot be effected without the driving power of intelligent enthusiasm bordering on religious zeal. It requires the lure of a great ideal to drive people on in the pursuit of a goal which will initially be beset by difficult material problems and manifold intellectual hazards.

When we dare to embark on such an adventure, we must expect to suffer the consequent hazards of conflict, unhappiness, and uncertainty. The first step in the solution of any personal difficulty is its recognition. The great mistake we make is our tendency to refuse to acknowledge its existence. Only a brave person is willing honestly to admit, and fearlessly to face, those human failings that a sincere and logical mind discovers. But once having attained some degree of intellectual and emotional maturity, the mature human soon begins to look upon all immature mortals with feelings of tenderness and emotions of tolerance. Mature men and women view immature folks with the love and consideration that good parents bear their children.

Rodan states that the greatest of all methods for attaining this maturity he learned from Jesus. “I refer,” he says, “to that which Jesus so consistently practices, the isolation of worshipful meditation. In this habit of Jesus' going off so frequently to commune with the Father in heaven is to be found the technique, not only of gathering strength and wisdom for the ordinary conflicts of living, but also of appropriating energy for the solution of the higher problems of a moral and spiritual nature.”

The philosopher warns that even correct techniques for solving problems will not compensate for inherent defects of personality in the absence of a real and genuine hunger and thirst for true righteousness. The relaxation of worship, or spiritual communion, as practiced by the Master, relieves tension, removes conflicts, mightily augments the total resources of personality, and produces a stability that can only be experienced by those who have discovered and embraced the living God as the goal of eternal attainment.

The effort toward maturity necessitates work, and work requires energy. Whence comes the power to accomplish all this? Jesus has taught us that God lives in us. How can mankind be induced to release these soul-bound powers of divinity and infinity? How shall we induce them to let go of God, that He may spring forth to the refreshment of our own souls while in transit outward, thereby serving the purpose of enlightening, uplifting, and blessing countless other souls? Whence comes the energy to do these great things?

The secret of this problem is in spiritual communion, in worship. From the human standpoint it is a question of combined meditation and relaxation. Meditation makes the contact of mind with spirit, relaxation determines the capacity for spiritual receptivity. And this interchange of strength for weakness, courage for fear, the will of God for the mind of self, constitutes worship. When these experiences are frequently repeated, they crystallize into habits, strength-giving and worshipful habits, and such habits eventually formulate themselves into a spiritual character, and such a character is finally recognized by one's fellows as a mature personality.
This new gospel of the kingdom renders a great service to the art of living in that it supplies a new and richer incentive for higher living. It presents man with a new and exalted goal of destiny, a supreme life purpose, and that consciousness of unity with divinity that enables him to dare to be God-like.  From such vantage points of high living, man is able to transcend the material irritations of the lower levels of thinking—worry, jealousy, envy, revenge, and the pride of immature personality. These high-climbing souls deliver themselves from a multitude of the crosscurrent conflicts of the trifles of living, thus becoming free to attain  consciousness of the higher currents of spirit concept and celestial communication.

The Master regards genuine human religion as the individual's experience with spiritual realities. “I have regarded religion”, Rodan says, "as man's experience of reacting to something which he regards as being worthy of the homage and devotion of all mankind. In this sense, religion symbolizes our supreme devotion to that which represents our highest concept of the ideals of reality and the farthest reach of our minds toward eternal possibilities of spiritual attainment.

We must always look upon the object of our religious loyalty as being worthy of the reverence of all men.  Religion can never be a matter of mere intellectual belief; religion is always and forever a mode of reacting to the situations of life; it is a species of conduct. Religion embraces thinking, feeling, and acting reverently toward some reality which we deem worthy of universal adoration.

The religion of Jesus transcends all our former concepts of the idea of worship in that he not only portrays his Father as the ideal of infinite reality but positively declares that this divine source of values and the eternal center of the universe is truly and personally attainable by every mortal creature who chooses to enter the kingdom of heaven on earth, thereby acknowledging the acceptance of sonship with God and brotherhood with man." Rodan concludes that this is the highest concept of religion the world has ever known.

# Music—Functions and Changes

Author: **Ann Bendall**


One art form which has changed dramatically over the past 100 years, not necessarily in its production but most certainly in its appreciation,  is music.  Up until the twentieth century the amount of time spent listening to music was negligible. Only the wealthy could afford the luxury of music.  The rest of civilization planned their music carefully, and looked forward to the wedding, death or the few festive occasions during the year to enjoy it.

Today, this situation has been replaced by the penetration of music into every corner of people's lives, literally and metaphorically. Consider the amount of time that people spend listening to music - in their homes, offices, vehicles, shopping centres and even whilst walking!  Music of all types has become a major part of the life-style of a very large number of people.   

The most frequent prototypical situations in which people listen to music have shifted from specialized locations, such as opera houses and concert halls, into the informal settings like the home and the car. Where the average person rarely goes to a concert of any kind, and probably never attends an operatic performance, ordinary days are filled with countless aesthetic micro-episodes, numerous conscious decisions to listen to some type of music by turning on the radio, putting on a tape or cd, and then proceeding to listen, irrespective of the time of day, and twenty four hours a day, if desired.

Entire generations of youngsters have been brought up on rock and roll. Social mini-movements and sub-cultures revolve around music and its association with other mood-optimizers, such as drugs and alcohol. This type of music would fall within the category of physical appreciation, due to the physiological effects the music has on the person. Quite possibly, by The Urantia Book definition, it might also fall into the category of “barbarous monotony.”

“Appreciation of music on Urantia is both physical and spiritual; and your human musicians have done much to elevate musical taste from the barbarous monotony of your early ancestors to the higher levels of sound appreciation. The majority of Urantia mortals react to music so largely with the material muscles and so slightly with the mind and spirit.”(500)

More or less active listening to music has become fully embedded in the stream of daily life of ordinary men and women. People listen to music while working, talking, eating, working, studying. And a new phenomenon has arisen—Background Music. Sometimes called “mood music” or “easy listening,” this music is played while listeners are primarily engaged in some task or activity other than listening to music. “It is intended to be heard but not actively or purposefully listened to.” (Musselman, 1974). The individual, if asked why they are playing it, often replies merely that they like to have some background music whilst reading, studying, or whatever. Quite possibly most of this “easy listening” music  would fall within the category of:

“Tuneful syncopation (which) represents a transition from the musical monotony of primitive man to the expressionful harmony and meaningful melodies of your later-day musicians. These earlier types of rhythm stimulate the reaction of the music-loving sense without entailing the exertion of the higher intellectual powers of harmony appreciation and thus more generally appeal to immature or spiritually indolent individuals.” (500)

For the individual, it appears that such informally used background music may serve a variety of functions. For example, it may be used  to break the monotony while engaging in a task which requires little concentration; to alleviate feelings of loneliness, or to help establish a particular mood, perhaps of reverie or relaxation. In addition,  it could be used to mask other unwanted sounds. When entertaining, some people use background music to help establish an atmosphere conducive to stimulating conversation. Although the effects of such informal uses of music have not been studied to any extent, they apparently are considered valuable by the individuals involved, otherwise there would not be so much widespread use of music in this way.

In addition to background music, music is still used in the classical areas of—church, military and ceremonial.

Church Music has functioned more consistently and more positively in religious ritual than in any other area of life in western civilization, even to the extent that religious music now comprises one of the longest and richest musical traditions. Music in religious services appear to serve several functions: at times as a signal to stimulate the congregation to respond in a certain way; at other times quiet organ interludes are used to help establish a mood of reverence or tranquility. Congregational singing serves to draw people together, while choir anthems appear to lead the worshippers to reflect on the beliefs and values of the religion and its implications for them as individuals. Special religious ceremonies, such as weddings and funerals,  are also accompanied by special music designed to enhance the significance of the occasion. Musselman (1974)
	
	Military music has had the traditional function of inspiring and heightening interest in the military cause as well as stimulating troops to battle. That music for the military has been band music, characterized by percussion and fanfare is more than coincidental (even today, the military and state ceremonies of most nations include music of the military band rather than string music). Such music has a highly stimulative  and physical effect on the listener, even if it is only toe tapping.

Ceremonial music reflects one of the earliest functional uses of music. It is a part of primitive cultures today just as it has been throughout history. Apparently it is viewed as an integral part of the ceremony and does much to lend to the formality of such occasions. Music can be used as a signal to draw attention to a particular part of the ceremony, such as playing “Hail to the Chief” to signal the arrival of the president of the United States, to create a feeling of patriotism, and to commemorate particular occasions that are considered important. Music serves to heighten the immediate importance of the occasion as well as to contribute toward its memorableness.

Major sporting events nearly always include ceremonial music. The opening and closing ceremonies of the Olympic Games always involve special music, and the medal ceremonies include the playing of the national anthems of the recipient's countries. Nearly any Queen (or King) crowning ceremony, whether a high school homecoming event or the Miss World beauty contest, incorporates music into the ceremony.

The Urantia Book states that one way we can give enjoyment to our seraphim is through our “efforts in music, art, and real humor.” (419) This is bonus number one in acquiring an appreciation of music. Bearing in mind that  “The best music of Urantia is just a fleeting echo of the magnificent strains heard by the celestial associates of your musicians, who left but snatches of these harmonies of morontia forces on record as the musical melodies of sound harmonics” (500), any music which stimulates the person, not physically but “with the mind and spirit” (500) is spiritual. [Jesus connected music with worship in his discussions during his third preaching tour (1683)].

Music may go unnoticed to our conscious ear, but never to our emotions and unconscious (whilst prayerfully,  providing a pathway from/to our superconscious). Hence the power of music as “spiritual communication” cannot be underestimated: “If Adam and Eve had only survived, then would you have had music in reality; but the gift of harmony, so large in their natures, has been so diluted by strains of unmusical tendencies that only once in a thousand mortal lives is there any great appreciation of harmonics. But be not discouraged; some day a real musician may appear on Urantia, and whole peoples will be enthralled by the magnificent strains of his melodies. One such human being could forever change the course of a whole nation, even the entire civilized world. It is literally true, 'melody has power a whole world to transform.' Forever, music will remain the universal language of men, angels, and spirits. Harmony is the speech of Havona.”(500)


## References

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians - Edited by S. Sadie
The Psychology of Music. D. Deutsch
Psychological Foundations of Music Behaviour - R. Radocy & J. Boyle (1979)


# The Urantia Book: Why are its readers challenged with over 2000 pages of profuse facts and prodigious names???

Sue Tennant, Toronto, Canada


The Urantia Book proclaims: Life on earth is only the tip of the iceberg! The drama of eternity has only just begun! A cosmic adventure beckons!

While living this short, intense life on Urantia, we human beings begin the eternal development of our unique, never-to-be repeated, personalities. Our experience with the indwelling spirit of God, trusting and following its gentle leading, is the passport to that eternity.

Our personalities—essentially our wills—slowly become like God's as we increasingly trust ourselves to him during our ascent through the many worlds that the book tells us exist beyond this first earthly life. That is the purpose of all universe life—to grow perfect, even as God is perfect.

Attaining that perfection takes a long time, far longer than our finite minds can conceive. Today, as mere material mortals, our understanding is limited; but, as morontia progressors, our capacities will expand and as spirit pilgrims, unimagined faculties for experiential growth await us. We must choose freely to cooperate with the learning process. There is absolutely no coercion in God's plan of experiential progress.


We are God's precious offspring, born to grow perfect, to love and to serve throughout eternity.


In its  2097 pages, The Urantia Book encourages us to make God our personal priority. The more we know about God—the amazing, creative, nurturing Cosmic Parent—the more we are empowered to serve others. To love and serve as God loves and serves is the business of living and the source of all lasting joy and fulfillment. To know God as Universal Father, and the whole of humankind as family, is the supreme experience of living. This is the great destiny to which we humans are called. It is a never-ending, thrilling enterprise which fulfills our deepest and most profound personal longings. It is to realize, with absolute assurance, our immutable identity as sons and daughters of God.

Critical thinking and making decisions are more important than we ever imagined.

The Urantia Book is an information tool to know God more deeply and to grow spiritually. It is a book which demands time plus an open and questing mind. The reward for the student is an endlessly fascinating orientation to life, one filled with challenge and meaning. This mind tool leads the reader through new facts and concepts not otherwise available. It generates the confidence in us to risk trusting a loving God and making that trust the obvious and logical course to follow.

It is by our faith decisions that we are advanced. The mortal mind is the connection between the material and the spiritual. How and what we think—our attitudes and our priorities—are crucial. Strenuous thinking and making choices are the keys to progress. Matter, when subject to mind and the overcontrol of spirit can progress to perfection, even an eternal perfection.

People need to belong

The progress of the whole is dependent on the progress of the part. Urantia depends on the progress of the individual to one day achieve perfection status. We belong to a universe in which we are accountable. Our contribution to the evolution of this planet is vital. Progress has to do with the development of our personality potential in our relationships with others  through faith attitudes of love, trust, and mercy. The book tells us:

Personality cannot very well perform in isolation. Man is innately a social creature; he is dominated by the craving of belongingness. It is literally true, “No man lives unto himself.” (1227)

Of all human needs, none is more compelling than this need to belong. For it is in belonging that we grasp our own reality and validate our sense of worth. All personality development is dependent on a sense of belonging, a sense of identity of the self in relation to others, the part in relation to the whole. The Urantia Papers are very specific about our identity as cosmic citizens in a loving and friendly universe.

The profuse details about the vast, inhabited universes, its multitudinous lifeforms, the facts regarding the history and destiny of our planet, and the description of the administration of the entire cosmic creation, boggle the mind. These details leave little room for the reader to doubt who they are, where they are going, and to whom they belong.

The Urantia Book ventures into the past further than the finite human mind can conceive, 
and ahead into the eternal future with equal demands on the imagination. Perhaps such detail will seem crude to future generations, but to our twentieth century minds, this precise information is nothing short of a revelation. Such detail is necessary if we are to grasp the size and grandeur of God's creation, and the importance of our co-operation and participation in our own universe evolution.

Essential concepts of life after death

The Urantia Book is different from other scientific/philosophical and spiritual writings because of its unprecedented context. Over one third of the book tells us, in detail, about life after we leave this planet. The remainder continually refers to our post-Urantia experiences.

It may be essential that, at this point in history, we humans have a dire need to know, beyond all shadow of doubt, how and why our personalities survive after death. If we do not fully grasp and internalize why each and every person is of supreme value to God, the peoples of Urantia will surely lose hope. That this is so may be seen in the widely disseminated philosophy of European existentialists who perceive life as absurd, even an obscene and  meaningless joke.

Without new information about our history, our destiny, and the unseen assistance available to us, how can we feel safe enough to abandon ourselves to divine guidance, much less to trust ourselves and each other? Without grasping these new concepts and insights contained in The Urantia Book, without widespread and enlightened dedication to the service motive, how can we possibly think of progress in our world? Yet without a paradigm shift in the basis of human motivation from that of self-interest to the service of God and our neighbor, the people of Urantia are surely on a path to self-destruction.


The integrity of personal religious experience


There is no human authority, religious or otherwise, by which the truth of The Urantia Book's teachings can be validated. No authoritative voice exists that can assure the new reader of the reliability of its information. Therefore, it is the individual reader who must resolve this issue and eventually reach a decision—either to embrace its teachings, or to ignore or reject them. For many, the truths contained within the book strike a deep, personal chord of truth that is self-authenticating. For others an inner voice beckons saying, “this is the way.” Ultimately, placing our full trust in that inner voice is the most important lesson of our spiritual life. And it is the very essence of personal religious experience.

# Ravening Wolves, Swine, Dogs, Sheep, Serpents, and Doves

Author: **Ann Bendall**


Jesus did not pull any punches in his analogies, similes and metaphors about us humans. We were seen as lambs and sheep, whilst underneath we were “ravening wolves.” (1571)  And this is the man who “could help men so much because he loved them so sincerely. He truly loved each man, each woman, and each child. He could be such a true friend because of his remarkable insight—he knew so fully what was in the heart and in the mind of man. He was an interested and keen observer. He was an expert in the comprehension of human need, clever in detecting human longings.”(1874 ).

The only way he can love us so sincerely, is to separate our behaviour from our individuality. It decidedly upsets my ego to think that I, a much beloved child of God, at the same time can be a “swine!” And then I remind myself that Jesus looks upon me in terms of my “possibilities in time and in eternity.”(1727). I cannot deny that often my behaviour and attitudes are decidedly piggish and unbecoming for a child of God. Actually, the more I strive to become as God would wish me, the more painfully aware I am of sharing my being with the wolves and swine of my animal heritage. I guess it is all part of the painful and disappointing process that I, as an experiential being, must grow through and beyond.

Occasionally I stop reflecting on my being and toddle out into the world. And there I meet lots of brothers and sisters who look decidedly like kindred pigs and wolves. So many people trying  so very hard to be animals, and a considerable percentage appearing to be so adept that they deserve to be nominated for the Oscar award of Swine of the Year.  Do I greet them as a swine, a wolf or as a possibility—a child of God? My choice depends upon whether I wish to place emphasis on our animal heritage or our human potential.

I refuse to be a swine or a wolf at any time, in any way! I want to be at all times, in every way, what the universe sees me as, what Jesus and my Thought Adjuster, know I am—a child of God. And, despite their best performances, I refuse to regard any person I meet in any other way than as the image I have—they are, like me—children of God. Like the apostles, I have learned from Jesus (through The Urantia Book) that  “many souls can best be led to love the unseen God by being first taught to love their brethren whom they can see.” (1727).  And so I pray I can be true to my Master knowing that, “Inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of my brethren, you did it to me.”(1727)

Therefore it is of paramount importance to not base a relationship upon like-minded swine playing in the mud of life, but as baby God children striving to grow, love and understand each other. I and my brother/sister can philosophize about what a dog's life it is, but does this really help either of us to grow? Pity does not help them or me! (1874).

“You have heard it said: 'If the blind lead the blind, they both shall fall into the pit.' If you would guide others into the kingdom, you must yourselves walk in the clear light of living truth. In all the business of the kingdom I exhort you to show just judgment and keen wisdom. Present not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine, lest they trample your gems under foot and turn to rend you.”(1571)

If I can truly model myself on Jesus, there is a chance that my decidedly swine/wolf like brother/sister may see the reflection of their personality in my eyes and start to believe in the possibility that they can become the real, unique personality which is their birth right. Perhaps I can sympathize with them, just like Jesus would in a “practical, personal, and constructive” manner. (1874) We could discuss any problems which might arise with their loved ones if they decide to be a little more human and a little less animal. How they might be a bit lonely for a while, and feel decidedly uncomfortable; how all their friends might complain about the difference; how they much preferred them being pigs to being humans; how they knew where they stood with a pig, whereas life with a human is confusing. We could talk about how change, even if it is for the better, is uncomfortable simply because it is new. We could discuss ways to strengthen my new friend's resolve when the pull of the environment was strong and looked very much like a piggery. If I believe in my friend, as Jesus believes in all of us, just maybe they will believe in themselves; and then, as a human, recently a swine, they may become so comfortable being a human rather than an animal, that they will be able to encourage others to give being a human a try.

I believe that I must understand the individual, how they came to believe that they were swine; how they came to choose being a ravening wolf as  preferable to being human. But understanding does not mean condoning. Such animalistic emulation is unseemly for a God child, and  must not be affirmed. If their behaviour is piggish, I must recognize same. If they wish to play me being Little Red Riding Hood and them the star of the show dressed in Grannie's gear, then I must toss away the little red cloak  and become a serpent/dove.

And so I am a sheep/lamb (1800), with the ability to be a serpent at the same time as I am to be a dove (1584;1800), whilst all the time being a little God-child. Like Thomas, I would have been confused by what appeared to be contradictory instructions, were it not for the fact that I am privy to both Thomas' confusion and Jesus reply. (1585) In the spiritual sense, in my relationship with God and Michael, I must toss away all the illusion of being a grown up adult person. In my relationship with God, I make it easier, more enjoyable as well as enabling myself to grow, if I am “as a little child”—for that is the reality of me in relation to God. However, where my brothers and sisters are concerned, I would be a fool if I was anything other than a serpent/dove.

And when is the appropriate role that of serpent/dove?  It appears that I am to adopt this role for most of my dealings with my brothers and sisters: “In every possible way—in everything short of your spiritual allegiance to the rulers of the universe—seek to live peaceably with all men. Be you always as wise as serpents but as harmless as doves.”(1930) “It seemed to be his purpose in all social situations to teach patience, tolerance, and forgiveness.” (1580).

How do I identify swine, and how do I ensure that I don't toss pearls before them? Using Jesus as my model, he listened carefully to questions, and  chose to answer or not, based upon whether the other person was role locking themselves into the swine category. There is a beautiful example of this on p.1999. When Jesus asks us to do or not do something, he always shows us when and how to apply his instruction.

And finally the role of sheep/lamb—this is the relationship between me and Jesus! Our relationship will blossom as long as I remember that I am the lamb and Jesus the shepherd. I would also like to be the lamb with 98 friends around rather than having Jesus wander around all night looking for me. And in the flock, I must try to do as Jesus does, to adopt his caring attitude with the other 98, so that none of them will wander off,  “Serve your fellow men even as I have served you; forgive your fellow mortals even as I have forgiven you. Let experience teach you the value of meditation and the power of intelligent reflection.” (2047)

# Pain and Conflict in Time and Space

Robert S. Webb, Hawaii


The root cause of pain and conflict in the present realm of time and space in which we live is very simple. Tiny material particles exist as constituents of atoms. Space is a three dimensional expanse in which material particles are located. Time is a sequence of moments in which events occur. Physicists have shown that no two material particles can occupy the same space in the same moment of time. At the macro level, when any two bodies attempt to occupy the same moment of space-time, conflict will be automatically generated—which will bring pain.

Conflict comes into being from disagreement between parties, variance in opinions, aggressive intent, incompatibility, etc. Pain may arise from physical or emotional causes that bring mental distress. Pain and conflict is a natural component of the environmental realm in which we live and function. Pain may cause us to take action, to evaluate situations, even to make decisions on ethical values. It may cause us to grow in our affections, to develop, to learn, may even initiate our desire to seek ultimate perfection.

As agondonters, we triumph over insuperable difficulties when alone. As agondonters, we believe without seeing, we persevere when isolated. We actually need to live in a realm of possible conflict situations. These are essential for our progress towards perfection. But conflict can also make us depressed and confused, depending upon how each of us handles conflict and pain in living experience.

The realm in which we live was purposely created so no two material particles can occupy the same space and moment of time. In trying to do so, conflict and pain may be generated. This realm of time and space also helps us to become aware of the pain and conflict that exists in the lives of our brothers and sisters. It creates the opportunity for us to minister to them during their time of suffering and torment. If we never had conflict and pain in our own lives, how then would we understand the pain and conflict existing in the lives of others?

If we lived in a universe where particles never conflicted in time and space, would this be perfection? And if it was so, would we know it? Could we know true pleasure and happiness if we had no experience of conflict or pain with which to make comparisons?

The Urantia Book tells us that the greatest affliction in life is never to have been afflicted. The physical realm of time and space, as it exists in our experiential universe, provides the opportunity for that affliction. Surely this is related to the fact that no two physical particles can occupy the same space at the same moment of time, thus providing the basis for all conflict and pain to occur.

The physical time-space universe in which we live was created by God—and there is purpose to that creation. In time, we have past, present, and future. We can learn from our past experience, look forward to future experience, and dwell in the present. We live to seek God, to learn to live in his presence, ultimately to become perfect as he is perfect. The time-space element of pain and conflict is a great learning experience. We should be grateful for the opportunities it provides.

# Science and The Urantia Book. Neutrinos, Neutrons, and Neutron Stars

Because of the mandatory restrictions imposed on the revelators (1109), the science and cosmology of The Urantia Book is at the approximate level of current human knowledge for the mid-1930's. It also contains some statements that were prophetic at that time because the mandate allowed the revelators to supply vital information to fill gaps in our otherwise earned knowledge. One such gap-filler may have been:

“In large suns when hydrogen is exhausted and gravity contraction ensures, and such a body is not sufficiently opaque to retain the internal pressure of support for the outer gas regions, then a sudden collapse occurs.  The gravity-electric changes give origin to vast quantities of tiny particles devoid of electric potential, and such particles readily escape from the solar interior thus bringing about the collapse of a gigantic sun within a few days.”(464)     

No tiny particles devoid of electric potential that could escape readily from the interior of a collapsing star were known to exist in 1934. In fact, the reality of such particles were not confirmed until 1956, one year after the publication of The Urantia Book. The existence of particles that might have such properties had been put forward as a suggestion by Wolfgang Pauli in 1932, because studies on radioactive beta decay of atoms had indicated that a neutron could decay to a proton and an electron, but measurements had shown that the combined mass energy of the electron and proton did not add up with that of the neutron. To account for the missing energy, Pauli suggested a little neutral particle was emitted, and then, on the same day, while lunching with the eminent astrophysicist Walter Baade, Pauli commented that he had done the worst thing a theoretical physicist could possibly do, he had proposed a particle that could never be discovered because it had no properties. Not long after, the great Enrico Fermi took up Pauli's idea and attempted to publish a paper on the subject in the prestigious science journal Nature. The editors rejected Fermi's paper on the grounds that it was too speculative. This was in 1933, the year before receipt of the relevant Urantia Paper.

An interesting thing to note is The Urantia Book statement that tiny particles devoid of electric potential would be released in vast quantities during the collapse of the star. If, in 1934, an author other than a knowledgeable particle physicist was prophesying about the formation of a neutron star (a wildly speculative proposal from Zwicky and Baade in the early 1930's), then surely that author would have been thinking about the reversal of beta decay in which a proton, an electron and Pauli's little neutral particle would be squeezed together to form a neutron.

Radioactive beta decay can be written...
1. neutron ——> proton + electron + LNP
where LNP stands for little neutral particle.  Hence the reverse should be:
2. LNP + electron + proton——>neutron

For this to occur an electron and a proton have to be compressed to form a neutron but somehow they would have to add a little neutral particle in order to make up for the missing mass-energy. Thus, in terms of available speculative scientific concepts in 1934, The Urantia Book appears to have put things back to front, it has predicted a vast release of LNP's, when the reversal of radioactive beta decay would appear to demand that LNPs should disappear.

The idea of a neutron star was considered to be highly speculative right up until 1967. Most astronomers believed that stars of average size, like our sun, up to stars that are very massive, finished their lives as white dwarfs. The theoretical properties of neutron stars were just too preposterous; for example, a thimble full would weigh about 100 million tonnes. A favored alternative proposal was that large stars were presumed to blow off their surplus mass a piece at a time until they got below the Chandrasekhar limit of 1.4 solar masses, when they could retire as respectable white dwarfs. This process did not entail the release of vast quantities of tiny particles devoid of electric potential that accompany star collapse as described in the cited Urantia Book quotation.

Distinguished Russian astrophysicist, Igor Novikov, has written, “Apparently no searches in earnest for neutron stars or black holes were attempted by astronomers before the 1960s. It was tacitly assumed that these objects were far too eccentric and most probably were the fruits of theorists wishful thinking. Preferably, one avoided speaking about them. Sometimes they were mentioned vaguely with a remark yes, they could be formed, but in all likelihood this had never happened. At any rate, if they existed, then they could not be detected.”

Acceptance of the existence of neutron stars gained ground slowly with discoveries accompanying the development of radio and x-ray astronomy. The Crab nebula played a central role as ideas about it emerged in the decade, 1950-1960. Originally observed as an explosion in the sky by Chinese astronomers in 1054, interest in the Crab nebula increased when, in 1958, Walter Baade reported visual observations suggesting moving ripples in its nebulosity. When sensitive electronic devices replaced  the photographic plate as a means of detection, the oscillation frequency of what was thought to be a white dwarf star at the center of the Crab nebula turned out to be about 30 times per second.
	
	For a white dwarf star with a diameter in the order of 1000 km, a rotation rate of even once per second would cause it to disintegrate due to centrifugal forces. Hence, this remarkably short pulsation period implied that the object responsible for the light variations must be very much smaller than a white dwarf, and the only possible contender for such properties appeared to be a neutron star. Final acceptance came with pictures of the center of the Crab nebula beamed back to earth by the orbiting Einstein X-ray observatory in 1967. These confirmed and amplified the evidence obtained by prior observations made with both light and radio telescopes.

The reversal of beta-decay, as depicted in (2) above, involves a triple collision, an extremely improbable event, unless two of the components combine in a meta-stable state—a fact not likely to be obvious to a non-expert observer which also indicates that the author(s) of the Urantia Paper was highly knowledgeable in this field.

The probable evolutionary course of collapse of massive stars has only been elucidated since the advent of fast computers. Such stars begin life composed mainly of hydrogen gas that burns to form helium. The nuclear energy released in this way holds off the gravitational urge to collapse. With the hydrogen in the central core exhausted, the core begins to shrink and heat up, making the outer layers expand. With the rise in temperature in the core, helium fuses to give carbon and oxygen, while the hydrogen around the core continues to make helium. At this stage the star expands to become a red giant.

After exhaustion of helium at the core, gravitational contraction again occurs and the rise in temperature permits carbon to burn to yield neon, sodium, and magnesium, after which the star begins to shrink to become a blue giant. Neon and oxygen burning follow. Finally silicon and sulphur, the products from burning of oxygen, ignite to produce iron. Iron nuclei cannot release energy on fusing together, hence with the exhaustion of its fuel source, the furnace at the center of the star goes out. Nothing can now slow the onslaught of gravitational collapse, and when the iron core reaches a critical mass of 1.4 times the mass of our sun, and the diameter of the star is now about half that of the earth, the star's fate is sealed.

Within a few tenths of a second, the iron ball collapses to about 50 kilometers across and then the collapse is halted as its density approaches that of the atomic nucleus and the protons and neutrons cannot be further squeezed together. The halting of the collapse sends a tremendous shock wave back  through the outer region of the core.

The light we see from our sun comes only from its outer surface layer. However, the energy that fuels the sunlight (and life on earth) originates from the hot, dense thermonuclear furnace at the Sun's core. Though sunlight takes only about eight minutes to travel from the sun to earth, the energy from the sun's core that gives rise to this sunlight takes in the order of a million years to diffuse from the core to the surface. In other words, a sun (or star) is relatively “opaque” (as per The Urantia Book, p.464) to the energy diffusing from its thermonuclear core to its surface, hence it supplies the pressure necessary to prevent gravitational collapse. But this is not true of the little neutral particles, known since the mid 1930's by the name neutrinos. These particles are so tiny and unreactive that their passage from our sun's core to its exterior takes only about 3 seconds.

It is because neutrinos can escape so readily that they have a critical role in bringing about the star's sudden death and the ensuing explosion. Neutrinos are formed in a variety of ways, many as neutrino-antineutrino pairs from highly energetic gamma rays and others arise as the compressed protons capture an electron (or expel a positron) to become neutrons, a reaction that is accompanied by the release of a neutrino. Something in the order of 1057 electron neutrinos are released in this way. Neutral current reactions from Zo particles of the weak force also contribute electron neutrinos along with the 'heavy' muon and tau neutrinos.

Together, these neutrinos constitute a “vast quantity of tiny particles devoid of electric potential” that readily escape from the star's interior. Calculations indicate that they carry ninety-nine percent of the energy released in the final supernova explosion. The gigantic flash of light that accompanies the explosion accounts for only a part of the remaining one percent! Although the bulk of the neutrinos and anti-neutrinos are released during the final explosion, they are also produced at the enormous temperatures reached by the inner core during final stages of contraction.

The opportunity to confirm the release of the neutrinos postulated to accompany the spectacular death of a giant star came in 1987 when a supernova explosion, visible to the naked eye, occurred in the Cloud of Magellan that neighbors our Milky Way galaxy. Calculations indicated that this supernova, dubbed SN1987A, should give rise to a neutrino burst at a density of 50 billion per square centimeter when it finally reached the earth, even though expanding as a spherical 'surface' originating at a distance 170,000 light years away. This neutrino burst was observed in the huge neutrino detectors at Kamiokande in Japan and at Fairport, Ohio, in the USA. lasting for a period of just 12 seconds, and confirming the computer simulations that indicated they should diffuse through the dense core relatively slowly. From the average energy and the number of 'hits' by the neutrinos in the detectors, it was possible to estimate that the energy released by SN1987 amounted to 2-3 x 1053 ergs. This is equal to the calculated gravitational binding energy that would be released by the collapse of a core of about 1.5 solar masses to a neutron star. Thus SN1987A provided a remarkable confirmation of the general picture of neutron star formation developed over the last fifty years. Importantly, it also confirmed that The Urantia Book had its facts right long before the concept of neutrino-spawning neutron stars achieved respectability..


## References


Hoyle, F., and J. Narlikar. The Physics Astronomy Frontier. (W.H. Freeman & Co. San Francisco, 1980.)
Novikov, I. Black Holes and the Universe. (Cambridge University Press, 1990)
Sutton, C. Spaceship Neutrino. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1992)

Image here
