---
title: "Hadith 1:101 to 1:200"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:1 to 1:100</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_300">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:201 to 1:300</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Hadith 1:101

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Some women requested the Prophet to fix a day for them as the men were taking all his time. On that he promised them one day for religious lessons and commandments. Once during such a lesson the Prophet said, “A woman whose three children die will be shielded by them from the Hell fire.” On that a woman asked, “If only two die?” He replied, “Even two (will shield her from the Hell-fire).”


## Hadith 1:102

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

as above (the sub narrators are different). Abu Huraira qualified the three children referred to in the above mentioned Hadith as not having reached the age of committing sins (i.e. age of puberty) .


## Hadith 1:103

_Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:_

Whenever 'Aisha (the wife of the Prophet) heard anything which she did not understand, she used to ask again till she understood it completely. Aisha said: “Once the Prophet said, “Whoever will be called to account (about his deeds on the Day of Resurrection) will surely be punished.” I said, ”Doesn't Allah say: “He surely will receive an easy reckoning.” (84.8) The Prophet replied, “This means only the presentation of the accounts but whoever will be argued about his account, will certainly be ruined.”


## Hadith 1:104

_Narrated Said:_

Abu Shuraih said, “When 'Amr bin Said was sending the troops to Mecca (to fight 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair) I said to him, 'O chief! Allow me to tell you what the Prophet said on the day following the conquests of Mecca. My ears heard and my heart comprehended, and I saw him with my own eyes, when he said it.” He glorified and praised Allah and then said, “Allah and not the people has made Mecca a sanctuary. So anybody who has belief in Allah and the Last Day (i.e. a Muslim) should neither shed blood in it nor cut down its trees. If anybody argues that fighting is allowed in Mecca as Allah's Apostle did fight (in Mecca), tell him that Allah gave permission to His Apostle, but He did not give it to you. The Prophet added: Allah allowed me only for a few hours on that day (of the conquest) and today (now) its sanctity is the same (valid) as it was before. So it is incumbent upon those who are present to convey it (this information) to those who are absent.” Abu- Shuraih was asked, “What did 'Amr reply?” He said 'Amr said, "O Abu Shuraih! I know better than you (in this respect). Mecca does not give protection to one who disobeys (Allah) or runs after committing murder, or theft (and takes refuge in Mecca).


## Hadith 1:105

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

The Prophet said. “No doubt your blood, property, the sub-narrator Muhammad thought that Abu Bakra had also mentioned and your honor (chastity), are sacred to one another as is the sanctity of this day of yours in this month of yours. It is incumbent on those who are present to inform those who are absent.” (Muhammad the Subnarrator used to say, “Allah's Apostle told the truth.”) The Prophet repeated twice: "No doubt! Haven't I conveyed Allah's message to you.


## Hadith 1:106

_Narrated 'Ali:_

The Prophet said, “Do not tell a lie against me for whoever tells a lie against me (intentionally) then he will surely enter the Hell-fire.”


## Hadith 1:107

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair:_

I said to my father, “I do not hear from you any narration (Hadith) of Allah s Apostle as I hear (his narrations) from so and so?” Az-Zubair replied. I was always with him (the Prophet) and I heard him saying "Whoever tells a lie against me (intentionally) then (surely) let him occupy, his seat in Hell-fire.


## Hadith 1:108

_Narrated Anas:_

The fact which stops me from narrating a great number of Hadiths to you is that the Prophet said: “Whoever tells a lie against me intentionally, then (surely) let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire.”


## Hadith 1:109

_Narrated Salama:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “Whoever (intentionally) ascribes to me what I have not said then (surely) let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire.”


## Hadith 1:110

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Name yourselves with my name (use my name) but do not name yourselves with my Kunya name (i.e. Abu-l Qasim). And whoever sees me in a dream then surely he has seen me for Satan cannot impersonate me. And whoever tells a lie against me (intentionally), then (surely) let him occupy his seat in Hell-fire.”


## Hadith 1:111

_Narrated Ash-Sha'bi:_

Abu Juhaifa said, “I asked Ali, ‘Have you got any book (which has been revealed to the Prophet apart from the Qur'an)?’ Ali replied, ‘No, except Allah's Book or the power of understanding which has been bestowed (by Allah) upon a Muslim or what is (written) in this sheet of paper (with me).’” Abu Juhaifa said, “I asked, ‘What is (written) in this sheet of paper?’ Ali replied, it deals with The Diyya (compensation (blood money) paid by the killer to the relatives of the victim), the ransom for the releasing of the captives from the hands of the enemies, and the law that no Muslim should be killed in Qisas (equality in punishment) for the killing of (a disbeliever).”


## Hadith 1:112

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

In the year of the Conquest of Mecca, the tribe of Khuza'a killed a man from the tribe of Bani Laith in revenge for a killed person, belonging to them. They informed the Prophet about it. So he rode his Rahila (she-camel for riding) and addressed the people saying, “Allah held back the killing from Mecca.” (The sub-narrator is in doubt whether the Prophet said “elephant or killing,” as the Arabic words standing for these words have great similarity in shape), but He (Allah) let His Apostle and the believers over power the infidels of Mecca. Beware! (Mecca is a sanctuary) Verily! Fighting in Mecca was not permitted for anyone before me nor will it be permitted for anyone after me. It (war) in it was made legal for me for few hours or so on that day. No doubt it is at this moment a sanctuary, it is not allowed to uproot its thorny shrubs or to uproot its trees or to pick up its Luqatt (fallen things) except by a person who will look for its owner (announce it publicly). And if somebody is killed, then his closest relative has the right to choose one of the two— the blood money (Diyya) or retaliation having the killer killed. In the meantime a man from Yemen came and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Get that written for me.” The Prophet ordered his companions to write that for him. Then a man from Quraish said, “Except Al-Iqhkhir (a type of grass that has good smell) O Allah's Apostle, as we use it in our houses and graves.” The Prophet said, “Except Al-Idhkhiri.e. Al-Idhkhir is allowed to be plucked.”


## Hadith 1:113

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

There is none among the companions of the Prophet who has narrated more Hadiths than I except 'Abdallah bin Amr (bin Al-'As) who used to write them and I never did the same.


## Hadith 1:114

_Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah:_

Ibn 'Abbas said, “When the ailment of the Prophet became worse, he said, 'Bring for me (writing) paper and I will write for you a statement after which you will not go astray.' But 'Umar said, 'The Prophet is seriously ill, and we have got Allah's Book with us and that is sufficient for us.' But the companions of the Prophet differed about this and there was a hue and cry. On that the Prophet said to them, 'Go away (and leave me alone). It is not right that you should quarrel in front of me.” Ibn 'Abbas came out saying, "It was most unfortunate (a great disaster) that Allah's Apostle was prevented from writing that statement for them because of their disagreement and noise. (Note: It is apparent from this Hadith that Ibn 'Abbes had witnessed the event and came out saying this statement. The truth is not so, for Ibn 'Abbas used to say this statement on narrating the Hadith and he had not witnessed the event personally. See Fath Al-Bari Vol. 1, p.220 footnote.) (See Hadith No. 228, Vol. 4).


## Hadith 1:115

_Narrated Um Salama:_

One night Allah's Apostle got up and said, “Subhan Allah! How many afflictions have been descended tonight and how many treasures have been disclosed! Go and wake the sleeping lady occupants of these dwellings (his wives) up (for prayers). A well-dressed (soul) in this world may be naked in the Hereafter. ”


## Hadith 1:116

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Once the Prophet led us in the 'Isha' prayer during the last days of his life and after finishing it (the prayer) (with Taslim) he said: “Do you realize (the importance of) this night?” Nobody present on the surface of the earth tonight will be living after the completion of one hundred years from this night."


## Hadith 1:117

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

I stayed overnight in the house of my aunt Maimuna bint Al-Harith (the wife of the Prophet ) while the Prophet was there with her during her night turn. The Prophet offered the 'Isha' prayer (in the mosque), returned home and after having prayed four Rakat, he slept. Later on he got up at night and then asked whether the boy (or he used a similar word) had slept? Then he got up for the prayer and I stood up by his left side but he made me stand to his right and offered five Rakat followed by two more Rakat. Then he slept and I heard him snoring and then (after a while) he left for the (Fajr) prayer.


## Hadith 1:118

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

People say that I have narrated many Hadiths (The Prophet's narrations). Had it not been for two verses in the Qur'an, I would not have narrated a single Hadith, and the verses are:

“Verily those who conceal the clear sign and the guidance which We have sent down . . . (up to) Most Merciful.” (2:159-160). And no doubt our Muhajir (emigrant) brothers used to be busy in the market with their business (bargains) and our Ansari brothers used to be busy with their property (agriculture). But I (Abu Huraira) used to stick to Allah's Apostle contented with what will fill my stomach and I used to attend that which they used not to attend and I used to memorize that which they used not to memorize.


## Hadith 1:119

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I said to Allah's Apostle “I hear many narrations (Hadiths) from you but I forget them.” Allah's Apostle said, “Spread your Rida' (garment).” I did accordingly and then he moved his hands as if filling them with something (and emptied them in my Rida') and then said, “Take and wrap this sheet over your body.” I did it and after that I never forgot any thing.


## Hadith 1:120

_Narrated Ibrahim bin Al-Mundhir:_

Ibn Abi Fudaik narrated the same as above (Hadith...119) but added that the Prophet had moved his hands as if filling them with something and then he emptied them in the Rida' of Abu Huraira.


## Hadith 1:121

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I have memorized two kinds of knowledge from Allah's Apostle . I have propagated one of them to you and if I propagated the second, then my pharynx (throat) would be cut (i.e. killed).


## Hadith 1:122

_Narrated Jarir:_

The Prophet said to me during Hajjat-al-Wida': Let the people keep quiet and listen. Then he said (addressing the people), “Do not (become infidels) revert to disbelief after me by striking the necks (cutting the throats) of one another (killing each other).”


## Hadith 1:123

_Narrated Said bin Jubair:_

I said to Ibn 'Abbas, “Nauf-Al-Bakali claims that Moses (the companion of Khadir) was not the Moses of Bani Israel but he was another Moses.” Ibn 'Abbas remarked that the enemy of Allah (Nauf) was a liar.


## Hadith 1:124

_Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b:_

The Prophet said, “Once the Prophet Moses stood up and addressed Bani Israel.” He was asked, “Who is the most learned man amongst the people.” He said, “I am the most learned.” Allah admonished Moses as he did not attribute absolute knowledge to Him (Allah). So Allah inspired to him “At the junction of the two seas there is a slave amongst my slaves who is more learned than you.” Moses said, “O my Lord! How can I meet him?” Allah said: Take a fish in a large basket (and proceed) and you will find him at the place where you will lose the fish. So Moses set out along with his (servant) boy, Yusha' bin Nuin and carried a fish in a large basket till they reached a rock, where they laid their heads (i.e. lay down) and slept. The fish came out of the basket and it took its way into the sea as in a tunnel. So it was an amazing thing for both Moses and his (servant) boy. They proceeded for the rest of that night and the following day. When the day broke, Moses said to his (servant) boy: “Bring us our early meal. No doubt, we have suffered much fatigue in this journey.” Moses did not get tired till he passed the place about which he was told. There the (servant) boy told Moses, “Do you remember when we betook ourselves to the rock, I indeed forgot the fish.” Moses remarked, “That is what we have been seeking. So they went back retracing their foot-steps, till they reached the rock. There they saw a man covered with a garment (or covering himself with his own garment).” Moses greeted him. Al-Khadir replied saying, “How do people greet each other in your land?” Moses said, “I am Moses.” He asked, “The Moses of Bani Israel?” Moses replied in the affirmative and added, “May I follow you so that you teach me of that knowledge which you have been taught.” Al-Khadir replied, “Verily! You will not be able to remain patient with me, O Moses! I have some of the knowledge of Allah which He has taught me and which you do not know, while you have some knowledge which Allah has taught you which I do not know.” Moses said, “Allah willing, you will find me patient and I will not disobey you in aught. So both of them set out walking along the sea-shore, as they did not have a boat. In the meantime a boat passed by them and they requested the crew of the boat to take them on board. The crew recognized Al-Khadir and took them on board without fare. Then a sparrow came and stood on the edge of the boat and dipped its beak once or twice in the sea.” Al-Khadir said: “O Moses! My knowledge and your knowledge have not decreased Allah's knowledge except as much as this sparrow has decreased the water of the sea with its beak.” Al-Khadir went to one of the planks of the boat and plucked it out. Moses said, “These people gave us a free lift but you have broken their boat and scuttled it so as to drown its people.” Al-Khadir replied, “Didn't I tell you that you will not be able to remain patient with me.” Moses said, “Call me not to account for what I forgot.” The first (excuse) of Moses was that he had forgotten. Then they proceeded further and found a boy playing with other boys. Al-Khadir took hold of the boy's head from the top and plucked it out with his hands (i.e. killed him). Moses said, “Have you killed an innocent soul who has killed none.” Al-Kha,dir replied, “Did I not tell you that you cannot remain patient with me?” Then they both proceeded till when they came to the people of a town, they asked them for food, but they refused to entertain them. Then they found there a wall on the point of collapsing. Al-Khadir repaired it with his own hands. Moses said, “If you had wished, surely you could have taken wages for it.” Al-Khadir replied, “This is the parting between you and me.” The Prophet added, “May Allah be Merciful to Moses! Would that he could have been more patient to learn more about his story with Al-Khadir. ”


## Hadith 1:125

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

A man came to the Prophet and asked, “O Allah's Apostle! What kind of fighting is in Allah's cause? (I ask this), for some of us fight because of being enraged and angry and some for the sake of his pride and haughtiness.” The Prophet raised his head (as the questioner was standing) and said, “He who fights so that Allah's Word (Islam) should be superior, then he fights in Allah's cause.”


## Hadith 1:126

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amar:_

I saw the Prophet near the Jamra and the people were asking him questions (about religious problems). A man asked, “O Allah's Apostle! I have slaughtered the Hadi (animal) before doing the Rami.” The Prophet replied, “Do the Rami (now) and there is no harm.” Another person asked, “O Allah's Apostle! I got my head shaved before slaughtering the animal.” The Prophet replied, “Do the slaughtering (now) and there is no harm.” So on that day, when the Prophet was asked about anything as regards the ceremonies of Hajj performed before or after its due time his reply was, “Do it (now) and there is no harm.”


## Hadith 1:127

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

While I was going with the Prophet through the ruins of Medina and he was reclining on a date-palm leaf stalk, some Jews passed by. Some of them said to the others: Ask him (the Prophet) about the spirit. Some of them said that they should not ask him that question as he might give a reply which would displease them. But some of them insisted on asking, and so one of them stood up and asked, “O Aba-l-Qasim ! What is the spirit?” The Prophet remained quiet. I thought he was being inspired Divinely. So I stayed till that state of the Prophet (while being inspired) was over. The Prophet then said, “And they ask you (O Muhammad) concerning the spirit —Say: The spirit — its knowledge is with my Lord. And of knowledge you (mankind) have been given only a little).” (17.85)


## Hadith 1:128

_Narrated Aswad:_

Ibn Az-Zubair said to me, “Aisha used to tell you secretly a number of things. What did she tell you about the Ka'ba?” I replied, “She told me that once the Prophet said, 'O 'Aisha! Had not your people been still close to the pre-Islamic period of ignorance (infidelity)! I would have dismantled the Ka'ba and would have made two doors in it; one for entrance and the other for exit.” Later on Ibn Az-Zubair did the same.


## Hadith 1:129

_Narrated Abu At-Tufail:_

the above mentioned Statement of 'Ali.


## Hadith 1:130

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

“Once Mu'adh was along with Allah's Apostle as a companion rider.” Allah's Apostle said, “O Mu'adh bin Jabal.” Mu'adh replied, “Labbaik and Sa'daik. O Allah's Apostle!” Again the Prophet said, “O Mu'adh!” Mu'adh said thrice, “Labbaik and Sa'daik, O Allah's Apostle!” Allah's Apostle said, “There is none who testifies sincerely that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is his Apostle, except that Allah, will save him from the Hell-fire.” Mu'adh said, “O Allah's Apostle ! Should I not inform the people about it so that they may have glad tidings?” He replied, “When the people hear about it, they will solely depend on it.” Then Mu'adh narrated the above-mentioned Hadith just before his death, being afraid of committing sin (by not telling the knowledge).


## Hadith 1:131

_Narrated Anas:_

I was informed that the Prophet had said to Mu'adh, “Whosoever will meet Allah without associating anything in worship with Him will go to Paradise.” Mu'adh asked the Prophet, “Should I not inform the people of this good news?” The Prophet replied, “No, I am afraid, lest they should depend upon it (absolutely).”


## Hadith 1:132

_Narrated Um Salama:_

Um-Sulaim came to Allah's Apostle and said, “Verily, Allah is not shy of (telling you) the truth. Is it necessary for a woman to take a bath after she has a wet dream (nocturnal sexual discharge?)” The Prophet replied, “Yes, if she notices a discharge.” Um Salama, then covered her face and asked, “O Allah's Apostle! Does a woman get a discharge?” He replied, “Yes, let your right hand be in dust (An Arabic expression you say to a person when you contradict his statement meaning “you will not achieve goodness”), and that is why the son resembles his mother.”


## Hadith 1:133

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Once Allah's Apostle said, “Amongst the trees there is a tree, the leaves of which do not fall and is like a Muslim, tell me the name of that tree.” Everybody started thinking about the trees of the desert areas and I thought of the date-palm tree but felt shy (to answer). The others asked, “O Allah's Apostle! inform us of it.” He replied, “it is the date-palm tree.” I told my father what had come to my mind and on that he said, “Had you said it I would have preferred it to such and such a thing that I might possess.”


## Hadith 1:134

_Narrated 'Ali:_

I used to get the emotional urethral discharge frequently so I requested Al-Miqdad to ask the Prophet about it. Al-Miqdad asked him and he replied, “One has to perform ablution (after it).” (See Hadith No. 269).


## Hadith 1:135

_Narrated Nafi:_

'Abdullah bin 'Umar said: “A man got up in the mosque and said: O Allah's Apostle 'At which place you order us that we should assume the Ihram?' Allah's Apostle replied, 'The residents of Medina should assure the Ihram from Dhil-Hulaifa, the people of Syria from Al-Ju,hfa and the people of Najd from Qarn.” Ibn 'Umar further said, “The people consider that Allah's Apostle had also said, 'The residents of Yemen should assume Ihram from Yalamlam.' ” Ibn 'Umar used to say, “I do not: remember whether Allah's Apostle had said the last statement or not?”


## Hadith 1:136

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

A man asked the Prophet : “What (kinds of clothes) should a Muhrim (a Muslim intending to perform 'Umra or Hajj) wear?” He replied, “He should not wear a shirt, a turban, trousers, a head cloak or garment scented with saffron or Wars (kinds of perfumes). And if he has n slippers, then he can use Khuffs (leather socks) but the socks should be cut short so as to make the ankles bare.” (See Hadith No. 615, Vol. 2).


## Hadith 1:137

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The prayer of a person who does ,Hadath (passes, urine, stool or wind) is not accepted till he performs (repeats) the ablution.” A person from Hadaramout asked Abu Huraira, “What is 'Hadath'?” Abu Huraira replied, “ 'Hadath' means the passing of wind from the anus.”


## Hadith 1:138

_Narrated Nu'am Al-Mujmir:_

Once I went up the roof of the mosque, along with Abu Huraira. He perform ablution and said, “I heard the Prophet saying, “On the Day of Resurrection, my followers will be called “Al-Ghurr-ul-Muhajjalun” from the trace of ablution and whoever can increase the area of his radiance should do so (i.e. by performing ablution regularly).” ”


## Hadith 1:139

_Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim:_

My uncle asked Allah's Apostle about a person who imagined to have passed wind during the prayer. Allah' Apostle replied: “He should not leave his prayers unless he hears sound or smells something.”


## Hadith 1:140

_Narrated Kuraib:_

Ibn 'Abbas said, “The Prophet slept till he snored and then prayed (or probably lay till his breath sounds were heard and then got up and prayed).” Ibn 'Abbas added: “I stayed overnight in the house of my aunt, Maimuna, the Prophet slept for a part of the night, (See Fateh-al-Bari page 249, Vol. 1), and late in the night, he got up and performed ablution from a hanging water skin, a light (perfect) ablution and stood up for the prayer. I, too, performed a similar ablution, then I went and stood on his left. He drew me to his right and prayed as much as Allah wished, and again lay and slept till his breath sounds were heard. Later on the Mua'dhdhin (callmaker for the prayer) came to him and informed him that it was time for Prayer. The Prophet went with him for the prayer without performing a new ablution.” (Sufyan said to 'Amr that some people said, “The eyes of Allah's Apostle sleep but his heart does not sleep.” 'Amr replied, “I heard 'Ubaid bin 'Umar saying that the dreams of Prophets were Divine Inspiration, and then he recited the verse: 'I (Abraham) see in a dream, (O my son) that I offer you in sacrifice (to Allah).” (37.102) (See Hadith No. 183)


## Hadith 1:141

_Narrated Usama bin Zaid:_

Allah's Apostle proceeded from 'Arafat till when he reached the mountain pass, he dismounted, urinated and then performed ablution but not a perfect one. I said to him, (“Is it the time for) the prayer, O Allah's Apostle?” He said, “The (place of) prayer is ahead of you.” He rode till when he reached Al-Muzdalifa, he dismounted and performed ablution and a perfect one, The (call for) Iqama was pronounced and he led the Maghrib prayer. Then everybody made his camel kneel down at its place. Then the Iqama was pronounced for the 'Isha' prayer which the Prophet led and no prayer was offered in between the two . prayers ('Isha' and Maghrib).


## Hadith 1:142

_Narrated 'Ata' bin Yasar:_

Ibn 'Abbas performed ablution and washed his face (in the following way): He ladled out a handful of water, rinsed his mouth and washed his nose with it by putting in water and then blowing it out. He then, took another handful (of water) and did like this (gesturing) joining both hands, and washed his face, took another handful of water and washed his right forearm. He again took another handful of water and washed his left forearm, and passed wet hands over his head and took another handful of water and poured it over his right foot (up to his ankles) and washed it thoroughly and similarly took another handful of water and washed thoroughly his left foot (up to the ankles) and said, “I saw Allah's Apostle performing ablution in this way.”


## Hadith 1:143

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “If anyone of you on having sexual relations with his wife said (and he must say it before starting) 'In the name of Allah. O Allah! Protect us from Satan and also protect what you bestow upon us (i.e. the coming offspring) from Satan, and if it is destined that they should have a child then, Satan will never be able to harm that offspring.”


## Hadith 1:144

_Narrated Anas:_

Whenever the Prophet went to answer the call of nature, he used to say, “Allah-umma inni a'udhu bika minal khubuthi wal khaba'ith i.e. O Allah, I seek Refuge with You from all offensive and wicked things (evil deeds and evil spirits).”


## Hadith 1:145

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Once the Prophet entered a lavatory and I placed water for his ablution. He asked, “Who placed it?” He was informed accordingly and so he said, “O Allah! Make him (Ibn 'Abbas) a learned scholar in religion (Islam).”


## Hadith 1:146

_Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If anyone of you goes to an open space for answering the call of nature he should neither face nor turn his back towards the Qibla; he should either face the east or the west.”


## Hadith 1:147

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

People say, “Whenever you sit for answering the call of nature, you should not face the Qibla or Bait-ulMaqdis (Jerusalem).” I told them. "Once I went up the roof of our house and I saw Allah's Apostle answering the call of nature while sitting on two bricks facing Bait-ul-Maqdis (Jerusalem) (but there was a screen covering him. ' (FatehAl-Bari, Page 258, Vol. 1).


## Hadith 1:148

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The wives of the Prophet used to go to Al-Manasi, a vast open place (near Baqia at Medina) to answer the call of nature at night. 'Umar used to say to the Prophet “Let your wives be veiled,” but Allah's Apostle did not do so. One night Sauda bint Zam'a the wife of the Prophet went out at 'Isha' time and she was a tall lady. 'Umar addressed her and said, “I have recognized you, O Sauda.” He said so, as he desired eagerly that the verses of Al-Hijab (the observing of veils by the Muslim women) may be revealed. So Allah revealed the verses of “Al-Hijab” (A complete body cover excluding the eyes).


## Hadith 1:149

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said to his wives, “You are allowed to go out to answer the call of nature. ”


## Hadith 1:150

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

I went up to the roof of Hafsa's house for some job and I saw Allah's Apostle answering the call of nature facing Sham (Syria, Jordan, Palestine and Lebanon regarded as one country) with his back towards the Qibla. (See Hadith No. 147).


## Hadith 1:151

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Once I went up the roof of our house and saw Allah's Apostle answering the call of nature while sitting over two bricks facing Bait-ul-Maqdis (Jerusalem). (See Hadith No. 147).


## Hadith 1:152

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle went to answer the call of nature, I along with another boy used to accompany him with a tumbler full of water. (Hisham commented, “So that he might wash his private parts with it.)”


## Hadith 1:153

_Narrated Anas:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle went to answer the call of nature, I along with another boy from us used to go behind him with a tumbler full of water.


## Hadith 1:154

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle went to answer the call of nature, I along with another boy used to carry a tumbler full of water (for cleaning the private parts) and an 'Anza (spear-headed stuck).


## Hadith 1:155

_Narrated Abu Qatada:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whenever anyone of you drinks water, he should not breathe in the drinking utensil, and whenever anyone of you goes to a lavatory, he should neither touch his penis nor clean his private parts with his right hand.”


## Hadith 1:156

_Narrated Abu Qatada:_

The Prophet said, “Whenever anyone of you makes water he should not hold his penis or clean his private parts with his right hand. (And while drinking) one should not breathe in the drinking utensil .”


## Hadith 1:157

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I followed the Prophet while he was going out to answer the call of nature. He used not to look this way or that. So, when I approached near him he said to me, “Fetch for me some stones for ' cleaning the privates parts (or said something similar), and do not bring a bone or a piece of dung.” So I brought the stones in the corner of my garment and placed them by his side and I then went away from him. When he finished (from answering the call of nature) he used, them .


## Hadith 1:158

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet went out to answer the call of nature and asked me to bring three stones. I found two stones and searched for the third but could not find it. So took a dried piece of dung and brought it to him. He took the two stones and threw away the dung and said, “This is a filthy thing.”


## Hadith 1:159

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet performed ablution by washing the body parts only once.


## Hadith 1:160

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:_

The Prophet performed ablution by washing the body parts twice.


## Hadith 1:161

_Narrated Humran:_

(the slave of 'Uthman) I saw 'Uthman bin 'Affan asking for a tumbler of water (and when it was brought) he poured water over his hands and washed them thrice and then put his right hand in the water container and rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out. then he washed his face and forearrlns up to the elbows thrice, passed his wet hands over his head and washed his feet up to the ankles thrice. Then he said, “Allah's Apostle said 'If anyone Performs ablution like that of mine and offers a two-rak'at prayer during which he does not think of anything else (not related to the present prayer) then his past sins will be forgiven.' ” After performing the ablution 'Uthman said, “I am going to tell you a Hadith which I would not have told you, had I not been compelled by a certain Holy Verse (the sub narrator 'Urwa said: This verse is: "Verily, those who conceal the clear signs and the guidance which we have sent down...)” (2:159). I heard the Prophet saying, 'If a man performs ablution perfectly and then offers the compulsory congregational prayer, Allah will forgive his sins committed between that (prayer) and the (next) prayer till he offers it.


## Hadith 1:162

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever performs ablution should clean his nose with water by putting the water in it and then blowing it out, and whoever cleans his private parts with stones should do it with odd number of stones.”


## Hadith 1:163

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If anyone of you performs ablution he should put water in his nose and then blow it out and whoever cleans his private parts with stones should do so with odd numbers. And whoever wakes up from his sleep should wash his hands before putting them in the water for ablution, because nobody knows where his hands were during sleep.”


## Hadith 1:164

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:_

The Prophet remained behind us on a journey. He joined us while we were performing ablution for the 'Asr prayer which was over-due and we were just passing wet hands over our feet (not washing them thoroughly) so he addressed us in a loud voice saying twice orthriae, “Save your heels from the fire.”


## Hadith 1:165

_Narrated Humran:_

(the freed slave of 'Uthman bin 'Affan) I saw 'Uthman bin 'Affan asking (for a tumbler of water) to perform ablution (and when it was brought) he poured water from it over his hands and washed them thrice and then put his right hand in the water container and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out. Then he washed his face thrice and (then) forearms up to the elbows thrice, then passed his wet hands over his head and then washed each foot thrice. After that 'Uthman said, "I saw the Prophet performing ablution like this of mine, and he said, 'If anyone performs ablution like that of mine and offers a two-rak'at prayer during which he does not think of anything else (not related to the present prayer) then his past sins will be forgiven. '


## Hadith 1:166

_Narrated Muhammad Ibn Ziyad:_

I heard Abu Huraira saying as he passed by us while the people were performing ablution from a utensil containing water, “Perform ablution perfectly and thoroughly for Abul-Qasim (the Prophet) said, 'Save your heels from the Hell-fire.' ”


## Hadith 1:167

_Narrated 'Ubaid Ibn Juraij:_

I asked 'Abdullah bin 'Umar, “O Abu 'Abdur-Rahman! I saw you doing four things which I never saw being done by anyone of you companions?” 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, “What are those, O Ibn Juraij?” I said, “I never saw you touching any corner of the Ka'ba except these (two) facing south (Yemen) and I saw you wearing shoes made of tanned leather and dyeing your hair with Hinna; (a kind of dye). I also noticed that whenever you were in Mecca, the people assume l,hram on seeing the new moon crescent (1st of Dhul-Hijja) while you did not assume the Ihlal (Ihram)—(Ihram is also called Ihlal which means 'Loud calling' because a Muhrim has to recite Talbiya aloud when assuming the state of Ihram)—till the 8th of Dhul-Hijja (Day of Tarwiya).” 'Abdullah replied, “Regarding the corners of Ka'ba, I never saw Allah's Apostle touching except those facing south (Yemen) and regarding the tanned leather shoes, no doubt I saw Allah's Apostle wearing non-hairy shoes and he used to perform ablution while wearing the shoes (i.e. wash his feet and then put on the shoes). So I love to wear similar shoes. And about the dyeing of hair with Hinna; no doubt I saw Allah's Apostle dyeing his hair with it and that is why I like to dye (my hair with it). Regarding Ihlal, I did not see Allah's Apostle assuming Ihlal till he set out for Hajj (on the 8th of Dhul-Hijja).”


## Hadith 1:168

_Narrated Um-'Atiya:_

that the Prophet at the time of washing his deceased daughter had said to them, “Start from the right side beginning with those parts which are washed in ablution.”


## Hadith 1:169

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to like to start from the right side on wearing shoes, combing his hair and cleaning or washing himself and on doing anything else.


## Hadith 1:170

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

saw Allah's Apostle when the 'Asr prayer was due and the people searched for water to perform ablution but they could not find it. Later on (a pot full of) water for ablution was brought to Allah's Apostle . He put his hand in that pot and ordered the people to perform ablution from it. I saw the water springing out from underneath his fingers till all of them performed the ablution (it was one of the miracles of the Prophet).


## Hadith 1:171

_Narrated Ibn Sirrn:_

I said to 'Ablda, “I have some of the hair of the Prophet which I got from Anas or from his family.” 'Abida replied. “No doubt if I had a single hair of that it would have been dearer to me than the whole world and whatever is in it.”


## Hadith 1:172

_Narrated Anas:_

When Allah's Apostle got his head shaved, Abu- Talha was the first to take some of his hair.


## Hadith 1:173

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If a dog drinks from the utensil of anyone of you it is essential to wash it seven times.”


## Hadith 1:174

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “A man saw a dog eating mud from (the severity of) thirst. So, that man took a shoe (and filled it) with water and kept on pouring the water for the dog till it quenched its thirst. So Allah approved of his deed and made him to enter Paradise.” And narrated Hamza bin 'Abdullah: My father said. “During the lifetime of Allah's Apostle, the dogs used to urinate, and pass through the mosques (come and go), nevertheless they never used to sprinkle water on it (urine of the dog.)”


## Hadith 1:175

_Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:_

I asked the Prophet (about the hunting dogs) and he replied, “If you let loose (with Allah's name) your tamed dog after a game and it hunts it, you may eat it, but if the dog eats of (that game) then do not eat it because the dog has hunted it for itself.” I further said, “Sometimes I send my dog for hunting and find another dog with it. He said, ”Do not eat the game for you have mentioned Allah's name only on sending your dog and not the other dog."


## Hadith 1:176

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “A person is considered in prayer as long as he is waiting for the prayer in the mosque as long as he does not do Hadath.” A non-Arab man asked, “O Abii Huraira! What is Hadath?” I replied, “It is the passing of wind (from the anus) (that is one of the types of Hadath).”


## Hadith 1:177

_Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim:_

My uncle said: The Prophet said, “One should not leave his prayer unless he hears sound or smells something.”


## Hadith 1:178

_Narrated 'Ali:_

I used to get emotional urethral discharges frequently and felt shy to ask Allah's Apostle about it. So I requested Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad to ask (the Prophet ) about it. Al-Miqdad asked him and he replied, “On has to perform ablution (after it).”


## Hadith 1:179

_Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:_

I asked 'Uthman bin 'Affan about a person who engaged in intercourse but did no discharge. 'Uthman replied, “He should perform ablution like the one for ar ordinary prayer but he must wash his penis.” 'Uthman added, “I heard it from Allah's Apostle.” I asked 'Ali Az-Zubair, Talha and Ubai bin Ka'b about it and they, too, gave the same reply. (This order was cancelled later on and taking a bath became necessary for such cases).


## Hadith 1:180

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khud:_

Allah's Apostle sent for a Ansari man who came with water dropping from his head. The Prophet said, “Perhaps we have forced you to hurry up, haven't we?” The Ansari replied, “Yes.” Allah's Apostle further said, "If you are forced to hurry up (during intercourse) or you do not discharge then ablution is due on you (This order was cancelled later on, i.e. one has to take a bath).


## Hadith 1:181

_Narrated Usama bin Zaid:_

“When Allah's Apostle departed from 'Arafat, he turned towards a mountain pass where he answered the call of nature.” (After he had finished) I poured water and he performed ablution and then I said to him, “O Allah's Apostle! Will you offer the prayer?” He replied, “The Musalla (place of the prayer) is ahead of you (in Al-Muzdalifa).”


## Hadith 1:182

_Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:_

I was in the company of Allah's Apostle on one of the journeys and he went out to answer the call of nature (and after he finished) I poured water and he performed ablution; he washed his face, forearms and passed his wet hand over his head and over the two Khuff, (leather socks).


## Hadith 1:183

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

that he stayed overnight in the house of Maimuna the wife of the Prophet, his aunt. He added : I lay on the bed (cushion transversally) while Allah's Apostle and his wife lay in the length-wise direction of the cushion. Allah's Apostle slept till the middle of the night, either a bit before or a bit after it and then woke up, rubbing the traces of sleep off his face with his hands. He then, recited the last ten verses of Sura Al-Imran, got up and went to a hanging water-skin. He then Performed the ablution from it and it was a perfect ablution, and then stood up to offer the prayer. I, too, got up and did as the Prophet had done. Then I went and stood by his side. He placed his right hand on my head and caught my right ear and twisted it. He prayed two Rakat then two Rakat and two Rakat and then two Rakat and then two Rakat and then two Rakat (separately six times), and finally one Rak'a (the Witr). Then he lay down again in the bed till the Mu'adhdhin came to him where upon the Prophet got up, offered a two light Rakat prayer and went out and led the Fajr prayer


## Hadith 1:184

_Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:_

I came to 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet during the solar eclipse. The people were standing and offering the prayer and she was also praying. I asked her, “What is wrong with the people?” She beckoned with her hand towards the sky and said, “Subhan Allah.” I asked her, “Is there a sign?” She pointed out, “Yes.” So I, too, stood for the prayer till I fell unconscious and later on I poured water on my head. After the prayer, Allah's Apostle praised and glorified Allah and said, “Just now I have seen something which I never saw before at this place of mine, including Paradise and Hell. I have been inspired (and have understood) that you will be put to trials in your graves and these trials will be like the trials of Ad-Dajjal, or nearly like it (the sub narrator is not sure of what Asma' said). Angels will come to every one of you and ask, 'What do you know about this man?' A believer will reply, 'He is Muhammad, Allah's Apostle , and he came to us with self-evident truth and guidance. So we accepted his teaching, believed and followed him.' Then the angels will say to him to sleep in peace as they have come to know that he was a believer. On the other hand a hypocrite or a doubtful person will reply, 'I do not know but heard the people saying something and so I said the same.' ”


## Hadith 1:185

_Narrated Yahya Al-Mazini:_

A person asked 'Abdullah bin Zaid who was the grandfather of 'Amr bin Yahya, “Can you show me how Allah's Apostle used to perform ablution?” 'Abdullah bin Zaid replied in the affirmative and asked for water. He poured it on his hands and washed them twice, then he rinsed his mouth thrice and washed his nose with water thrice by putting water in it and blowing it out. He washed his face thrice and after that he washed his forearms up to the elbows twice and then passed his wet hands over his head from its front to its back and vice versa (beginning from the front and taking them to the back of his head up to the nape of the neck and then brought them to the front again from where he had started) and washed his feet (up to the ankles).


## Hadith 1:186

_Narrated 'Amr:_

My father saw 'Amr bin Abi Hasan asking 'Abdullah bin Zaid about the ablution of the Prophet. 'Abdullah bin Zaid asked for earthen-ware pot containing water and in front of them performed ablution like that of the Prophet . He poured water from the pot over his hand and washed his hands thrice and then he put his hands in the pot and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out with three handfuls of water. Again he put his hand in the water and washed his face thrice and washed his forearms up to the elbows twice; and then put his hands in the water and then passed them over his head by bringing them to the front and then to the rear of the head once, and then he washed his feet up to the ankles.


## Hadith 1:187

_Narrated Abu Juhaifa:_

Allah's Apostle came to us at noon and water for ablution was brought to him. After he had performed ablution, the remaining water was taken by the people and they started smearing their bodies with it (as a blessed thing). The Prophet offered two Rakat of the Zuhr prayer and then two Rakat of the 'Asr prayer while an 'Anza (spear-headed stick) was there (as a Sutra) in front of him. Abu Musa said: The Prophet asked for a tumbler containing water and washed both his hands and face in it and then threw a mouthful of water in the tumbler and said to both of us (Abu Musa and Bilal), “Drink from the tumbler and pour some of its water on your faces and chests.”


## Hadith 1:188

_Narrated Ibn Shihab:_

Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi' who was the person on whose face the Prophet had ejected a mouthful of water from his family's well while he was a boy, and 'Urwa (on the authority of Al-Miswar and others) who testified each other, said, “Whenever the Prophet , performed ablution, his companions were nearly fighting for the remains of the water.”


## Hadith 1:189

_Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:_

My aunt took me to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle! This son of my sister has got a disease in his legs.” So he passed his hands on my head and prayed for Allah's blessings for me; then he performed ablution and I drank from the remaining water. I stood behind him and saw the seal of Prophethood between his shoulders, and it was like the “Zir-al-Hijla” (means the button of a small tent, but some said 'egg of a partridge.' etc.)


## Hadith 1:190

_Narrated 'Amr bin Yahya:_

(on the authority of his father) 'Abdullah bin Zaid poured water on his hands from a utensil containing water and washed them and then with one handful of water he rinsed his mouth and cleaned his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out. He repeated it thrice. He, then, washed his hands and forearms up to the elbows twice and passed wet hands over his head, both forwards and backwards, and washed his feet up to the ankles and said, “This is the ablution of Allah's Apostle.”


## Hadith 1:191

_Narrated Amr bin Yahya:_

My father said, “I saw Amr bin Abi Hasan asking 'Abdullah bin Zaid about the ablution of the Prophet. Abdullah bin Zaid asked for an earthenware pot containing water and performed ablution in front of them. He poured water over his hands and washed them thrice. Then he put his (right) hand in the pot and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out thrice with three handfuls of water Again he put his hand in the water and washed his face thrice. After that he put his hand in the pot and washed his forearms up to the elbows twice and then again put his hand in the water and passed wet hands over his head by bringing them to the front and then to the back and once more he put his hand in the pot and washed his feet (up to the ankles.)”


## Hadith 1:192

_Narrated Wuhaib:_

that he (the Prophet in narration 191 above) had passed his wet hands


## Hadith 1:193

_Narrated Jabir:_

Allah's Apostle came to visit me while I was sick and unconscious. He performed ablution and sprinkled the remaining water on me and I became conscious and said, “O Allah's Apostle! To whom will my inheritance go as I have neither ascendants nor descendants?” Then the Divine verses regarding Fara'id (inheritance) were revealed.


## Hadith 1:194

_Narrated Anas:_

It was the time for prayer, and those whose houses were near got up and went to their people (to perform ablution), and there remained some people (sitting). Then a painted stove pot (Mikhdab) containing water was brought to Allah's Apostles The pot was small, not broad enough for one to spread one's hand in; yet all the people performed ablution. (The sub narrator said, “We asked Anas, 'How many persons were you?' Anas replied 'We were eighty or more”). (It was one of the miracles of Allah's Apostle).


## Hadith 1:195

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

Once the Prophet asked for a tumbler containing water. He washed his hands and face in it and also threw a mouthful of water in it.


## Hadith 1:196

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:_

Once Allah's Apostle came to us and we brought out water for him in a brass pot. He performed ablution thus: He washed his face thrice, and his forearms to the elbows twice, then passed his wet hands lightly over the head from front to rear and brought them to front again and washed his feet (up to the ankles).


## Hadith 1:197

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When the ailment of the Prophet became aggravated and his disease became severe, he asked his wives to permit him to be nursed (treated) in my house. So they gave him the permission. Then the Prophet came (to my house) with the support of two men, and his legs were dragging on the ground, between “Abbas, and another man.” 'Ubaid-Ullah (the sub narrator) said, “I informed 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas of what'Aisha said. Ibn 'Abbas said: 'Do you know who was the other man?' I replied in the negative. Ibn 'Abbas said, 'He was 'Ali (bin Abi Talib).” 'Aisha further said, “When the Prophet came to my house and his sickness became aggravated he ordered us to pour seven skins full of water on him, so that he might give some advice to the people. So he was seated in a Mikhdab (brass tub) belonging to Hafsa, the wife of the Prophet. Then, all of us started pouring water on him from the water skins till he beckoned to us to stop and that we have done (what he wanted us to do). After that he went out to the people.”


## Hadith 1:198

_Narrated 'Amr bin Yahya:_

(on the authority of his father) My uncle used to perform ablution extravagantly and once he asked 'Abdullah bin Zaid to tell him how he had seen the Prophet performing ablution. He asked for an earthen-ware pot containing water, and poured water from it on his hands and washed them thrice, and then put his hand in the earthen-ware pot and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it Out thrice with one handful of water; he again put his hand in the water and took a handful of water and washed his face thrice, then washed his hands up to the elbows twice, and took water with his hand, and passed it over his head from front to back and then from back to front, and then washed his feet (up to the ankles) and said, “I saw the Prophet performing ablution in that way.”


## Hadith 1:199

_Narrated Thabit:_

Anas said, “The Prophet asked for water and a tumbler with a broad base and no so deep, containing a small quantity of water, was brought to him whereby he put his fingers in it.” Anas further said, “ noticed the water springing out from amongst his fingers.” Anas added, “ estimated that the people who performed ablution with it numbered between seventy to eighty.”


## Hadith 1:200

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet used to take a bath with one Saor up to five Mudds (1 Sa'= Mudds) of water and used to perform ablution with one Mudd of water.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:1 to 1:100</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_300">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:201 to 1:300</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
