---
title: "Hadith 1:201 to 1:300"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_200">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:101 to 1:200</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_400">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:301 to 1:400</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 1:201

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Sa'd bin Abi Waqqas said, “The Prophet passed wet hands over his Khuffs.” 'Abdullah bin 'Umar asked Umar about it. 'Umar replied in the affirmative and added, “Whenever Sa'd narrates a Hadith from the Prophet, there is no need to ask anyone else about it.”


## Hadith 1:202

_Narrated Al-Mughlra bin Shu'ba:_

Once Allah's Apostle went out to answer the call of nature and I followed him with a tumbler containing water, and when he finished, I poured water and he performed ablution and passed wet hands over his Khuffs.


## Hadith 1:203

_Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr bin Umaiya Ad-Damri:_

My father said, “I saw the Prophet passing wet hands over his Khuffs.”


## Hadith 1:204

_Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr:_

My father said, “I saw the Prophet passing wet hands over his turban and Khuffs (leather socks).”


## Hadith 1:205

_Narrated 'Urwa bin Al-Mughira:_

My father said, "Once I was in the company of the Prophet on a journey and I dashed to take off his Khuffs. He ordered me to leave them as he had put them after performing ablution. So he passed wet hands or them.


## Hadith 1:206

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle ate a piece of cooked mutton from the shoulder region and prayed without repeating ablution.


## Hadith 1:207

_Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr bin Umaiya:_

My father said, “I saw Allah's Apostle taking a piece of (cooked) mutton from the shoulder region and then he was called for prayer. He put his knife down and prayed without repeating ablution.”


## Hadith 1:208

_Narrated Suwaid bin Al-Nu'man:_

In the year of the conquest of Khaibar I went with Allah's Apostle till we reached Sahba,' a place near Khaibar, where Allah's Apostle offered the 'Asr prayer and asked for food. Nothing but Sawrq was brought. He ordered it to be moistened with water. He and all of us ate it and the Prophet got up for the evening prayer (Maghrib prayer), rinsed his mouth with water and we did the same, and he then prayed without repeating the ablution.


## Hadith 1:209

_Narrated Maimuna:_

The Prophet ate (a piece of) mutton from the shoulder region and then prayed without repeating the ablution.


## Hadith 1:210

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle drank milk, rinsed his mouth and said, “It has fat.”


## Hadith 1:211

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If anyone of you feels drowsy while praying he should go to bed (sleep) till his slumber is over because in praying while drowsy one does not know whether one is asking for forgiveness or for a bad thing for oneself.”


## Hadith 1:212

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “If anyone of you feels drowsy while praying, he should sleep till he understands what he is saying (reciting).”


## Hadith 1:213

_Narrated 'Amr bin 'Amir:_

Anas said, “The Prophet used to perform ablution for every prayer.” I asked Anas, “What you used to do?' Anas replied, ”We used to pray with the same ablution until we break it with Hadath."


## Hadith 1:214

_Narrated Suwaid bin Nu'man:_

In the year of the conquest of Khaibar I went with Allah's Apostle till we reached As-Sahba' where Allah's Apostle led the 'Asr prayer and asked for the food. Nothing but Sawiq was brought and we ate it and drank (water). The Prophet got up for the (Maghrib) Prayer, rinsed his mouth with water and then led the prayer without repeating the ablution.


## Hadith 1:215

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Once the Prophet, while passing through one of the grave-yards of Medina or Mecca heard the voices of two persons who were being tortured in their graves. The Prophet said, “These two persons are being tortured not for a major sin (to avoid).” The Prophet then added, “Yes! (they are being tortured for a major sin). Indeed, one of them never saved himself from being soiled with his urine while the other used to go about with calumnies (to make enmiy between friends). The Prophet then asked for a green leaf of a date-palm tree, broke it into two pieces and put one on each grave. On being asked why he had done so, he replied, ”I hope that their torture might be lessened, till these get dried."


## Hadith 1:216

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Whenever the Prophet went to answer the call of nature, I used to bring water with which he used to clean his private parts.


## Hadith 1:217

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet once passed by two graves and said, “These two persons are being tortured not for a major sin (to avoid). One of them never saved himself from being soiled with his urine, while the other used to go about with calumnies(to make enmity between friends).” The Prophet then took a green leaf of a date-palm tree, split it into (pieces) and fixed one on each grave. They said, “O Allah's Apostle! Why have you done so?” He replied, “I hope that their punishment might be lessened till these (the pieces of the leaf) become dry.” (See the foot-note of Hadith 215).


## Hadith 1:218

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet saw a Bedouin making water in the mosque and told the people not to disturb him. When he finished, the Prophet asked for some water and poured it over (the urine).


## Hadith 1:219

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A Bedouin stood up and started making water in the mosque. The people caught him but the Prophet ordered them to leave him and to pour a bucket or a tumbler of water over the place where he had passed the urine. The Prophet then said, “You have been sent to make things easy and not to make them difficult.”


## Hadith 1:220

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said as above (219).


## Hadith 1:221

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

A Bedouin came and passed urine in one corner of the mosque. The people shouted at him but the Prophet stopped them till he finished urinating. The Prophet ordered them to spill a bucket of water over that place and they did so.


## Hadith 1:222

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the mother of faithful believers) A child was brought to Allah's Apostle and it urinated on the garment of the Prophet. The Prophet asked for water and poured it over the soiled place.


## Hadith 1:223

_Narrated Um Qais bint Mihsin:_

I brought my young son, who had not started eating (ordinary food) to Allah's Apostle who took him and made him sit in his lap. The child urinated on the garment of the Prophet, so he asked for water and poured it over the soiled (area) and did not wash it.


## Hadith 1:224

_Narrated Hudhaifa:_

Once the Prophet went to the dumps of some people and passed urine while standing. He then asked for water and so I brought it to him and he performed ablution.


## Hadith 1:225

_Narrated Hudhaifa':_

The Prophet and I walked till we reached the dumps of some people. He stood, as any one of you stands, behind a wall and urinated. I went away, but he beckoned me to come. So I approached him and stood near his back till he finished.


## Hadith 1:226

_Narrated Abu Wail:_

Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari used to lay great stress on the question of urination and he used to say, “If anyone from Bani Israel happened to soil his clothes with urine, he used to cut that portion away.” Hearing that, Hudhaifa said to Abu Wail, “I wish he (Abu Musa) didn't (lay great stress on that matter).” Hudhaifa added, “Allah's Apostle went to the dumps of some people and urinated while standing.”


## Hadith 1:227

_Narrated Asma':_

A woman came to the Prophet and said, “If anyone of us gets menses in her clothes then what should she do?” He replied, “She should (take hold of the soiled place), rub it and put it in the water and rub it in order to remove the traces of blood and then pour water over it. Then she can pray in it.”


## Hadith 1:228

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Fatima bint Abi Hubaish came to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle I get persistent bleeding from the uterus and do not become clean. Shall I give up my prayers?” Allah's Apostle replied, “No, because it is from a blood vessel and not the menses. So when your real menses begins give up your prayers and when it has finished wash off the blood (take a bath) and offer your prayers.” Hisham (the sub narrator) narrated that his father had also said, (the Prophet told her): “Perform ablution for every prayer till the time of the next period comes.”


## Hadith 1:229

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I used to wash the traces of Janaba (semen) from the clothes of the Prophet and he used to go for prayers while traces of water were still on it (water spots were still visible).


## Hadith 1:230

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

as above (229).


## Hadith 1:231

_Narrated Sulaiman bin Yasar:_

I asked 'Aisha about the clothes soiled with semen. She replied, “I used to wash it off the clothes of Allah's Apostle and he would go for the prayer while water spots were still visible. ”


## Hadith 1:232

_Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun:_

I heard Sulaiman bin Yasar talking about the clothes soiled with semen. He said that 'Aisha had said, "I used to wash it off the clothes of Allah's Apostle and he would go for the prayers while water spots were still visible on them.


## Hadith 1:233

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I used to wash the semen off the clothes of the Prophet and even then I used to notice one or more spots on them.


## Hadith 1:234

_Narrated Abu Qilaba:_

Anas said, “Some people of 'Ukl or 'Uraina tribe came to Medina and its climate did not suit them. So the Prophet ordered them to go to the herd of (Milch) camels and to drink their milk and urine (as a medicine). So they went as directed and after they became healthy, they killed the shepherd of the Prophet and drove away all the camels. The news reached the Prophet early in the morning and he sent (men) in their pursuit and they were captured and brought at noon. He then ordered to cut their hands and feet (and it was done), and their eyes were branded with heated pieces of iron, They were put in 'Al-Harra' and when they asked for water, no water was given to them.” Abu Qilaba said, “Those people committed theft and murder, became infidels after embracing Islam and fought against Allah and His Apostle .”


## Hadith 1:235

_Narrated Anas:_

Prior to the construction of the mosque, the Prophet offered the prayers at sheep-folds.


## Hadith 1:236

_Narrated Maimuna:_

Allah's Apostle was asked regarding ghee (cooking butter) in which a mouse had fallen. He said, “Take out the mouse and throw away the ghee around it and use the rest.”


## Hadith 1:237

_Narrated Maimuna:_

The Prophet was asked regarding ghee in which a mouse had fallen. He said, “Take out the mouse and throw away the ghee around it (and use the rest.)”


## Hadith 1:238

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “A wound which a Muslim receives in Allah's cause will appear on the Day of Resurrection as it was at the time of infliction; blood will be flowing from the wound and its color will be that of the blood but will smell like musk.”


## Hadith 1:239

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “We (Muslims) are the last (people to come in the world) but (will be) the foremost (on the Day of Resurrection).” The same narrator told that the Prophet had said, “You should not pass urine in stagnant water which is not flowing then (you may need to) wash in it.”


## Hadith 1:240

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

While Allah's Apostle was prostrating (as stated below).


## Hadith 1:241

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:_

Once the Prophet was offering prayers at the Ka'ba. Abu Jahl was sitting with some of his companions. One of them said to the others, “Who amongst you will bring the abdominal contents (intestines, etc.) of a camel of Bani so and so and put it on the back of Muhammad, when he prostrates?” The most unfortunate of them got up and brought it. He waited till the Prophet prostrated and then placed it on his back between his shoulders. I was watching but could not do any thing. I wish I had some people with me to hold out against them. They started laughing and falling on one another. Allah's Apostle was in prostration and he did not lift his head up till Fatima (Prophet's daughter) came and threw that (camel's abdominal contents) away from his back. He raised his head and said thrice, “O Allah! Punish Quraish.” So it was hard for Abu Jahl and his companions when the Prophet invoked Allah against them as they had a conviction that the prayers and invocations were accepted in this city (Mecca). The Prophet said, "O Allah! Punish Abu Jahl, 'Utba bin Rabi'a, Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al-Walid bin 'Utba, Umaiya bin Khalaf, and 'Uqba bin Al Mu'it (and he mentioned the seventh whose name I cannot recall). By Allah in Whose Hands my life is, I saw the dead bodies of those persons who were counted by Allah's Apostle in the Qalib (one of the wells) of Badr.


## Hadith 1:242

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet once spat in his clothes.


## Hadith 1:243

_Narrated Aisha:_

The Prophet said, "All drinks that produce intoxication are Haram (forbidden to drink).


## Hadith 1:244

_Narrated Abu Hazim:_

Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi, was asked by the people, “With what was the wound of the Prophet treated? Sahl replied, ”None remains among the people living who knows that better than I. 'Ah used to bring water in his shield and Fatima used to wash the blood off his face. Then straw mat was burnt and the wound was filled with it."


## Hadith 1:245

_Narrated Abu Burda:_

My father said, “I came to the Prophet and saw him carrying a Siwak in his hand and cleansing his teeth, saying, 'U' U',” as if he was retching while the Siwak was in his mouth."


## Hadith 1:246

_Narrated Hudhaifa:_

Whenever the Prophet got up at night, he used to clean his mouth with Siwak.


## Hadith 1:247

_Narrated Al-Bara 'bin 'Azib:_

The Prophet said to me, “Whenever you go to bed perform ablution like that for the prayer, lie or your right side and say, “Allahumma aslamtu wajhi ilaika, wa fauwadtu amri ilaika, wa alja'tu Zahri ilaika raghbatan wa rahbatan ilaika. La Malja' wa la manja minka illa ilaika. Allahumma amantu bikitabika-l-ladhi anzalta wa bina-biyika-l ladhi arsalta” (O Allah! I surrender to You and entrust all my affairs to You and depend upon You for Your Blessings both with hope and fear of You. There is no fleeing from You, and there is no place of protection and safety except with You O Allah! I believe in Your Book (the Qur'an) which You have revealed and in Your Prophet (Muhammad) whom You have sent). Then if you die on that very night, you will die with faith (i.e. or the religion of Islam). Let the aforesaid words be your last utterance (before sleep).” I repeated it before the Prophet and when I reached “Allahumma amantu bikitabika-l-ladhi anzalta (O Allah I believe in Your Book which You have revealed).” I said, “Wa-rasulika (and your Apostle).” The Prophet said, “No, (but say): 'Wanabiyika-l-ladhi arsalta (Your Prophet whom You have sent), instead.”


## Hadith 1:248

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Whenever the Prophet took a bath after Janaba he started by washing his hands and then performed ablution like that for the prayer. After that he would put his fingers in water and move the roots of his hair with them, and then pour three handfuls of water over his head and then pour water all over his body.


## Hadith 1:249

_Narrated Maimuna:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle performed ablution like that for the prayer but did not wash his feet. He washed off the discharge from his private parts and then poured water over his body. He withdrew his feet from that place (the place where he took the bath) and then washed them. And that was his way of taking the bath of Janaba.


## Hadith 1:250

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a single pot called 'Faraq'.


## Hadith 1:251

_Narrated Abu Salama:_

'Aisha's brother and I went to 'Aisha and he asked her about the bath of the Prophet. She brought a pot containing about a Sa' of water and took a bath and poured it over her head and at what time there was a screen between her and us.


## Hadith 1:252

_Narrated Abu Ja'far:_

While I and my father were with Jabir bin 'Abdullah, some People asked him about taking a bath He replied, “A Sa' of water is sufficient for you.” A man said, “A Sa' is not sufficient for me.” Jabir said, “A Sa was sufficient for one who had more hair than you and was better than you (meaning the Prophet).” And then Jabir (put on) his garment and led the prayer.


## Hadith 1:253

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet and Maimuna used to take a bath from a single pot.


## Hadith 1:254

_Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:_

Allah's Apostle said, “As for me, I pour water three times on my head.” And he pointed with both his hands.


## Hadith 1:255

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet used to pour water three times on his head.


## Hadith 1:256

_Narrated Abu Ja'far:_

Jabir bin Abdullah said to me, “Your cousin (Hasan bin Muhammad bin Al-Hanafiya) came to me and asked about the bath of Janaba. I replied, 'The Prophet uses to take three handfuls of water, pour them on his head and then pour more water over his body.' Al-Hasan said to me, 'I am a hairy man.' I replied, 'The Prophet had more hair than you'. ”


## Hadith 1:257

_Narrated Maimuna:_

I placed water for the bath of the Prophet. He washed his hands twice or thrice and then poured water on his left hand and washed his private parts. He rubbed his hands over the earth (and cleaned them), rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by putting water in it and blowing it out, washed his face and both forearms and then poured water over his body. Then he withdrew from that place and washed his feet.


## Hadith 1:258

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Whenever the Prophet took the bath of Janaba (sexual relation or wet dream) he asked for the Hilab or some other scent. He used to take it in his hand, rub it first over the right side of his head and then over the left and then rub the middle of his head with both hands.


## Hadith 1:259

_Narrated Maimuna:_

I placed water for the bath of the Prophet and he poured water with his right hand on his left and washed them. Then he washed his private parts and rubbed his hands on the ground, washed them with water, rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and blowing it out, washed his face and poured water on his head. He withdrew from that place and washed his feet. A piece of cloth (towel) was given to him but he did not use it.


## Hadith 1:260

_Narrated Maimuna:_

The Prophet took the bath of Janaba. (sexual relation or wet dream). He first cleaned his private parts with his hand, and then rubbed it(that hand) on the wall (earth) and washed it. Then he performed ablution like that for the prayer, and after the bath he washed his feet.


## Hadith 1:261

_Narrated Aisha:_

The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a single pot of water and our hands used to go in the pot after each other in turn.


## Hadith 1:262

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle took a bath of Janaba, he washed his hands first.


## Hadith 1:263

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a single pot of water after Janaba.


## Hadith 1:264

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

the Prophet and one of his wives used to take a bath from a single pot of water. (Shu'ba added to Anas's Statement “After the Janaba”)


## Hadith 1:265

_Narrated Maimuna:_

I placed water for the bath of Allah's Apostle and he poured water over his hands and washed them twice or thrice; then he poured water with his right hand over his left and washed his private parts (with his left hand). He rubbed his hand over the earth and rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and blowing it out. After that he washed his face, both fore arms and head thrice and then poured water over his body. He withdrew from that place and washed his feet.


## Hadith 1:266

_Narrated Maimuna bint Al-Harith:_

I placed water for the bath of Allah's Apostle and put a screen. He poured water over his hands, and washed them once or twice. (The subnarrator added that he did not remember if she had said thrice or not). Then he poured water with his right hand over his left one and washed his private parts. He rubbed his hand over the earth or the wall and washed it. He rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and blowing it out. He washed his face, forearms and head. He poured water over his body and then withdrew from that place and washed his feet. I presented him a piece of cloth (towel) and he pointed with his hand (that he does not want it) and did not take it.


## Hadith 1:267

_Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Muntathir:_

on the authority of his father that he had asked 'Aisha (about the Hadith of Ibn 'Umar). She said, “May Allah be Merciful to Abu 'Abdur-Rahman. I used to put scent on Allah's Apostle and he used to go round his wives, and in the morning he assumed the Ihram, and the fragrance of scent was still coming out from his body.”


## Hadith 1:268

_Narrated Qatada:_

Anas bin Malik said, “The Prophet used to visit all his wives in a round, during the day and night and they were eleven in number.” I asked Anas, “Had the Prophet the strength for it?” Anas replied, “We used to say that the Prophet was given the strength of thirty (men).” And Sa'id said on the authority of Qatada that Anas had told him about nine wives only (not eleven).


## Hadith 1:269

_Narrated 'Ali:_

I used to get emotional urethral discharge frequently. Being the son-in-law of the Prophet I requested a man to ask him about it. So the man asked the Prophet about it. The Prophet replied, “Perform ablution after washing your organ (penis).”


## Hadith 1:270

_Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Muntathir:_

on the authority of his father that he had asked 'Aisha about the saying of Ibn 'Umar(i.e. he did not like to be a Muhrim while the smell of scent was still coming from his body). 'Aisha said, “I scented Allah's Apostle and he went round (had sexual intercourse with) all his wives, and in the morning he was Muhrim (after taking a bath).”


## Hadith 1:271

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

It is as if I am just looking at the glitter of scent in the parting of the Prophet's head hair while he was a Muhrim.


## Hadith 1:272

_Narrated Hisham bin 'Urwa:_

(on the authority of his father) 'Aisha said, “Whenever Allah's Apostle took the bath of Janaba, he cleaned his hands and performed ablution like that for prayer and then took a bath and rubbed his hair, till he felt that the whole skin of the head had become wet, then he would pour water thrice and wash the rest of the body.” 'Aisha further said, “I and Allah's Apostle used to take a bath from a single water container, from which we took water simultaneously.”


## Hadith 1:273

_Narrated Maimuna:_

Water was placed for the ablution of Allah's Apostle after Janaba. He poured water with his right hand over his left twice or thrice and then washed his private parts and rubbed his hand on the earth or on a wall twice or thrice and then rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out arid then washed his face and forearms and poured water over his head and washed his body. Then he shifted from that place and washed his feet. I brought a piece of cloth, but he did not take it and removed the traces of water from his body with his hand."


## Hadith 1:274

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Once the call (Iqama) for the prayer was announced and the rows were straightened. Allah's Apostle came out; and when he stood up at his Musalla, he remembered that he was Junub. Then he ordered us to stay at our places and went to take a bath and then returned with water dropping from his head. He said, “Allahu-Akbar”, and we all offered the prayer with him.


## Hadith 1:275

_Narrated Maimuna:_

I placed water for the bath of the Prophet and screened him with a garment. He poured water over his hands and washed them. After that he poured water with his right hand over his left and washed his private parts, rubbed his hands with earth and washed them, rinsed his mouth, washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out and then washed his face and forearms. He poured water over his head and body. He then shifted from that place and washed his feet. I gave him a piece of cloth but he did not take it and came out removing the water (from his body) with both his hands.


## Hadith 1:276

_Narrated Aisha:_

Whenever any one of us was Junub, she poured water over her head thrice with both her hands and then rubbed the right side of her head with one hand and rubbed the left side of the head with the other hand.


## Hadith 1:277

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, 'The (people of) Bani Israel used to take bath naked (all together) looking at each other. The Prophet Moses used to take a bath alone. They said, 'By Allah! Nothing prevents Moses from taking a bath with us except that he has a scrotal hernia.' So once Moses went out to take a bath and put his clothes over a stone and then that stone ran away with his clothes. Moses followed that stone saying, “My clothes, O stone! My clothes, O stone! till the people of Bani Israel saw him and said, 'By Allah, Moses has got no defect in his body. Moses took his clothes and began to beat the stone.” Abu Huraira added, “By Allah! There are still six or seven marks present on the stone from that excessive beating.”

was taking a bath naked, golden locusts began to fall on him. Job started collecting them in his clothes. His Lord addressed him, 'O Job! Haven't I given you enough so that you are not in need of them.' Job replied, 'Yes!' By Your Honor (power)! But I cannot dispense with Your Blessings.' "


## Hadith 1:278

_Narrated Um Hani bint Abi Talib:_

I went to Allah's Apostle in the year of the conquest of Mecca and found him taking a bath while Fatima was screening him. The Prophet asked, “Who is it?” I replied, “I am Um-Hani.”


## Hadith 1:279

_Narrated Maimuna:_

I screened the Prophet while he was taking a bath of Janaba. He washed his hands, poured water from his right hand over his left and washed his private parts. Then he rubbed his hand over a wall or the earth, and performed ablution similar to that for the prayer but did not wash his feet. Then he poured water over his body, shifted from that place, and washed his feet.


## Hadith 1:280

_Narrated Um-Salama:_

(the mother of the believers) Um Sulaim, the wife of Abu Talha, came to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Verily Allah is not shy of (telling you) the truth. Is it necessary for a woman to take a bath after she has a wet dream (nocturnal sexual discharge)?” Allah's Apostle replied, “Yes, if she notices a discharge.”


## Hadith 1:281

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet came across me in one of the streets of Medina and at that time I was Junub. So I slipped away from him and went to take a bath. On my return the Prophet said, “O Abu Huraira! Where have you been?” I replied, “I was Junub, so I disliked to sit in your company.” The Prophet said, “Subhan Allah! A believer never becomes impure.”


## Hadith 1:282

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet used to visit all his wives in one night and he had nine wives at that time.


## Hadith 1:283

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle came across me and I was Junub He took my hand and I went along with him till he sat down I slipped away, went home and took a bath. When I came back. he was still sitting there. He then said to me, “O AbuHuraira! Where have you been?” I told him about it The Prophet said, “Subhan Allah! O Abu Huraira! A believer never becomes impure.”


## Hadith 1:284

_Narrated Abu Salama :_

I asked 'Aisha “Did the Prophet use to sleep while he was Junub?” She replied, "Yes, but he used to perform ablution (before going to bed).


## Hadith 1:285

_Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:_

I asked Allah's Apostle “Can any one of us sleep while he is Junub?” He replied, “Yes, if he performs ablution, he can sleep while he is Junub.”


## Hadith 1:286

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Whenever the Prophet intended to sleep while he was Junub, he used to wash his private parts and perform ablution like that for the prayer.


## Hadith 1:287

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

'Umar asked the Prophet “Can anyone of us sleep while he is Junub?” He replied, “Yes, if he performs ablution.”


## Hadith 1:288

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Umar bin Al-Khattab told Allah's Apostle, “I became Junub at night.” Allah's Apostle replied, “Perform ablution after washing your private parts and then sleep.”


## Hadith 1:289

_Narrated Hisham:_

as the following Hadith 290.


## Hadith 1:290

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “When a man sits in between the four parts of a woman and did the sexual intercourse with her, bath becomes compulsory.”


## Hadith 1:291

_Narrated Zaid bin Khalid AjJuhani:_

I asked 'Uthman bin 'Affan about a man who engaged in the sexual intercourse with his wife but did not discharge. 'Uthman replied, “He should perform ablution like that for the prayer after washing his private parts.” 'Uthman added, “I heard that from Allah's Apostle.” I asked 'Ali bin Abi Talib, Az-Zubair bin Al-'Awwam, Talha bin 'Ubaidullah and Ubai bin Ka'b and a gave the same reply. (Abu Aiylub said that he had heard that from Allah's Apostle ) (This order was cancelled later on so one has to take a bath. See, Hadith No. 180).


## Hadith 1:292

_Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b:_

I asked Allah's Apostle about a man who engages in sexual intercourse with his wife but does not discharge. He replied, “He should wash the parts which comes in contact with the private parts of the woman, perform ablution and then pray.” (Abu 'Abdullah said, “Taking a bath is safer and is the last order.”)


## Hadith 1:293

_Narrated Al-Qasim:_

'Aisha said, “We set out with the sole intention of performing Hajj and when we reached Sarif, (a place six miles from Mecca) I got my menses. Allah's Apostle came to me while I was weeping. He said 'What is the matter with you? Have you got your menses?' I replied, 'Yes.' He said, 'This is a thing which Allah has ordained for the daughters of Adam. So do what all the pilgrims do with the exception of the Taw-af (Circumambulation) round the Ka'ba.” 'Aisha added, “Allah's Apostle sacrificed cows on behalf of his wives.”


## Hadith 1:294

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

While in menses, I used to comb the hair of Allah's Apostle .


## Hadith 1:295

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

A person asked me, “Can a woman in menses serve me? And can a Junub woman come close to me?” I replied, “All this is easy for me. All of them can serve me, and there is no harm for any other person to do the same. 'Aisha told me that she used to comb the hair of Allah's Apostle while she was in her menses, and he was in Itikaf (in the mosque). He would bring his head near her in her room and she would comb his hair, while she used to be in her menses.”


## Hadith 1:296

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to lean on my lap and recite Qur'an while I was in menses.


## Hadith 1:297

_Narrated Um Salama:_

While I was laying with the Prophet under a single woolen sheet, I got the menses. I slipped away and put on the clothes for menses. He said, “Have you got “Nifas” (menses)?” I replied, “Yes.” He then called me and made me lie with him under the same sheet.


## Hadith 1:298

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet and I used to take a bath from a single pot while we were Junub. During the menses, he used to order me to put on an Izar (dress worn below the waist) and used to fondle me. While in Itikaf, he used to bring his head near me and I would wash it while I used to be in my periods (menses).


## Hadith 1:299

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Aswad:_

(on the authority of his father) 'Aisha said: “Whenever Allah's Apostle wanted to fondle anyone of us during her periods (menses), he used to order her to put on an Izar and start fondling her.” 'Aisha added, “None of you could control his sexual desires as the Prophet could.”


## Hadith 1:300

_Narrated Maimuna:_

When ever Allah's Apostle wanted to fondle any of his wives during the periods (menses), he used to ask her to wear an Izar.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_200">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:101 to 1:200</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_400">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:301 to 1:400</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
