---
title: "Hadith 1:301 to 1:400"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_300">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:201 to 1:300</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_500">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:401 to 1:500</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 1:301

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Once Allah's Apostle went out to the Musalla (to offer the prayer) o 'Id-al-Adha or Al-Fitr prayer. Then he passed by the women and said, “O women! Give alms, as I have seen that the majority of the dwellers of Hell-fire were you (women).” They asked, “Why is it so, O Allah's Apostle ?” He replied, “You curse frequently and are ungrateful to your husbands. I have not seen anyone more deficient in intelligence and religion than you. A cautious sensible man could be led astray by some of you.” The women asked, “O Allah's Apostle! What is deficient in our intelligence and religion?” He said, “Is not the evidence of two women equal to the witness of one man?” They replied in the affirmative. He said, “This is the deficiency in her intelligence. Isn't it true that a woman can neither pray nor fast during her menses?” The women replied in the affirmative. He said, “This is the deficiency in her religion.”


## Hadith 1:302

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

We set out with the Prophet for Hajj and when we reached Sarif I got my menses. When the Prophet came to me, I was weeping. He asked, “Why are you weeping?” I said, “I wish if I had not performed Hajj this year.” He asked, “May be that you got your menses?” I replied, “Yes.” He then said, “This is the thing which Allah has ordained for all the daughters of Adam. So do what all the pilgrims do except that you do not perform the Tawaf round the Ka'ba till you are clean.”


## Hadith 1:303

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Fatima bint Abi Hubaish said to Allah's Apostle, “O Allah's Apostle! I do not become clean (from bleeding). Shall I give up my prayers?” Allah's Apostle replied: “No, because it is from a blood vessel and not the menses. So when the real menses begins give up your prayers and when it (the period) has finished wash the blood off your body (take a bath) and offer your prayers.”


## Hadith 1:304

_Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr:_

A woman asked Allah's Apostle, “O Allah's Apostle! What should we do, if the blood of menses falls on our clothes?” Allah's Apostle replied, “If the blood of menses falls on the garment of anyone of you, she must take hold of the blood spot, rub it, and wash it with water and then pray in (with it).”


## Hadith 1:305

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Whenever anyone of us got her menses, she, on becoming clean, used to take hold of the blood spot and rub the blood off her garment, and pour water over it and wash that portion thoroughly and sprinkle water over the rest of the garment. After that she would pray in (with) it.


## Hadith 1:306

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Once one of the wives of the Prophet did Itikaf along with him and she was getting bleeding in between her periods. She used to see the blood (from her private parts) and she would perhaps put a dish under her for the blood. (The sub-narrator 'Ikrima added, 'Aisha once saw the liquid of safflower and said, “It looks like what so and so used to have.”)


## Hadith 1:307

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

“One of the wives of Allah's Apostle joined him in l'tikaf and she noticed blood and yellowish discharge (from her private parts) and put a dish under her when she prayed.”


## Hadith 1:308

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

One of the mothers of the faithful believers (i.e. the wives of the Prophet ) did l'tikaf while she was having bleeding in between her periods.


## Hadith 1:309

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

None of us had more than a single garment and we used to have our menses while wearing it. Whenever it got soiled with blood of menses we used to apply saliva to the blood spot and rub off the blood with our nails.


## Hadith 1:310

_Narrated Um-'Atiya:_

We were forbidden to mourn for a dead person for more than three days except in the case of a husband for whom mourning was allowed for four months and ten days. (During that time) we were not allowed to put ko,hl (Antimony eye power) in our eyes or to use perfumes or to put on colored clothes except a dress made of 'Asb (a kind of Yemen cloth, very coarse and rough). We were allowed very light perfumes at the time of taking a bath after menses and also we were forbidden to go with the funeral procession .


## Hadith 1:311

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

A woman asked the Prophet about the bath which is take after finishing from the menses. The Prophet told her what to do and said, “Purify yourself with a piece of cloth scented with musk.” The woman asked, “How shall I purify myself with it” He said, “Subhan Allah! Purify yourself (with it).” I pulled her to myself and said, “Rub the place soiled with blood with it.”


## Hadith 1:312

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

An Ansari woman asked the Prophet how to take a bath after finishing from the menses. He replied, “Take a piece a cloth perfumed with musk and clean the private parts with it thrice.” The Prophet felt shy and turned his face. So pulled her to me and told her what the Prophet meant.


## Hadith 1:313

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

In the last Hajj of Allah's Apostle I assume the Ihram for Hajj along with Allah Apostle. I was one of those who intended Tamattu' (to perform Hajj an 'Umra) and did not take the Hadi (animal for sacrifice) with me. I got my menses and was not clean till the night of 'Arafa I said, "O Allah's Apostle! It is the night of the day of 'Arafat and I intended to perform the Hajj Tamattu' with 'Umra Allah's Apostle told me to undo my hair and comb it and to postpone the 'Umra. I did the same and completed the Hajj. On the night of Al-Hasba (i.e. place outside Mecca where the pilgrims go after finishing all the ceremonies Hajj at Mina) he (the Prophet ordered 'Abdur Rahman ('Aisha's brother) to take me to At-Tan'im to assume the lhram for'Umra in lieu of that of Hajj-atTamattu' which I had intended to perform.


## Hadith 1:314

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

On the 1st of Dhul-Hijja we set out with the intention of performing Hajj. Allah's Apostle said, “Any one who likes to assume the Ihram for 'Umra he can do so. Had I not brought the Hadi with me, I would have assumed the Ihram for 'Umra. Some of us assumed the Ihram for 'Umra while the others assumed the Ihram for Hajj. I was one of those who assumed the Ihram for 'Umra. I got menses and kept on menstruating until the day of 'Arafat and complained of that to the Prophet . He told me to postpone my 'Umra, undo and comb my hair, and to assure the Ihram of Hajj and I did so. On the right of Hasba, he sent my brother 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr with me to At-Tah'im, where I assumed the Ihram for'Umra in lieu of the previous one.” Hisham said, "For that ('Umra) no Hadi, fasting or alms were required.


## Hadith 1:315

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “At every womb Allah appoints an angel who says, 'O Lord! A drop of semen, O Lord! A clot. O Lord! A little lump of flesh.” Then if Allah wishes (to complete) its creation, the angel asks, (O Lord!) Will it be a male or female, a wretched or a blessed, and how much will his provision be? And what will his age be?' So all that is written while the child is still in the mother's womb."


## Hadith 1:316

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

'Aisha said, “We set out with the Prophet in his last Hajj. Some of us intended to perform 'Umra while others Hajj. When we reached Mecca, Allah's Apostle said, 'Those who had assumed the lhram for'Umra and had not brought the Hadi should finish his lhram and whoever had assumed the Ihram for 'Umra and brought the Hadi should not finish the Ihram till he has slaughtered his Hadi and whoever had assumed the lhram for Hajj should complete his Hajj.” 'Aisha further said, “I got my periods (menses) and kept on menstruating till the day of 'Arafat, and I had assumed the Ihram for 'Umra only (Tamattu'). The Prophet ordered me to undo and comb my head hair and assume the lhram for Hajj only and leave the 'Umra. I did the same till I completed the Hajj. Then the Prophet sent 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Bakr with me and ordered me to perform 'Umra from At-Tan'im in lieu of the missed 'Umra.”


## Hadith 1:317

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Fatima bint Abi Hubaish used to have bleeding in between the periods, so she asked the Prophet about it . He replied, “The bleeding is from a blood vessel and not the menses. So give up the prayers when the (real) menses begin and when it has finished, take a bath and start praying.”


## Hadith 1:318

_Narrated Mu'adha:_

A woman asked 'Aisha, “Should I offer the prayers that which I did not offer because of menses” 'Aisha said, “Are you from the Huraura' (a town in Iraq?) We were with the Prophet and used to get our periods but he never ordered us to offer them (the Prayers missed during menses).” 'Aisha perhaps said, “We did not offer them.”


## Hadith 1:319

_Narrated Zainab bint Abi Salama:_

Um-Salama said, “I got my menses while I was lying with the Prophet under a woolen sheet. So I slipped away, took the clothes for menses and put them on. Allah's Apostle said, 'Have you got your menses?' I replied, 'Yes.' Then he called me and took me with him under the woolen sheet.” Um Salama further said, “The Prophet used to kiss me while he was fasting. The Prophet and I used to take the bath of Janaba from a single pot.”


## Hadith 1:320

_Narrated Um Salama:_

While I was lying with the Prophet under a woolen sheet, I got my menses. I slipped away and put on the clothes for menses. The Prophet said, “Have you got your menses?” I replied, “Yes.” He called me and I slept with him under the woolen sheet.


## Hadith 1:321

_Narrated Aiyub:_

Hafsa said, 'We used to forbid our young women to go out for the two 'Id prayers. A woman came and stayed at the palace of Bani Khalaf and she narrated about her sister whose husband took part in twelve holy battles along with the Prophet and her sister was with her husband in six (out of these twelve). She (the woman's sister) said, “We used to treat the wounded, look after the patients and once I asked the Prophet, 'Is there any harm for any of us to stay at home if she doesn't have a veil?' He said, 'She should cover herself with the veil of her companion and should participate in the good deeds and in the religious gathering of the Muslims.' When Um 'Atiya came I asked her whether she had heard it from the Prophet.” She replied, “Yes. May my father be sacrificed for him (the Prophet)! (Whenever she mentioned the Prophet she used to say, 'May my father be sacrificed for him) I have heard the Prophet saying, 'The unmarried young virgins and the mature girl who stay often screened or the young unmarried virgins who often stay screened and the menstruating women should come out and participate in the good deeds as well as the religious gathering of the faithful believers but the menstruating women should keep away from the Musalla (praying place).' ” Hafsa asked Um 'Atiya surprisingly, “Do you say the menstruating women?” She replied, “Doesn't a menstruating woman attend 'Arafat (Hajj) and such and such (other deeds)?”


## Hadith 1:322

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Fatima bint Abi Hubaish asked the Prophet, “I got persistent bleeding (in between the periods) and do not become clean. Shall I give up prayers?” He replied, “No, this is from a blood vessel. Give up the prayers only for the days on which you usually get the menses and then take a bath and offer your prayers.”


## Hadith 1:323

_Narrated Um 'Atiya:_

We never considered yellowish discharge as a thing of importance (as menses).


## Hadith 1:324

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Um Habiba got bleeding in between the periods for seven years. She asked Allah's Apostle about it. He ordered her to take a bath (after the termination of actual periods) and added that it was (from) a blood vessel. So she used to take a bath for every prayer.


## Hadith 1:325

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) I told Allah's Apostle that Safiya bint Huyai had got her menses. He said, “She will probably delay us. Did she perform Tawaf (Al-Ifada) with you?” We replied, “Yes.” On that the Prophet told her to depart.


## Hadith 1:326

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

A woman is al lowed to leave (go back home) if she gets menses (after Tawaf-AlIfada). Ibn 'Umar formerly used to say that she should not leave but later on I heard him saying, “She may leave, since Allah's Apostle gave them the permission to leave (after Tawaf-AlIfada.”


## Hadith 1:327

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said to me, “Give up the prayer when your menses begin and when it has finished, wash the blood off your body (take a bath) and start praying.”


## Hadith 1:328

_Narrated Samura bin Jundab:_

The Prophet offered the funeral prayer for the dead body of a woman who died of (during) delivery (i.e. child birth) and he stood by the middle of her body.


## Hadith 1:329

_Narrated Maimuna:_

(the wife of the Prophet) During my menses, I never prayed, but used to sit on the mat beside the mosque of Allah's Apostle. He used to offer the prayer on his sheet and in prostration some of his clothes used to touch me."


## Hadith 1:330

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) We set out with Allahs Apostle on one of his journeys till we reached Al-Baida' or Dhatul-Jaish, a necklace of mine was broken (and lost). Allah's Apostle stayed there to search for it, and so did the people along with him. There was no water at that place, so the people went to Abu- Bakr As-Siddiq and said, “Don't you see what 'Aisha has done? She has made Allah's Apostle and the people stay where there is no water and they have no water with them.” Abu Bakr came while Allah's Apostle was sleeping with his head on my thigh, He said, to me: "You have detained Allah's Apostle and the people where there is no water and they have no water with them.

So he admonished me and said what Allah wished him to say and hit me on my flank with his hand. Nothing prevented me from moving (because of pain) but the position of Allah's Apostle on my thigh. Allah's Apostle got up when dawn broke and there was no water. So Allah revealed the Divine Verses of Tayammum. So they all performed Tayammum. Usaid bin Hudair said, “O the family of Abu Bakr! This is not the first blessing of yours.” Then the camel on which I was riding was caused to move from its place and the necklace was found beneath it.


## Hadith 1:331

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, "I have been given five things which were not given to any one else before me.

1\. Allah made me victorious by awe, (by His frightening my enemies) for a distance of one month's journey.

2\. The earth has been made for me (and for my followers) a place for praying and a thing to perform Tayammum, therefore anyone of my followers can pray wherever the time of a prayer is due.

3\. The booty has been made Halal (lawful) for me yet it was not lawful for anyone else before me.

4\. I have been given the right of intercession (on the Day of Resurrection).

5\. Every Prophet used to be sent to his nation only but I have been sent to all mankind.


## Hadith 1:332

_Narrated 'Urwa's father:_

Aisha said, “I borrowed a necklace from Asma' and it was lost. So Allah's Apostle sent a man to search for it and he found it. Then the time of the prayer became due and there was no water. They prayed (without ablution) and informed Allah's Apostle about it, so the verse of Tayammum was revealed.” Usaid bin Hudair said to 'Aisha, “May Allah reward you. By Allah, whenever anything happened which you did not like, Allah brought good for you and for the Muslims in that.”

Al-Jurf and the time for the 'Asr prayer became due while he was at Marbad-AnNa'am (sheep-fold), so he (performed Tayammum) and prayed there and then entered Medina when the sun was still high but he did not repeat that prayer.


## Hadith 1:333

_Narrated Abu Juhaim Al-Ansari:_

The Prophet came from the direction of Bir Jamal. A man met him and greeted him. But he did not return back the greeting till he went to a (mud) wall and smeared his hands and his face with its dust (performed Tayammum) and then returned back the greeting.


## Hadith 1:334

_Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza:_

A man came to 'Umar bin Al-Khattab and said, “I became Junub but no water was available.” 'Ammar bin Yasir said to 'Umar, “Do you remember that you and I (became Junub while both of us) were together on a journey and you didn't pray but I rolled myself on the ground and prayed? I informed the Prophet about it and he said, 'It would have been sufficient for you to do like this.' The Prophet then stroked lightly the earth with his hands and then blew off the dust and passed his hands over his face and hands.”


## Hadith 1:335

_Narrated Said bin 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza:_

(on the authority of his father who said) 'Ammar said so (the above Statement). And Shu'ba stroked lightly the earth with his hands and brought them close to his mouth (blew off the dust) and passed them over his face and then the backs of his hands. 'Ammar said, “Ablution (meaning Tayammum here) is sufficient for a Muslim if water is not available.”


## Hadith 1:336

_Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza:_

that while he was in the company of 'Umar, 'Ammar said to 'Umar, “We were in a detachment and became Junub and I blew the dust off my hands (performed the rolling over the earth and prayed.)”


## Hadith 1:337

_Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza:_

'Ammar said to 'Umar “I rolled myself in the dust and came to the Prophet who said, 'Passing dusted hands over the face and the backs of the hands is sufficient for you.' ”


## Hadith 1:338

_Narrated 'Ammar:_

as above.


## Hadith 1:339

_Narrated 'Ammar:_

The Prophet stroked the earth with his hands and then passed them over his face and the backs of his hands (while demonstrating Tayammum).


## Hadith 1:340

_Narrated 'Imran:_

Once we were traveling with the Prophet and we carried on traveling till the last part of the night and then we (halted at a place) and slept (deeply). There is nothing sweeter than sleep for a traveler in the last part of the night. So it was only the heat of the sun that made us to wake up and the first to wake up was so and so, then so and so and then so and so (the narrator 'Auf said that Abu Raja' had told him their names but he had forgotten them) and the fourth person to wake up was 'Umar bin Al-Khattab. And whenever the Prophet used to sleep, nobody would wake up him till he himself used to get up as we did not know what was happening (being revealed) to him in his sleep. So, 'Umar got up and saw the condition of the people, and he was a strict man, so he said, “Allahu Akbar” and raised his voice with Takbir, and kept on saying loudly till the Prophet got up because of it. When he got up, the people informed him about what had happened to them. He said, “There is no harm (or it will not be harmful). Depart!” So they departed from that place, and after covering some distance the Prophet stopped and asked for some water to perform the ablution. So he performed the ablution and the call for the prayer was pronounced and he led the people in prayer. After he finished from the prayer, he saw a man sitting aloof who had not prayed with the people. He asked, “O so and so! What has prevented you from praying with us?” He replied, “I am Junub and there is no water. ” The Prophet said, “Perform Tayammum with (clean) earth and that is sufficient for you.”

Then the Prophet proceeded on and the people complained to him of thirst. Thereupon he got down and called a person (the narrator 'Auf added that Abu Raja' had named him but he had forgotten) and 'Ali, and ordered them to go and bring water. So they went in search of water and met a woman who was sitting on her camel between two bags of water. They asked, “Where can we find water?” She replied, “I was there (at the place of water) this hour yesterday and my people are behind me.” They requested her to accompany them. She asked, “Where?” They said, “To Allah's Apostle .” She said, “Do you mean the man who is called the Sabi, (with a new religion)?” They replied, “Yes, the same person. So come along.” They brought her to the Prophet and narrated the whole story. He said, “Help her to dismount.” The Prophet asked for a pot, then he opened the mouths of the bags and poured some water into the pot. Then he closed the big openings of the bags and opened the small ones and the people were called upon to drink and water their animals. So they all watered their animals and they (too) all quenched their thirst and also gave water to others and last of all the Prophet gave a pot full of water to the person who was Junub and told him to pour it over his body. The woman was standing and watching all that which they were doing with her water. By Allah, when her water bags were returned the looked like as if they were more full (of water) than they had been before (Miracle of Allah's Apostle) Then the Prophet ordered us to collect something for her; so dates, flour and Sawiq were collected which amounted to a good meal that was put in a piece of cloth. She was helped to ride on her camel and that cloth full of food-stuff was also placed in front of her and then the Prophet said to her, “We have not taken your water but Allah has given water to us.” She returned home late. Her relatives asked her: “O so and so what has delayed you?” She said, “A strange thing! Two men met me and took me to the man who is called the Sabi' and he did such and such a thing. By Allah, he is either the greatest magician between this and this (gesturing with her index and middle fingers raising them towards the sky indicating the heaven and the earth) or he is Allah's true Apostle.”

Afterwards the Muslims used to attack the pagans around her abode but never touched her village. One day she said to her people, “I think that these people leave you purposely. Have you got any inclination to Islam?” They obeyed her and all of them embraced Islam.

Abu 'Abdultah said: The word Saba'a means “The one who has deserted his old religion and embraced a new religion.” Abul 'Ailya said, “The Sabis are a sect of people of the Scripture who recite the Book of Psalms.”


## Hadith 1:341

_Narrated Abu Wail:_

Abu Muisa said to'Abdullah bin Mas'ud, “If one does not find water (for ablution) can he give up the prayer?” Abdullah replied, “If you give the permission to perform Tayammum they will perform Tayammum even if water was available if one of them found it cold.” Abu Musa said, “What about the statement of 'Ammar to 'Umar?” 'Abdullah replied, “Umar was not satisfied by his statement.”


## Hadith 1:342

_Narrated Shaqiq bin Salama:_

I was with 'Abdullah and Abu Musa; the latter asked the former, “O Abu AbdurRahman! What is your opinion if somebody becomes Junub and no water is available?” 'Abdullah replied, “Do not pray till water is found.” Abu Musa said, “What do you say about the statement of 'Ammar (who was ordered by the Prophet to perform Tayammum). The Prophet said to him: “Perform Tayammum and that would be sufficient.” 'Abdullah replied, “Don't you see that 'Umar was not satisfied by 'Ammar's statement?” Abu- Musa said, “All right, leave 'Ammalr's statement, but what will you say about this verse (of Tayammum)?” 'Abqiullah kept quiet and then said, “If we allowed it, then they would probably perform Tayammum even if water was available, if one of them found it (water) cold.” The narrator added, “I said to Shaqrq, Then did 'Abdullah dislike to perform Tayammum because of this?” He replied, “Yes.”


## Hadith 1:343

_Narrated Al-A'mash:_

Shaqiq said, "While I was sitting with 'Abdullah and Abu Musa Al-Ash-'ari, the latter asked the former, ‘If a person becomes Junub and does not find water for one month, can he perform Tayammum and offer his prayer?’ (He applied in the negative). Abu Musa said, 'What do you say about this verse from Surat “Al-Ma'ida”: When you do not find water then perform Tayammum with clean earth? 'Abdullah replied, ‘If we allowed it then they would probably perform Tayammum with clean earth even if water were available but cold.’ I said to Shaqiq, 'You then disliked to perform Tayammum because of this?' Shaqiq said,‘Yes.’ (Shaqiq added), “Abu Musa said, ‘Haven't you heard the statement of 'Ammar to 'Umar? He said: I was sent out by Allah's Apostle for some job and I became Junub and could not find water so I rolled myself over the dust (clean earth) like an animal does, and when I told the Prophet of that he said, ‘Like this would have been sufficient.’ The Prophet (saying so) lightly stroked the earth with his hand once and blew it off, then passed his (left) hand over the back of his right hand or his (right) hand over the back of his left hand and then passed them over his face.’ So 'Abdullah said to Abu- Musa, ‘Don't you know that 'Umar was not satisfied with 'Ammar's statement?’ ”

said to the former, “Haven't you heard the statement of 'Ammar to 'Umar?” He said, “Allah's Apostle sent you and me out and I became Junub and rolled myself in the dust (clean earth) (for Tayammum). When we came to Allah's Apostle I told him about it and he said, 'This would have been sufficient,' passing his hands over his face and the backs of his hands once only.' ”


## Hadith 1:344

_Narrated 'Imran bin Husain Al-Khuza'i:_

Allah's Apostle saw a person sitting aloof and not praying with the people. He asked him, “O so and so! What prevented you from offering the prayer with the people?” He replied, “O Allah's Apostle! I am Junub and there is no water.” The Prophet said, “Perform Tayammum with clean earth and that will be sufficient for you.”


## Hadith 1:345

_Narrated Abu Dhar:_

Allah's Apostle said, "While I was at Mecca the roof of my house was opened and Gabriel descended, opened my chest, and washed it with Zam-zam water. Then he brought a golden tray full of wisdom and faith and having poured its contents into my chest, he closed it. Then he took my hand and ascended with me to the nearest heaven, when I reached the nearest heaven, Gabriel said to the gatekeeper of the heaven, 'Open (the gate).' The gatekeeper asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel answered: 'Gabriel.' He asked, 'Is there anyone with you?' Gabriel replied, 'Yes, Muhammad I is with me.' He asked, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel said, 'Yes.' So the gate was opened and we went over the nearest heaven and there we saw a man sitting with some people on his right and some on his left. When he looked towards his right, he laughed and when he looked toward his left he wept. Then he said, 'Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious son.' I asked Gabriel, 'Who is he?' He replied, 'He is Adam and the people on his right and left are the souls of his offspring. Those on his right are the people of Paradise and those on his left are the people of Hell and when he looks towards his right he laughs and when he looks towards his left he weeps.'

Then he ascended with me till he reached the second heaven and he (Gabriel) said to its gatekeeper, 'Open (the gate).' The gatekeeper said to him the same as the gatekeeper of the first heaven had said and he opened the gate. Anas said: “Abu Dhar added that the Prophet met Adam, Idris, Moses, Jesus and Abraham, he (Abu Dhar) did not mention on which heaven they were but he mentioned that he (the Prophet ) met Adarn on the nearest heaven and Abraham on the sixth heaven.” Anas said, “When Gabriel along with the Prophet passed by Idris, the latter said, 'Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious brother.' The Prophet asked, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He is Idris.” The Prophet added, "I passed by Moses and he said, 'Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious brother.' I asked Gabriel, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He is Moses.' Then I passed by Jesus and he said, 'Welcome! O pious brother and pious Prophet.' I asked, 'Who is he?' Gabriel replied, 'He is Jesus.

Then I passed by Abraham and he said, ‘Welcome! O pious Prophet and pious son.’ I asked Gabriel, ‘Who is he?’ Gabriel replied, 'He is Abraham. The Prophet added, “Then Gabriel ascended with me to a place where I heard the creaking of the pens.” Ibn Hazm and Anas bin Malik said: The Prophet said, “Then Allah enjoined fifty prayers on my followers when I returned with this order of Allah, I passed by Moses who asked me, 'What has Allah enjoined on your followers?' I replied, ‘He has enjoined fifty prayers on them.’ Moses said, ‘Go back to your Lord (and appeal for reduction) for your followers will not be able to bear it.’ (So I went back to Allah and requested for reduction) and He reduced it to half. When I passed by Moses again and informed him about it, he said, 'Go back to your Lord as your followers will not be able to bear it.' So I returned to Allah and requested for further reduction and half of it was reduced. I again passed by Moses and he said to me: 'Return to your Lord, for your followers will not be able to bear it. So I returned to Allah and He said, 'These are five prayers and they are all (equal to) fifty (in reward) for My Word does not change.' I returned to Moses and he told me to go back once again. I replied, 'Now I feel shy of asking my Lord again.' Then Gabriel took me till we '' reached Sidrat-il-Muntaha (Lote tree of; the utmost boundry) which was shrouded in colors, indescribable. Then I was admitted into Paradise where I found small (tents or) walls (made) of pearls and its earth was of musk.”


## Hadith 1:346

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

the mother of believers: Allah enjoined the prayer when He enjoined it, it was two Rakat only (in every prayer) both when in residence or on journey. Then the prayers offered on journey remained the same, but (the Rakat of) the prayers for non-travellers were increased.


## Hadith 1:347

_Narrated Um 'Atiya:_

We were ordered to bring out our menstruating women and veiled women in the religious gatherings and invocation of Muslims on the two 'Id festivals. These menstruating women were to keep away from their Musalla. A woman asked, “O Allah's Apostle ' What about one who does not have a veil?” He said, “Let her share the veil of her companion.”


## Hadith 1:348

_Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir:_

Once Jabir prayed with his Izar tied to his back while his clothes were Lying beside him on a wooden peg. Somebody asked him, “Do you offer your prayer in a single Izar?” He replied, “I did so to show it to a fool like you. Had anyone of us two garments in the life-time of the Prophet?”


## Hadith 1:349

_Narrated Muhammad bin Al Munkadir:_

I saw Jabir bin 'Abdullah praying in a single garment and he said that he had seen the Prophet praying in a single garment.


## Hadith 1:350

_Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama:_

The Prophet prayed in one garment and crossed its ends.


## Hadith 1:351

_Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama:_

I saw the Prophet offering prayers in a single garment in the house of Um-Salama and he had crossed its ends around his shoulders.


## Hadith 1:352

_Narrated 'Umar bin Abi Salama:_

In the house of Um-Salama I saw Allah's Apostle offering prayers, wrapped in a single garment around his body with its ends crossed round his shoulders.


## Hadith 1:353

_Narrated Abu Murra:_

(the freed slave of Um Hani) Um Hani, the daughter of Abi Talib said, “I went to Allah's Apostle in the year of the conquest of Mecca and found him taking a bath and his daughter Fatima was screening him. I greeted him. He asked, 'Who is she?' I replied, 'I am Um Hani bint Abi Talib.' He said, 'Welcome! O Um Hani.' When he finished his bath he stood up and prayed eight Rak at while wearing a single garment wrapped round his body and when he finished I said, 'O Allah's Apostle ! My brother has told me that he will kill a person whom I gave shelter and that person is so and so the son of Hubaira.' The Prophet said, 'We shelter the person whom you have sheltered.' ” Um Ham added, “And that was before noon (Duha).”


## Hadith 1:354

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A person asked Allah's Apostle about the offering of the prayer in a single garment. Allah's Apostle replied, “Has every one of you got two garments?”


## Hadith 1:355

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “None of you should offer prayer in a single garment that does not cover the shoulders.”


## Hadith 1:356

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever prays in a single garment must cross its ends (over the shoulders).”


## Hadith 1:357

_Narrated Said bin Al-Harith:_

I asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah about praying in a single garment. He said, “I travelled with the Prophet during some of his journeys, and I came to him at night for some purpose and I found him praying. At that time, I was wearing a single garment with which I covered my shoulders and prayed by his side. When he finished the prayer, he asked, 'O Jabir! What has brought you here?' I told him what I wanted. When I finished, he asked, 'O Jabir! What is this garment which I have seen and with which you covered your shoulders?' I replied, 'It is a (tight) garment.' He said, 'If the garment is large enough, wrap it round the body (covering the shoulders) and if it is tight (too short) then use it as an Izar (tie it around your waist only.)' ”


## Hadith 1:358

_Narrated Sahl:_

The men used to pray with the Prophet with their Izars tied around their necks as boys used to do; therefore the Prophet told the women not to raise their heads till the men sat down straight (while praying).


## Hadith 1:359

_Narrated Mughira bin Shu'ba:_

Once I was traveling with the Prophet and he said, “O Mughira! take this container of water.” I took it and Allah's Apostle went far away till he disappeared. He answered the call of nature and was wearing a Syrian cloak. He tried to take out his hands from its sleeve but it was very tight so he took out his hands from under it. I poured water and he performed ablution like that for prayers and passed his wet hands over his Khuff (leather socks) and then prayed .


## Hadith 1:360

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

While Allah's Apostle was carrying stones (along) with the people of Mecca for (the building of) the Ka'ba wearing an Izar (waist-sheet cover), his uncle Al-'Abbas said to him, “O my nephew! (It would be better) if you take off your Izar and put it over your shoulders underneath the stones.” So he took off his Izar and put it over his shoulders, but he fell unconscious and since then he had never been seen naked.


## Hadith 1:361

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A man stood up and asked the Prophet about praying in a single garment. The Prophet said, “Has every one of you two garments?” A man put a similar question to 'Umar on which he replied, “When Allah makes you wealthier then you should clothe yourself properly during prayers. Otherwise one can pray with an Izar and a Rida' (a sheet covering the upper part of the body.) Izar and a shirt, Izar and a Qaba', trousers and a Rida, trousers and a shirt or trousers and a Qaba', Tubban and a Qaba' or Tubban and a shirt.” (The narrator added, “I think that he also said a Tubban and a Rida. ”)


## Hadith 1:362

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

A person asked Allah's Apostle, “What should a Muhrim wear?” He replied, "He should not wear shirts, trousers, a burnus (a hooded cloak), or clothes which are stained with saffron or Wars (a kind of perfume). Whoever does not find a sandal to wear can wear Khuffs, but these should be cut short so as not to cover the ankles.


## Hadith 1:363

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri_

Allah's Apostle forbade Ishtimal-As-Samma' (wrapping one's body with a garment so that one cannot raise its end or take one's hand out of it). He also forbade Al-Ihtiba' (sitting on buttocks with knees close to abdomen and feet apart with the hands circling the knees) while wrapping oneself with a single garment, without having a part of it over the private parts.


## Hadith 1:364

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet forbade two kinds of sales i.e. Al-Limais and An-Nibadh (the former is a kind of sale in which the deal is completed if the buyer touches a thing, without seeing or checking it properly and the latter is a kind of a sale in which the deal is completed when the seller throws a thing towards the buyer giving him no opportunity to see, touch or check it) and (the Prophet forbade) also Ishtimal-As-Samma' and Al-Ihtiba' in a single garment.


## Hadith 1:365

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

On the Day of Nahr (10th of Dhul-Hijja, in the year prior to the last Hajj of the Prophet when Abu Bakr was the leader of the pilgrims in that Hajj) Abu Bakr sent me along with other announcers to Mina to make a public announcement: “No pagan is allowed to perform Hajj after this year and no naked person is allowed to perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba.” Then Allah's Apostle sent 'All to read out the Surat Bara'a (At-Tauba) to the people; so he made the announcement along with us on the day of Nahr in Mina: “No pagan is allowed to perform Hajj after this year and no naked person is allowed to perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba.”


## Hadith 1:366

_Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Munkadir:_

I went to Jabir bin 'Abdullah and he was praying wrapped in a garment and his Rida was Lying beside him. When he finished the prayers, I said “O 'Abdullah! You pray (in a single garment) while your Rida' is lying beside you.” He replied, “Yes, I did it intentionally so that the ignorant ones like you might see me. I saw the Prophet praying like this. ”


## Hadith 1:367

_Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz:_

Anas said, 'When Allah's Apostle invaded Khaibar, we offered the Fajr prayer there yearly in the morning) when it was still dark. The Prophet rode and Abu Talha rode too and I was riding behind Abu Talha. The Prophet passed through the lane of Khaibar quickly and my knee was touching the thigh of the Prophet . He uncovered his thigh and I saw the whiteness of the thigh of the Prophet. When he entered the town, he said, 'Allahu Akbar! Khalbar is ruined. Whenever we approach near a (hostile) nation (to fight) then evil will be the morning of those who have been warned.' He repeated this thrice. The people came out for their jobs and some of them said, 'Muhammad (has come).' (Some of our companions added, “With his army.”) We conquered Khaibar, took the captives, and the booty was collected. Dihya came and said, 'O Allah's Prophet! Give me a slave girl from the captives.' The Prophet said, 'Go and take any slave girl.' He took Safiya bint Huyai. A man came to the Prophet and said, 'O Allah's Apostles! You gave Safiya bint Huyai to Dihya and she is the chief mistress of the tribes of Quraiza and An-Nadir and she befits none but you.' So the Prophet said, 'Bring him along with her.' So Dihya came with her and when the Prophet saw her, he said to Dihya, 'Take any slave girl other than her from the captives.' Anas added: The Prophet then manumitted her and married her."

Thabit asked Anas, “O Abu Hamza! What did the Prophet pay her (as Mahr)?” He said, “Her self was her Mahr for he manumitted her and then married her.” Anas added, “While on the way, Um Sulaim dressed her for marriage (ceremony) and at night she sent her as a bride to the Prophet . So the Prophet was a bridegroom and he said, 'Whoever has anything (food) should bring it.' He spread out a leather sheet (for the food) and some brought dates and others cooking butter. (I think he (Anas) mentioned As-SawTq). So they prepared a dish of Hais (a kind of meal). And that was Walrma (the marriage banquet) of Allah's Apostle .”


## Hadith 1:368

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to offer the Fajr prayer and some believing women covered with their veiling sheets used to attend the Fajr prayer with him and then they would return to their homes unrecognized .


## Hadith 1:369

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

the Prophet prayed in a Khamisa (a square garment) having marks. During the prayer, he looked at its marks. So when he finished the prayer he said, “Take this Khamisa of mine to Abu Jahm and get me his Inbijaniya (a woolen garment without marks) as it (the Khamisa) has diverted my attention from the prayer.”


## Hadith 1:370

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, 'I was looking at its (Khamisa's) marks during the prayers and I was afraid that it may put me in trial (by taking away my attention).


## Hadith 1:371

_Narrated Anas:_

'Aisha had a Qiram (a thin marked woolen curtain) with which he had screened one side of her home. The Prophet said, “Take away this Qiram of yours, as its pictures are still displayed in front of me during my prayer (i.e. they divert my attention from the prayer).”


## Hadith 1:372

_Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:_

The Prophet was given a silken Farruj as a present. He wore it while praying. When he had finished his prayer, he took it off violently as if with a strong aversion to it and said, “It is not the dress of Allah-fearing pious people.”


## Hadith 1:373

_Narrated Abu Juhaifa:_

I saw Allah's Apostle in a red leather tent and I saw Bilal taking the remaining water with which the Prophet had performed ablution. I saw the people taking the utilized water impatiently and whoever got some of it rubbed it on his body and those who could not get any took the moisture from the others' hands. Then I saw Bilal carrying an 'Anza (a spear-headed stick) which he planted in the ground. The Prophet came out tucking up his red cloak, and led the people in prayer and offered two Rakat (facing the Ka'ba) taking 'Anza as a Sutra for his prayer. I saw the people and animals passing in front of him beyond the 'Anza.


## Hadith 1:374

_Narrated Abu Hazim:_

Sahl bin Sa'd was asked about the (Prophet's) pulpit as to what thing it was made of? Sahl replied: “None remains alive amongst the people, who knows about it better than I. It was made of tamarisk (wood) of the forest. So and so, the slave of so and so prepared it for Allah's Apostle . When it was constructed and place (in the Mosque), Allah's Apostle stood on it facing the Qibla and said 'Allahu Akbar', and the people stood behind him (and led the people in prayer). He recited and bowed and the people bowed behind him. Then he raised his head and stepped back, got down and prostrated on the ground and then he again ascended the pulpit, recited, bowed, raised his head and stepped back, got down and prostrate on the ground. So, this is what I know about the pulpit.”

Ahmad bin Hanbal said, “As the Prophet was at a higher level than the people, there is no harm according to the above-mentioned Hadith if the Imam is at a higher level than his followers during the prayers.”


## Hadith 1:375

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Once Allah's Apostle fell off a horse and his leg or shoulder got injured. He swore that he would not go to his wives for one month and he stayed in a Mashruba (attic room) having stairs made of date palm trunks. So his companions came to visit him, and he led them in prayer sitting, whereas his companions were standing. When he finished the prayer, he said, “Imam is meant to be followed, so when he says 'Allahu Akbar,' say 'Allahu Akbar' and when he bows, bow and when he prostrates, prostrate and if he prays standing pray, standing.” After the 29th day the Prophet came down (from the attic room) and the people asked him, “O Allah's Apostle! You swore that you will not go to your wives for one month.” He said, “The month is 29 days.”


## Hadith 1:376

_Narrated_

Narrates 'Abdullah bin Shaddad:

Maimuna said, “Allah's Apostle was praying while I was in my menses, sitting beside him and sometimes his clothes would touch me during his prostration.” Maimuna added, "He prayed on a Khumra (a small mat sufficient just for the face and the hands while prostrating during prayers).


## Hadith 1:377

_Narrated Ishaq:_

Anas bin Malik said, “My grand-mother Mulaika invited Allah's Apostle for a meal which she herself had prepared. He ate from it and said, 'Get up! I will lead you in the prayer.' ” Anas added, “I took my Hasir, washed it with water as it had become dark because of long use and Allah's Apostle stood on it. The orphan (Damira or Ruh) and I aligned behind him and the old lady (Mulaika) stood behind us. Allah's Apostle led us in the prayer and offered two Rak'at and then left.”


## Hadith 1:378

_Narrated Maimuna:_

Allah's Apostle used to pray on Khumra.


## Hadith 1:379

_Narrated Abu Salama:_

'Aisha the wife of the Prophet said, “I used to sleep in front o Allah's Apostle and my legs were opposite his Qibla and in prostration he pushed my legs and I withdrew then and when he stood, I stretched them.” 'Aisha added, “In those days the houses were without lights.”


## Hadith 1:380

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah Apostle prayed while I was lying like a dead body on his family bed between him and his Qibla.


## Hadith 1:381

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

The Prophet prayed while 'Aisha was lying between him and his Qibla on the bed on which they used to sleep.


## Hadith 1:382

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

We used to pray with the Prophet and some of us used to place the ends of their clothes at the place of prostration because of scorching heat.


## Hadith 1:383

_Narrated Abu Maslama:_

Said bin Yazid Al-Azdi: I asked Anas bin Malik whether the Prophet had ever, prayed with his shoes on. He replied “Yes.”


## Hadith 1:384

_Narrated Ibrahim:_

Hammam bin Al-Harith said, “I saw Jarir bin 'Abdullah urinating. Then he performed ablution and passed his (wet) hands over his Khuffs, stood up and prayed. He was asked about it. He replied that he had seen the Prophet doing the same.” They approved of this narration as Jarir was one of those who embraced Islam very late.


## Hadith 1:385

_Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:_

I helped the Prophet in performing ablution and he passed his wet hands over his Khuffs and prayed.


## Hadith 1:385

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik:_

Ibn Buhaina, “When the Prophet prayed, he used to separate his arms from his body so widely that the whiteness of his armpits was visible.”


## Hadith 1:386

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever prays like us and faces our Quibla and eats our slaughtered animals is a Muslim and is under Allah's and His Apostle's protection. So do not betray Allah by betraying those who are in His protection.”


## Hadith 1:387

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle said, “I have been ordered to fight the people till they say: 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah.” And if they say so, pray like our prayers, face our Qibla and slaughter as we slaughter, then their blood and property will be sacred to us and we will not interfere with them except legally and their reckoning will Malik, “O Abu Hamza! What makes the life and property of a person sacred?” He replied, “Whoever says, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah', faces our Qibla during the prayers, prays like us and eats our slaughtered animal, then he is a Muslim, and has got the same rights and obligations as other Muslims have.”


## Hadith 1:388

_Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari:_

The Prophet said, “While defecating, neither face nor turn your back to the Qibla but face either east or west.” Abu Aiyub added. “When we arrived in Sham we came across some lavatories facing the Qibla; therefore we turned ourselves while using them and asked for Allah's forgiveness.”


## Hadith 1:389

_Narrated 'Amr bin Dmar:_

I asked Ibn 'Umar, “Can a person who has performed the Tawaf around the Ka'ba for 'Umra but has not performed the (Sa'i) Tawaf of Safa and Marwa, have a sexual relation with his wife?” Ibn 'Umar replied “When the Prophet reached Mecca he performed the Tawaf around the Ka'ba (circumambulated it seven times) and offered a two-Rak'at prayer (at the place) behind the station (of Abraham) and then performed the Tawaf (Sa'i) of Safa and Marwa, and verily in Allah's Apostle you have a good example.” Then we put the same question to Jabir bin 'Abdullah and he too replied, “He should not go near his wife (for sexual relation) till he has finished the Tawaf of Safa and Marwa.”


## Hadith 1:390

_Narrated Mujahid:_

Someone came to Ibn 'Umar and said, “Here is Allah's Apostle entering the Ka'ba.” Ibn 'Umar said, “I went there but the Prophet had come out of the Ka'ba and I found Bilal standing between its two doors. I asked Bilal, 'Did the Prophet pray in the Ka'ba?' Bilal replied, 'Yes, he prayed two Rakat between the two pillars which are to your left on entering the Ka'ba. Then Allah's Apostle came out and offered a two-Rak'at prayer facing the Ka'ba.' ”


## Hadith 1:391

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

When the Prophet entered the Ka'ba, he invoked Allah in each and every side of it and did not pray till he came out of it, and offered a two-Rak'at prayer facing the Ka'ba and said, “This is the Qibla.”


## Hadith 1:392

_Narrated Bara' bin 'Azib:_

Allah's Apostle prayed facing Baitul-Maqdis for sixteen or seventeen months but he loved to face the Ka'ba (at Mecca) so Allah revealed: “Verily, We have seen the turning of your face to the heaven!” (2:144) So the Prophet faced the Ka'ba and the fools amongst the people namely “the Jews” said, “What has turned them from their Qibla (Bait-ul-Maqdis) which they formerly observed” (Allah revealed): “Say: 'To Allah belongs the East and the West. He guides whom he will to a straight path'.” (2:142) A man prayed with the Prophet (facing the Ka'ba) and went out. He saw some of the Ansar praying the 'Asr prayer with their faces towards Bait-ul-Maqdis, he said, “I bear witness that I prayed with Allah's Apostle facing the Ka'ba.” So all the people turned their faces towards the Ka'ba.


## Hadith 1:393

_Narrated Jabir:_

Allah's Apostle used to pray (optional, non-obligatory prayer) while riding on his mount (Rahila) wherever it turned, and whenever he wanted to pray the compulsory prayer he dismounted and prayed facing the Qibla.


## Hadith 1:394

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet prayed (and the subnarrator Ibrahim said, “I do not know whether he prayed more or less than usual”), and when he had finished the prayers he was asked, “O Allah's Apostle! Has there been any change in the prayers?” He said, “What is it?” The people said, “You have prayed so much and so much.” So the Prophet bent his legs, faced the Qibla and performed two prostrations (of Sahu) and finished his prayers with Tasiim (by turning his face to right and left saying: 'As-Salamu'Alaikum-Warahmat-ullah'). When he turned his face to us he said, “If there had been anything changed in the prayer, surely I would have informed you but I am a human being like you and liable to forget like you. So if I forget remind me and if anyone of you is doubtful about his prayer, he should follow what he thinks to be correct and complete his prayer accordingly and finish it and do two prostrations (of Sahu).”


## Hadith 1:395

_Narrated 'Umar (bin Al-Khattab):_

My Lord agreed with me in three things:

1\. I said,“O Allah's Apostle, I wish we took the station of Abraham as our praying place (for some of our prayers). So came the Divine Inspiration: And take you (people) the station of Abraham as a place of prayer (for some of your prayers e.g. two Rakat of Tawaf of Ka'ba)”. (2.125)

2\. And as regards the (verse of) the veiling of the women, I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! I wish you ordered your wives to cover themselves from the men because good and bad ones talk to them.' So the verse of the veiling of the women was revealed.

3\. Once the wives of the Prophet made a united front against the Prophet and I said to them, 'It may be if he (the Prophet) divorced you, (all) that his Lord (Allah) will give him instead of you wives better than you.' So this verse (the same as I had said) was revealed." (66.5).


## Hadith 1:396

_Narrated Anas:_

as above (395).


## Hadith 1:397

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

While the people were offering the Fajr prayer at Quba (near Medina), someone came to them and said: “It has been revealed to Allah's Apostle tonight, and he has been ordered to pray facing the Ka'ba.” So turn your faces to the Ka'ba. Those people were facing Sham (Jerusalem) so they turned their faces towards Ka'ba (at Mecca).


## Hadith 1:398

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

“Once the Prophet offered five Rakat in Zuhr prayer.” He was asked, “Is there an increase in the prayer?” The Prophet said, “And what is it?” They said, "You have prayed five Rakat.' So he bent his legs and performed two prostrations (of Sahu).


## Hadith 1:399

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet saw some sputum in the direction of the Qibla (on the wall of the mosque) and he disliked that and the sign of disgust was apparent from his face. So he got up and scraped it off with his hand and said, “Whenever anyone of you stands for the prayer, he is speaking in private to his Lord or his Lord is between him and his Qibla. So, none of you should spit in the direction of the Qibla but one can spit to the left or under his foot.” The Prophet then took the corner of his sheet and spat in it and folded it and said, “Or you can do like this. ”


## Hadith 1:400

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar: Allah's Apostle saw sputum on the wall_

of the mosque in the direction of the Qibla and scraped it off. He faced the people and said, "Whenever any one of you is praying, he should not spit in front of him because in the

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_300">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:201 to 1:300</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_500">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:401 to 1:500</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
