---
title: "Hadith 1:401 to 1:500"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_400">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:301 to 1:400</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_600">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:501 to 1:600</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 1:401

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the mother of faithful believers) Allah's Apostle saw some nasal secretions, expectoration or sputum on the wall of the mosque in the direction of the Qibla and scraped it off.


## Hadith 1:402

_Narrated Abd Huraira and Abu Said:_

Allah's Apostle saw some expectoration on the wall of the mosque; he took gravel and scraped it off and said, “If anyone of you wanted to spit he should neither spit in front of him nor on his right but he could spit either on his left or under his left foot.”


## Hadith 1:403

_Narrated Abd Huraira and Abu Sa'id:_

Allah's Apostle saw some expectoration on the wall of the mosque; he took gravel and scraped it off and said, “If anyone of you wanted to spit, he should neither spit in front of him nor on his right but could spit either on his left or under his left foot.”


## Hadith 1:404

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “None of you should spit in front or on his right but he could spit either on his left or under his foot.”


## Hadith 1:405

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “A faithful believer while in prayer is speaking in private to his Lord, so he should neither spit in front of him nor to his right side but he could spit either on his left or under his foot.”


## Hadith 1:406

_Narrated Abu Said:_

The Prophet saw sputum on (the wall of) the mosque in the direction of the Qibla and scraped it off with gravel. Then he forbade Spitting in front or on the right, but allowed it on one's left or under one's left foot.


## Hadith 1:407

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Spitting in the mosque is a sin and its expiation is to bury it.”


## Hadith 1:408

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Prophet said, “If anyone of you stands for prayer, he should not spit in front of him because in prayer he is speaking in private to Allah and he should not spit on his right as there is an angel, but he can spit either on his left or under his left foot and bury it (i.e. expectoration).”


## Hadith 1:409

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet saw expectoration (on the wall of the mosque) in the direction of the Qibla and scraped it off with his hand. It seemed that he disliked it and the sign of disgust was apparent from his face. He said, “If anyone of you stands for the prayer, he is speaking in private to his Lord, (or) his Lord is between him and his Qibla, therefore he should not spit towards his Qibla, but he could spit either on his left or under his foot.” Then he took the corner of his sheet and spat in it, folded it and said, “Or do like this.”


## Hadith 1:410

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Do you consider or see that my face is towards the Qibla? By Allah, neither your submissiveness nor your bowing is hidden from me, surely I see you from my back.”


## Hadith 1:411

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet led us in a prayer and then got up on the pulpit and said, “In your prayer and bowing, I certainly see you from my back as I see you (while looking at you.)”


## Hadith 1:412

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle ordered for a horse race; the trained horses were to run from a place called Al-Hafya' to Thaniyat Al-Wada' and the horses which were not trained were to run from Al-Thaniya to the Masjid (mosque of) Bani Zuraiq. The sub narrator added: Ibn Umar was one of those who took part in the race.


## Hadith 1:413

_Narrated Anas:_

Some goods came to Allah's Apostle from Bahrain. The Prophet ordered the people to spread them in the mosque —it was the biggest amount of goods Allah's Apostle had ever received. He left for prayer and did not even look at it. After finishing the prayer, he sat by those goods and gave from those to everybody he saw. Al-'Abbas came to him and said, “O Allah's Apostle! give me (something) too, because I gave ransom for myself and 'Aqil” Allah's Apostle told him to take. So he stuffed his garment with it and tried to carry it away but he failed to do so. He said, “O Allah's Apostle! Order someone to help me in lifting it.” The Prophet refused. He then said to the Prophet: “Will you please help me to lift it?” Allah's Apostle refused. Then Al-'Abbas threw some of it and tried to lift it (but failed). He again said, “O Allah's Apostle Order someone to help me to lift it.” He refused. Al-'Abbas then said to the Prophet: “Will you please help me to lift it?” He again refused. Then Al-'Abbas threw some of it, and lifted it on his shoulders and went away. Allah's Apostle kept on watching him till he disappeared from his sight and was astonished at his greediness. Allah's Apostle did not get up till the last coin was distributed.


## Hadith 1:414

_Narrated Anas:_

I found the Prophet in the mosque along with some people. He said to me, “Did Abu Talha send you?” I said, “Yes”. He said, “For a meal?” I said, “Yes.” Then he said to his companions, “Get up.” They set out and I was ahead of them.


## Hadith 1:415

_Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:_

A man said, “O Allah's Apostle! If a man finds another man with his wife, (committing adultery) should the husband kill him?” Later on I saw them (the man and his wife) doing Lian in the mosque.


## Hadith 1:416

_Narrated 'Itban bin Malik:_

The Prophet came to my house and said, “Where do you like me to pray?” I pointed to a place. The Prophet then said, “Allahu Akbar”, and we aligned behind him and he offered a two-Rak'at prayer.


## Hadith 1:417

_Narrated 'Itban bin Malik:_

who was one of the companions of Allah's Apostle and one of the Ansar's who took part in the battle of Badr: I came to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle I have weak eyesight and I lead my people in prayers. When it rains the water flows in the valley between me and my people so I cannot go to their mosque to lead them in prayer. O Allah's Apostle! I wish you would come to my house and pray in it so that I could take that place as a Musalla.” Allah's Apostle said. “Allah willing, I will do so.” Next day after the sun rose high, Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr came and Allah's Apostle asked for permission to enter. I gave him permission and he did not sit on entering the house but said to me, “Where do you like me to pray?” I pointed to a place in my house. So Allah's Apostle stood there and said, 'Allahu Akbar', and we all got up and aligned behind him and offered a two-Rak'at prayer and ended it with Taslim. We requested him to stay for a meal called “Khazira” which we had prepared for him. Many members of our family gathered in the house and one of them said, “Where is Malik bin Al-Dukhaishin or Ibn Al-Dukhshun?” One of them replied, “He is a hypocrite and does not love Allah and His Apostle.” Hearing that, Allah's Apostle said, “Do not say so. Haven't you seen that he said, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah' for Allah's sake only?” He said, “Allah and His Apostle know better. We have seen him helping and advising hypocrites.”

Allah's Apostle said, “Allah has forbidden the (Hell) fire for those who say, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah' for Allah's sake only.”


## Hadith 1:418

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to start every thing from the right (for good things) whenever it was possible in all his affairs; for example: in washing, combing or wearing shoes.


## Hadith 1:419

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Um Habiba and Um Salama mentioned about a church they had seen in Ethiopia in which there were pictures. They told the Prophet about it, on which he said, “If any religious man dies amongst those people they would build a place of worship at his grave and make these pictures in it. They will be the worst creature in the sight of Allah on the Day of Resurrection.”


## Hadith 1:420

_Narrated Anas:_

When the Prophet arrived Medina he dismounted at 'Awali-i-Medina amongst a tribe called Banu 'Amr bin 'Auf. He stayed there For fourteen nights. Then he sent for Bani An-Najjar and they came armed with their swords. As if I am looking (just now) as the Prophet was sitting over his Rahila (Mount) with Abu Bakr riding behind him and all Banu An-Najjar around him till he dismounted at the courtyard of Abu Aiyub's house. The Prophet loved to pray wherever the time for the prayer was due even at sheep-folds. Later on he ordered that a mosque should be built and sent for some people of Banu-An-Najjar and said, “O Banu An-Najjar! Suggest to me the price of this (walled) piece of land of yours.” They replied, “No! By Allah! We do not demand its price except from Allah.” Anas added: There were graves of pagans in it and some of it was unleveled and there were some date-palm trees in it. The Prophet ordered that the graves of the pagans be dug out and the unleveled land be level led and the date-palm trees be cut down . (So all that was done). They aligned these cut date-palm trees towards the Qibla of the mosque (as a wall) and they also built two stone side-walls (of the mosque). His companions brought the stones while reciting some poetic verses. The Prophet was with them and he kept on saying, “There is no goodness except that of the Hereafter, O Allah! So please forgive the Ansars and the emigrants. ”


## Hadith 1:421

_Narrated Abu Al-Taiyah:_

Anas said, “The Prophet prayed in the sheep fold.” Later on I heard him saying, “He prayed in the sheep folds before the construction of the, mosque.”


## Hadith 1:422

_Narrated Nafi:_

“I saw Ibn 'Umar praying while taking his camel as a Sutra in front of him and he said, ”I saw the Prophet doing the same."


## Hadith 1:423

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

The sun eclipsed and Allah's Apostle offered the eclipse prayer and said, “I have been shown the Hellfire (now) and I never saw a worse and horrible sight than the sight I have seen today.”


## Hadith 1:424

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet had said, “Offer some of your prayers (Nawafil) at home, and do not take your houses as graves.”


## Hadith 1:425

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Do not enter (the places) of these people where Allah's punishment had fallen unless you do so weeping. If you do not weep, do not enter (the places of these people) because Allah's curse and punishment which fell upon them may fall upon you.”


## Hadith 1:426

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Um Salama told Allah's Apostle about a church which she had seen in Ethiopia and which was called Mariya. She told him about the pictures which she had seen in it. Allah's Apostle said, “If any righteous pious man dies amongst them, they would build a place of worship at his grave and make these pictures in it; they are the worst creatures in the sight of Allah.”


## Hadith 1:427

_Narrated 'Aisha and 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

When the last moment of the life of Allah's Apostle came he started putting his 'Khamisa' on his face and when he felt hot and short of breath he took it off his face and said, “May Allah curse the Jews and Christians for they built the places of worship at the graves of their Prophets.” The Prophet was warning (Muslims) of what those had done.


## Hadith 1:428

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “May Allah's curse be on the Jews for they built the places of worship at the graves of their Prophets.”


## Hadith 1:429

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle said, "I have been given five things which were not given to any amongst the Prophets before me. These are:

1\. Allah made me victorious by awe (by His frightening my enemies) for a distance of one month's journey.

2\. The earth has been made for me (and for my followers) a place for praying and a thing to perform Tayammum. Therefore my followers can pray wherever the time of a prayer is due.

3\. The booty has been made Halal (lawful) for me (and was not made so for anyone else).

4\. Every Prophet used to be sent to his nation exclusively but I have been sent 1o all mankind.

5\. I have been given the right of intercession (on the Day of Resurrection.)


## Hadith 1:430

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

There was a black slave girl belonging to an 'Arab tribe and they manumitted her but she remained with them. The slave girl said, “Once one of their girls (of that tribe) came out wearing a red leather scarf decorated with precious stones. It fell from her or she placed it somewhere. A kite passed by that place, saw it Lying there and mistaking it for a piece of meat, flew away with it. Those people searched for it but they did not find it. So they accused me of stealing it and started searching me and even searched my private parts.” The slave girl further said, “By Allah! while I was standing (in that state) with those people, the same kite passed by them and dropped the red scarf and it fell amongst them. I told them, 'This is what you accused me of and I was innocent and now this is it.' ” 'Aisha added: That slave girl came to Allah's Apostle and embraced Islam. She had a tent or a small room with a low roof in the mosque. Whenever she called on me, she had a talk with me and whenever she sat with me, she would recite the following: “The day of the scarf (band) was one of the wonders of our Lord, verily He rescued me from the disbelievers' town.” 'Aisha added: “Once I asked her, 'What is the matter with you? Whenever you sit with me, you always recite these poetic verses.' On that she told me the whole story. ”


## Hadith 1:431

_Narrated Naf'a:_

'Abdullah bin 'Umar said: I used to sleep in the mosque of the Prophet while I was young and unmarried.


## Hadith 1:432

_Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:_

Allah's Apostle went to Fatima's house but did not find 'Ali there. So he asked, “Where is your cousin?” She replied, “There was something between us and he got angry with me and went out. He did not sleep (mid-day nap) in the house.” Allah's Apostle asked a person to look for him. That person came and said, “O Allah's Apostle! He (Ali) is sleeping in the mosque.” Allah's Apostle went there and 'Ali was lying. His upper body cover had fallen down to one side of his body and he was covered with dust. Allah's Apostle started cleaning the dust from him saying: "Get up! O Aba Turab. Get up! O Aba Turab (literally means: O father of dust).


## Hadith 1:433

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I saw seventy of As-Suffa men and none of them had a Rida' (a garment covering the upper part of the body). They had either Izars (only) or sheets which they tied round their necks. Some of these sheets reached the middle of their legs and some reached their heels and they used to gather them with their hands lest their private parts should become naked.


## Hadith 1:434

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

I went to the Prophet in the mosque (the sub-narrator Mas'ar thought that Jabir had said, “In the forenoon.”) He ordered me to pray two Rakat. He owed me some money and he repaid it to me and gave more than what was due to me.


## Hadith 1:435

_Narrated Abu Qatada Al-Aslami:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If anyone of you enters a mosque, he should pray two Rakat before sitting.”


## Hadith 1:436

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The angels keep on asking Allah's forgiveness for anyone of you, as long as he is at his Mu,salla (praying place) and he does not pass wind (Hadath). They say, 'O Allah! Forgive him, O Allah! be Merciful to him.”


## Hadith 1:437

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

In the life-time of Allah's Apostle the mosque was built of adobes, its roof of the leaves of date-palms and its pillars of the stems of date-palms. Abu Bakr did not alter it. 'Umar expanded it on the same pattern as it was in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle by using adobes, leaves of date-palms and changing the pillars into wooden ones. 'Uthman changed it by expanding it to a great extent and built its walls with engraved stones and lime and made its pillars of engraved stones and its roof of teak wood.


## Hadith 1:438

_Narrated 'Ikrima:_

Ibn 'Abbas said to me and to his son 'Ali, “Go to Abu Sa'id and listen to what he narrates.” So we went and found him in a garden looking after it. He picked up his Rida', wore it and sat down and started narrating till the topic of the construction of the mosque reached. He said, “We were carrying one adobe at a time while 'Ammar was carrying two.” The Prophet saw him and started removing the dust from his body and said, “May Allah be Merciful to 'Ammar. He will be inviting them (i.e. his murderers, the rebellious group) to Paradise and they will invite him to Hell-fire.” 'Ammar said, “I seek refuge with Allah from affliction.”


## Hadith 1:439

_Narrated Sahl:_

Allah's Apostle sent someone to a woman telling her to “Order her slave, carpenter, to prepare a wooden pulpit for him to sit on.”


## Hadith 1:440

_Narrated Jabir:_

A woman said, “O Allah's Apostle! Shall I get something constructed for you to sit on as I have a slave who is a carpenter?” He replied, “Yes, if you like.” So she had that pulpit constructed.


## Hadith 1:441

_Narrated 'Ubdaidullah Al-Khaulani:_

I heard 'Uthman bin 'Affan saying, when people argued too much about his intention to reconstruct the mosque of Allah's Apostle, “You have talked too much. I heard the Prophet saying, 'Whoever built a mosque, (Bukair thought that 'Asim, another subnarrator, added, “Intending Allah's Pleasure”), Allah would build for him a similar place in Paradise.' ”


## Hadith 1:442

_Narrated 'Amr:_

I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, “A man passed through the mosque carrying arrows. Allah's Apostle said to him, 'Hold them by their heads.' ”


## Hadith 1:443

_Narrated Abu Burda bin 'Abdulla:_

(on the authority of his father) The Prophet said, “Whoever passes through our mosques or markets with arrows should hold them by their heads lest he should injure a Muslim.”


## Hadith 1:444

_Narrated Hassan bin Thabit Al-Ansari:_

I asked Abu Huraira “By Allah! Tell me the truth whether you heard the Prophet saying, 'O Hassan! Reply on behalf of Allah's Apostle. O Allah! Help him with the Holy Spirit.” Abu Huraira said, “Yes . ”


## Hadith 1:445

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Once I saw Allah's Apostle at the door of my house while some Ethiopians were playing in the mosque (displaying their skill with spears). Allah's Apostle was screening me with his Rida' so as to enable me to see their display. ('Urwa said that 'Aisha said, “I saw the Prophet and the Ethiopians were playing with their spears.”)


## Hadith 1:446

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Barira came to seek my help regarding her manumission. I told herself you like I would pay your price to your masters but your Al-Wala(1) would be for me. Her masters said, “If you like, you can pay what remains (of the price of her manumission), (Sufyan the sub-narrator once said), or if you like you can manumit her, but her (inheritance) Al-Wala would be for us. ”When Allah's Apostle came, I spoke to him about it. He said, “Buy her and manumit her. No doubt Al-Wala(1) is for the manumitted.” Then Allah's Apostle stood on the pulpit (or Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit as Sufyan once said), and said, “What about some people who impose conditions which are not present in Allah's Book (Laws)? Whoever imposes conditions which are not in Allah's Book (Laws), his conditions will be invalid even if he imposed them a hundred times.”


## Hadith 1:447

_Narrated Ka'b:_

In the mosque l asked Ibn Abi Hadrad to pay the debts which he owed to me and our voices grew louder. Allah's Apostle heard that while he was in his house. So he came to us raising the curtain of his room and said, “O Ka'b!” I replied, “Labaik, O Allah's Apostle!” He said, “O Ka'b! reduce your debt to one half,” gesturing with his hand. I said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have done so.” Then Allah's Apostle said (to Ibn Abi Hadrad), “Get up and pay the debt to him.”


## Hadith 1:448

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A black man or a black woman used to sweep the mosque and he or she died. The Prophet asked about her (or him). He was told that she (or he) had died. He said, “Why did you not inform me? Show me his grave (or her grave).” So he went to her (his) grave and offered her (his) funeral prayer."


## Hadith 1:449

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When the verses of Surat “Al-Baqara”' about the usury Riba were revealed, the Prophet went to the mosque and recited them in front of the people and then banned the trade of alcohol.


## Hadith 1:450

_Narrated Abu Rafi:_

Abu Huraira said, “A man or a woman used to clean the mosque.” (A sub-narrator said, 'Most probably a woman..') Then he narrated the Hadith of the Prophet


## Hadith 1:450

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Last night a big demon (afreet) from the Jinns came to me and wanted to interrupt my prayers (or said something similar) but Allah enabled me to overpower him. I wanted to fasten him to one of the pillars of the mosque so that all of you could See him in the morning but I remembered the statement of my brother Solomon (as stated in Quran): My Lord! Forgive me and bestow on me a kingdom such as shall not belong to anybody after me (38.35).” The sub narrator Rauh said, “He (the demon) was dismissed humiliated.”


## Hadith 1:451

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet sent some horsemen to Najd and they brought a man called Thumama bin Uthal from Bani Hanifa. They fastened him to one of the pillars of the mosque. The Prophet came and ordered them to release him. He went to a (garden of) date-palms near the mosque, took a bath and entered the, mosque again and said, “None has the right to be worshipped but Allah an Muhammad is His Apostle (i.e. he embraced Islam).”


## Hadith 1:452

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

On the day of Al-Khandaq (battle of the Trench' the medial arm vein of Sa'd bin Mu'ad was injured and the Prophet pitched a tent in the mosque to look after him. There was another tent for Banu Ghaffar in the mosque and the blood started flowing from Sa'd's tent to the tent of Bani Ghaffar. They shouted, “O occupants of the tent! What is coming from you to us?” They found that Sa'd' wound was bleeding profusely and Sa'd died in his tent.


## Hadith 1:453

_Narrated Um Salama:_

I complained to Allah's Apostle that I was sick. He told me to perform the Tawaf behind the people while riding. So I did so and Allah's Apostle was praying beside the Ka'ba and reciting the Sura starting with “Wat-tur-wa-Kitabinmastur.”


## Hadith 1:454

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Two of the companions of the Prophet departed from him on a dark night and were led by two lights like lamps (going in front of them from Allah as a miracle) lighting the way in front of them, and when they parted, each of them was accompanied by one of these lights till he reached their (respective) houses.


## Hadith 1:455

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

The Prophet delivered a sermon and said, “Allah gave a choice to one of (His) slaves either to choose this world or what is with Him in the Hereafter. He chose the latter.” Abu Bakr wept. I said lo myself, “Why is this Sheikh weeping, if Allah gave choice to one (of His) slaves either to choose this world or what is with Him in the Here after and he chose the latter?” And that slave was Allah's Apostle himself. Abu Bakr knew more than us. The Prophet said, "O Abu Bakr! Don't weep. The Prophet added: Abu- Bakr has favored me much with his property and company. If I were to take a Khalil from mankind I would certainly have taken Abu Bakr but the Islamic brotherhood and friendship is sufficient. Close all the gates in the mosque except that of Abu Bakr.


## Hadith 1:456

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

“Allah's Apostle in his fatal illness came out with a piece of cloth tied round his head and sat on the pulpit. After thanking and praising Allah he said, ”There is no one who had done more favor to me with life and property than Abu Bakr bin Abi Quhafa. If I were to take a Khalil, I would certainly have taken Abu- Bakr but the Islamic brotherhood is superior. Close all the small doors in this mosque except that of Abu Bakr."


## Hadith 1:457

_Narrated Nafi:_

Ibn 'Umar said, “The Prophet arrived at Mecca and sent for 'Uthman bin Talha. He opened the gate of the Ka'ba and the Prophet, Bilal, Usama bin Zaid and 'Uthman bin Talha entered the Ka'ba and then they closed its door (from inside). They stayed there for an hour, and then came out.” Ibn 'Umar added, “I quickly went to Bilal and asked him (whether the Prophet had prayed). Bilal replied, 'He prayed in it.' I asked, 'Where?' He replied, 'Between the two pillars.' ”Ibn 'Umar added, “I forgot to ask how many Rakat he (the Prophet) had prayed in the Ka'ba.”


## Hadith 1:458

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle sent some horse men to Najd and they brought a man called Thumama bin Uthal from Bani Hanifa. They fastened him to one of the pillars of the mosque.


## Hadith 1:459

_Narrated Al-Sa'ib bin Yazid:_

I was standing in the mosque and somebody threw a gravel at me. I looked and found that he was 'Umar bin Al-Khattab. He said to me, “Fetch those two men to me.” When I did, he said to them, “Who are you? (Or) where do you come from?” They replied, “We are from Ta'if.” 'Umar said, "Were you from this city (Medina) I would have punished you for raising your voices in the mosque of Allah's Apostle


## Hadith 1:460

_Narrated 'Kab bin Malik:_

During the life-time of Allah's Apostle I asked Ibn Abi Hadrad in the mosque to pay the debts which he owed to me and our voices grew so loud that Allah's Apostle heard them while he was in his house. So he came to us after raising the curtain of his room. The Prophet said, “O Ka'b bin Malik!” I replied, “Labaik, O Allah's Apostle.” He gestured with his hand to me to reduce the debt to one half. I said, “O Allah's Apostle have done it.” Allah's Apostle said (to Ibn Hadrad), “Get up and pay it.”


## Hadith 1:461

_Narrated Nafi':_

Ibn 'Umar said, “While the Prophet was on the pulpit, a man asked him how to offer the night prayers. He replied, 'Pray two Rakat at a time and then two and then two and so on, and if you are afraid of the dawn (the approach of the time of the Fajr prayer) pray one Rak'a and that will be the witr for all the Rakat which you have offered.” Ibn 'Umar said, "The last Rakat of the night prayer should be odd for the Prophet ordered it to be so.


## Hadith 1:462

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

A man came to the Prophet while he was delivering the sermon and asked him how to offer the night prayers. The Prophet replied, 'Pray two Rakat at a time and then two and then two and so on and if you are afraid of dawn (the approach of the time of the Fajr prayer) pray one Rak'a and that will be the with for all the Rakat which you have the Prophet while he was in the mosque.


## Hadith 1:463

_Narrated Abu Waqid al-Laithi:_

While Allah's Apostle was sitting in the mosque (with some people) three men came, two of them came in front of Allah's Apostle and the third one went away, and then one of them found a place in the circle and sat there while the second man sat behind the gathering, and the third one went away. When Allah's Apostle finished his preaching, he said, "Shall I tell you about these three persons? One of them betook himself to Allah and so Allah accepted him and accommodated him; the second felt shy before Allah so Allah did the same for him and sheltered him in His Mercy (and did not punish him), while the third turned his face from Allah, and went away, so Allah turned His face from him likewise.


## Hadith 1:464

_Narrated 'Abbad bin Tamim:_

that his uncle said, "I saw Allah's Apostle lying flat (on his back) Al-Musaiyab that 'Umar and 'Uthman used to do the same.


## Hadith 1:465

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) I had seen my parents following Islam since I attained the age of puberty. Not a day passed but the Prophet visited us, both in the mornings and evenings. My father Abii Bakr thought of building a mosque in the courtyard of his house and he did so. He used to pray and recite the Qur'an in it. The pagan women and their children used to stand by him and look at him with surprise. Abu Bakr was a Softhearted person and could not help weeping while reciting the Quran. The chiefs of the Quraish pagans became afraid of that (i.e. that their children and women might be affected by the recitation of Quran)."


## Hadith 1:466

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, "The prayer offered in congregation is twenty five times more superior (in reward) to the prayer offered alone in one's house or in a business center, because if one performs ablution and does it perfectly, and then proceeds to the mosque with the sole intention of praying, then for each step which he takes towards the mosque, Allah upgrades him a degree in reward and (forgives) crosses out one sin till he enters the mosque. When he enters the mosque he is considered in prayer as long as he is waiting for the prayer and the angels keep on asking for Allah's forgiveness for him and they keep on saying: 'O Allah! Be Merciful to him, O Allah! Forgive him, as long as he keeps on sitting at his praying place and does not pass wind. (See Hadith No. 620).


## Hadith 1:467

_Narrated_

'Abdullah that Allah's Apostle said, “O 'Abdullah bin 'Amr! What will be your condition when you will be left with the sediments of (worst) people?” (They will be in conflict with each other).


## Hadith 1:468

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

The Prophet said, “A faithful believer to a faithful believer is like the bricks of a wall, enforcing each other.” While (saying that) the Prophet clasped his hands, by interlacing his fingers.


## Hadith 1:469

_Narrated_

Narrates Ibn Sirin:

Abu Huraira said, “Allah's Apostle led us in one of the two 'Isha' prayers (Abu Huraira named that prayer but I forgot it).” Abu Huraira added, “He prayed two Rakat and then finished the prayer with Tasllm. He stood up near a piece of wood Lying across the mosque and leaned on it in such a way as if he was angry. Then he put his right hand over the left and clasped his hands by interlacing his fingers and then put his J right cheek on the back of his left hand. The people who were in haste left the mosque through its gates. They wondered whether the prayer was reduced. And amongst them were Abu Bakr and 'Umar but they hesitated to ask the Prophet. A long-handed man called Dhul-Yadain asked the Prophet, 'O Allah's Apostle! Have you; forgotten or has the prayer been reduced?' The Prophet replied, 'I have neither forgotten nor has the prayer been reduced' The Prophet added, 'Is what Dhul Yadain has said true?' They (the people) said, 'Yes, it is true.' The Prophet stood up again and led the prayer, completing the remaining prayer, forgotten by him, and performed Talsrm, and then said, 'Allahu Akbar.' And then he did a prostration as he used to prostrate or longer than that. He then raised his head saying, 'Allahu Akbar; he then again said, 'Allahu Akbar', and prostrated as he used to prostrate or longer than that. Then he raised his head and said, 'Allahu Akbar.' ” (The subnarrator added, “I think that they asked (Ibn Sirin) whether the Prophet completed the prayer with Taslim. He replied, ”I heard that 'Imran bin Husain had said, 'Then he (the Prophet) did Taslim.")


## Hadith 1:470

_Narrated Fudail bin Sulaiman:_

Musa bin 'Uqba said, “I saw Salim bin 'Abdullah looking for some places on the way and prayed there. He narrated that his father used to pray there, and had seen the Prophet praying at those very places.”

at those places. Musa the narrator added, “I asked Salim on which he said, 'I agree with Nafi' concerning those places, except the mosque situated at the place called Sharaf Ar-Rawha.”


## Hadith 1:471

_Narrated Hadith is about the various places on the way from Medina to_

Mecca where the Prophet prayed and their In locations impossible to translate.


## Hadith 1:472

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Once I came riding a she-ass when I had just attained the age of puberty. Allah's Apostle was offering the prayer at Mina with no wall in front of him and I passed in front of some of the row. There I dismounted and let my she-ass loose to graze and entered the row and nobody objected to me about it.


## Hadith 1:473

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle came out on 'Id day, he used to order that a Harba (a short spear) to be planted in front of him (as a Sutra for his prayer) and then he used to pray facing it with the people behind him and used to do the same while on a journey. After the Prophet , this practice was adopted by the Muslim rulers (who followed his traditions).


## Hadith 1:474

_Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:_

I heard my father saying, “The Prophet led us, and prayed a two-Rak'at Zuhr prayer and then a two-Rak'at 'Asr prayer at Al-Batha' with an 'Anza (planted) in front of him (as a Sutra) while women and donkeys were passing in front of him (beyond that 'Anza).”


## Hadith 1:475

_Narrated Sahl (bin Sa'd):_

The distance between the Musalla of Allah's Apostle and the wall was just sufficient for a sheep to pass through .


## Hadith 1:476

_Narrated Salama:_

The distance between the wall of the mosque and the pulpit was hardly enough for a sheep to pass through.


## Hadith 1:477

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet used to get a Harba planted in front of him (as a Sutra) and pray behind it.


## Hadith 1:478

_Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:_

that he had heard his father saying, “Allah's Apostle came to us at mid-day and water was brought for his ablution. He performed ablution and led us in Zuhr and 'Asr prayers with an 'Anza planted in front of him (as a Sutra), while women and donkeys were passing beyond it.”


## Hadith 1:479

_Narrated Anas Ibn Malik:_

Whenever the Prophet went for answering the call of nature, I and another boy used to go after him with a staff, a stick or an 'Anza and a tumbler of water and when he finished from answering the call of nature we would hand that tumbler of water to him.


## Hadith 1:480

_Narrated Abu Juhaifa:_

Allah's Apostle came out at midday and offered a two-Rak'at Zuhr and 'Asr prayers at Al-Batha and an 'Anza was planted in front of him (as a Sutra). He performed ablution and the people took the remaining water left after his ablution and rubbed their bodies with it.


## Hadith 1:481

_Narrated Yazid bin Al 'Ubaid:_

I used to accompany Salama bin Al-Akwa' and he used to pray behind the pillar which was near the place where the Quran's were kept I said, “O Abu Muslim! I see you always seeking to pray behind this pillar.” He replied, “I saw Allah's Apostle always seeking to pray near that pillar.”


## Hadith 1:482

_Narrated Anas:_

I saw the most famous people amongst the companions of the Prophet hurrying towards the pillars at the Maghrib prayer before the Prophet came for the prayer.


## Hadith 1:483

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet entered the Ka'ba along with Usama bin Zaid, 'Uthman bin Talha and Bilal and remained there for a long time. When they came out, I was the first man to enter the Ka'ba. I asked Bilal “Where did the Prophet pray?” Bilal replied, “Between the two front Pillars.”


## Hadith 1:484

_Narrated Nafi':_

'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, “Allah's Apostle entered the Ka'ba along with Usama bin Zaid, Bilal and 'Uthman bin Talha Al-Hajabi and closed the door and stayed there for some time. I asked Bilal when he came out, 'What did the Prophet do?' He replied, 'He offered prayer with one pillar to his left and one to his right and three behind.' In those days the Ka'ba was supported by six pillars.” Malik said: “There were two pillars on his (the Prophet's) right side.”


## Hadith 1:485

_Narrated Nafi:_

“The Prophet used to make his she-camel sit across and he would pray facing it (as a Sutra).” I asked, “What would the Prophet do if the she-camel was provoked and moved?” He said, “He would take its camel-saddle and put it in front of him and pray facing its back part (as a Sutra). And Ibn 'Umar used to do the same.” (This indicates that one should not pray except behind a Sutra).


## Hadith 1:486

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Do you make us (women) equal to dogs and donkeys? While I used to lie in my bed, the Prophet would come and pray facing the middle of the bed. I used to consider it not good to stand in front of him in his prayers. So I used to slip away slowly and quietly from the foot of the bed till I got out of my guilt.


## Hadith 1:487

_Narrated Abu Sa'id:_

The Prophet said, (what is ascribed to him in the following Hadith 488):


## Hadith 1:488

_Narrated Abu Salih As-Samman:_

I saw Abu Said Al-Khudri praying on a Friday, behind something which acted as a Sutra. A young man from Bani Abi Mu'ait, wanted to pass in front of him, but Abu Said repulsed him with a push on his chest. Finding no alternative he again tried to pass but Abu Said pushed him with a greater force. The young man abused Abu Said and went to Marwan and lodged a complaint against Abu Said and Abu Said followed the young man to Marwan who asked him, “O Abu Said! What has happened between you and the son of your brother?” Abu Sa'id said to him, “I heard the Prophet saying, 'If anybody amongst you is praying behind something as a Sutra and somebody tries to pass in front of him, then he should repulse him and if he refuses, he should use force against him for he is a satan.' ”


## Hadith 1:489

_Narrated Busr bin Said:_

that Zaid bin Khalid sent him to Abi Juhaim to ask him what he had heard from Allah's Apostle about a person passing in front of another person who was praying. Abu Juhaim replied, “Allah's Apostle said, 'If the person who passes in front of another person in prayer knew the magnitude of his sin he would prefer to wait for 40 (days, months or years) rather than to pass in front of him.” Abu An-Nadr said, “I do not remember exactly whether he said 40 days, months or years.”


## Hadith 1:490

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The things which annul the prayers were mentioned before me. They said, “Prayer is annulled by a dog, a donkey and a woman (if they pass in front of the praying people).” I said, “You have made us (i.e. women) dogs. I saw the Prophet praying while I used to lie in my bed between him and the Qibla. Whenever I was in need of something, I would slip away. for I disliked to face him.”


## Hadith 1:491

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to pray while I was sleeping across in his bed in front of him. Whenever he wanted to pray Witr, he would wake me up and I would pray Witr.


## Hadith 1:492

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

the wife of the Prophet, “I used to sleep in front of Allah's Apostle with my legs opposite his Qibla (facing him); and whenever he prostrated, he pushed my feet and I withdrew them and whenever he stood, I stretched them.” 'Aisha added, “In those days there were no lamps in the houses.”


## Hadith 1:493

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The things which annual prayer were mentioned before me (and those were): a dog, a donkey and a woman. I said, “You have compared us (women) to donkeys and dogs. By Allah! I saw the Prophet praying while I used to lie in (my) bed between him and the Qibla. Whenever I was in need of something, I disliked to sit and trouble the Prophet. So, I would slip away by the side of his feet.”


## Hadith 1:494

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to get up at night and pray while I used to lie across between him and the Qibla on his family's bed.


## Hadith 1:495

_Narrated Abu Qatada Al-Ansari:_

Allah's Apostle was praying and he was carrying Umama the daughters of Zainab, the daughter of Allah's Apostle and she was the daughter of 'As bin Rabi'a bin 'AbduShams. When he prostrated, he put her down and when he stood, he carried her (on his neck).


## Hadith 1:496

_Narrated Maimuna bint Al-Harith:_

My bed was beside the praying place (Musalla) of the Prophet and sometimes his garment fell on me while I used to lie in my bed.


## Hadith 1:497

_Narrated Maimuna:_

The Prophet used to pray while I used to sleep beside him during my periods (menses) and in prostrations his garment used to touch me.


## Hadith 1:498

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

It is not good that you people have made us (women) equal to dogs and donkeys. No doubt I saw Allah's Apostle praying while I used to lie between him and the Qibla and when he wanted to prostrate, he pushed my legs and I withdrew them.


## Hadith 1:499

_Narrated 'Amr bin Maimuin:_

'Abdullah bin Mas'ud said, “While Allah's Apostle was praying beside the Ka'ba, there were some Quraish people sitting in a gathering. One of them said, 'Don't you see this (who does deeds just to show off)? Who amongst you can go and bring the dung, blood and the abdominal contents (intestines, etc). of the slaughtered camels of the family of so and so and then wait till he prostrates and put that in between his shoulders?' The most unfortunate amongst them ('Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait) went (and brought them) and when Allah's Apostle prostrated, he put them between his shoulders. The Prophet remained in prostration and they laughed so much so that they fell on each other. A passerby went to Fatima, who was a young girl in those days. She came running and the Prophet was still in prostration. She removed them and cursed upon the Quraish on their faces. When Allah's Apostle completed his prayer, he said, 'O Allah! Take revenge on Quraish.' He said so thrice and added, 'O Allah! take revenge on 'Amr bin Hisham, 'Utba bin Rabia, Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al-Walid bin'Utba, Umaiya bin Khalaf, 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait and 'Umar a bin Al-Walid.” Abdullah added, "By Allah! I saw all of them dead in the battle field on the day of Badr and they were dragged and thrown in the Qalib (a well) at Badr: Allah's Apostle then said, 'Allah's curse has descended upon the people of the Qalib (well).


## Hadith 1:500

_Narrated Ibn Shihab:_

Once'Umar bin 'Abdul 'Aziz delayed the prayer and 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair went to him and said, “Once in 'Iraq, Al-MughTra bin Shu'ba delayed his prayers and Abi Mas'ud Al-Ansari went to him and said, 'O Mughira! What is this? Don't you know that once Gabriel came and offered the prayer (Fajr prayer) and Allah's Apostle prayed too, then he prayed again (Zuhr prayer) and so did Allah's Apostle and again he prayed ('Asr prayers and Allah's Apostle did the same; again he prayed (Maghrib-prayer) and so did Allah's Apostle and again prayed ('Isha prayer) and so did Allah's Apostle and (Gabriel) said, 'I was ordered to do so (to demonstrate the prayers prescribed to you)?'” 'Umar (bin 'Abdul 'AzTz) said to 'Urwa, “Be sure of what you Say. Did Gabriel lead Allah's Apostle at the stated times of the prayers?” 'Urwa replied, “Bashir bin Abi Mas'ud narrated like this on the authority of his father.” Urwa added, “Aisha told me that Allah's Apostle used to pray 'Asr prayer when the sun-shine was still inside her residence (during the early time of 'Asr).”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_400">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:301 to 1:400</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_600">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:501 to 1:600</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
