---
title: "Hadith 1:501 to 1:600"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_500">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:401 to 1:500</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_700">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:601 to 1:700</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 1:501

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

“Once a delegation of 'Abdul Qais came to Allah's Apostle and said, ”We belong to such and such branch of the tribe of Rab'a and we can only come to you in the sacred months. Order us to do something good so that we may (carry out) take it from you and also invite to it our people whom we have left behind (at home).“ The Prophet said, ” I order you to do four things and forbid you from four things. (The first four are as follows):

1\. To believe in Allah. (And then he: explained it to them i.e.) to testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and (Muhammad) am Allah's Apostle

2\. To offer prayers perfectly (at the stated times):

3\. To pay Zakat (obligatory charity)

4\. To give me Khumus

(The other four things which are forbidden are as follows):

1\. Dubba

2\. Hantam

3\. Muqaiyat

4\. Naqir (all these are utensils used for the preparation of alcoholic drinks)."


## Hadith 1:502

_Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah:_

I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle for to offer prayers perfectly, to pay Zakat regularly, and to give good advice to every Muslim.


## Hadith 1:503

_Narrated Shaqiq:_

that he had heard Hudhaifa saying, “Once I was sitting with 'Umar and he said, 'Who amongst you remembers the statement of Allah's Apostle about the afflictions?' I said, 'I know it as the Prophet had said it.' 'Umar said, 'No doubt you are bold.' I said, 'The afflictions caused for a man by his wife, money, children and neighbor are expiated by his prayers, fasting, charity and by enjoining (what is good) and forbidding (what is evil).' 'Umar said, 'I did not mean that but I asked about that affliction which will spread like the waves of the sea.' I (Hudhaifa) said, 'O leader of the faithful believers! You need not be afraid of it as there is a closed door between you and it.' 'Umar asked, Will the door be broken or opened?' I replied, 'It will be broken.' 'Umar said, 'Then it will never be closed again.' I was asked whether 'Umar knew that door. I replied that he knew it as one knows that there will be night before the tomorrow morning. I narrated a Hadith that was free from any mis-statement” The subnarrator added that they deputed Masruq to ask Hudhaifa (about the door). Hudhaifa said, “The door was 'Umar himself.”


## Hadith 1:504

_Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:_

A man kissed a woman (unlawfully) and then went to the Prophet and informed him. Allah revealed:

And offer prayers perfectly At the two ends of the day And in some hours of the night (i.e. the five compulsory prayers). Verily! good deeds remove (annul) the evil deeds (small sins) (11.114). The man asked Allah's Apostle, “Is it for me?” He said, “It is for all my followers.”


## Hadith 1:505

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

I asked the Prophet “Which deed is the dearest to Allah?” He replied, “To offer the prayers at their early stated fixed times.” I asked, “What is the next (in goodness)?” He replied, “To be good and dutiful to your parents” I again asked, “What is the next (in goodness)?” He replied, “To participate in Jihad (religious fighting) in Allah's cause.” 'Abdullah added, “I asked only that much and if I had asked more, the Prophet would have told me more.”


## Hadith 1:506

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “If there was a river at the door of anyone of you and he took a bath in it five times a day would you notice any dirt on him?” They said, “Not a trace of dirt would be left.” The Prophet added, “That is the example of the five prayers with which Allah blots out (annuls) evil deeds.”


## Hadith 1:507

_Narrated Ghailan:_

Anas said, “I do not find (now-a-days) things as they were (practiced) at the time of the Prophet.” Somebody said “The prayer (is as it was.)” Anas said, "Have you not done in the prayer what you have done?

him weeping and asked him why he was weeping. He replied, “I do not know anything which I used to know during the life-time of Allah's Apostle except this prayer which is being lost (not offered as it should be).”


## Hadith 1:508

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “Whenever anyone of you offers his prayer he is speaking in private to his Lord. So he should not spit to his right but under his left foot.” Qatada said, “He should not spit in front of him but to his left or under his feet.” And Shu'ba said, “He should not spit in front of him, nor to his right but to his left or under his foot.” Anas said: The Prophet said, “He should neither spit in the direction of his Qibla nor to his right but to his left or under his foot.”


## Hadith 1:509

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “Do the prostration properly and do not put your fore-arms flat with elbows touching the ground like a dog. And if you want to spit, do not spit in front, nor to the right for the person in prayer is speaking in private to his Lord.”


## Hadith 1:510

_Narrated Abu Huraira and 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If it is very hot, then pray the Zuhr prayer when it becomes (a bit) cooler, as the severity of the heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire.”


## Hadith 1:511

_Narrated Abu Dhar:_

The Muadhdhin (call-maker) of the Prophet pronounced the Adhan (call) for the Zuhr prayer but the Prophet said, “Let it be cooler, let it be cooler.” Or said, 'Wait, wait, because the severity of heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire. In severe hot weather, pray when it becomes (a bit) cooler and the shadows of hillocks appear."


## Hadith 1:512

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

breath in the summer is at the time when you feel the severest heat a


## Hadith 1:513

_Narrated Abu Sa'id:_

that Allah's Apostle said, “Pray Zuhr prayer when it becomes (a bit) cooler as the severity of heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire.”


## Hadith 1:514

_Narrated Abu Dhar Al-Ghifar:_

We were with the Prophet on a journey and the Mu'adhdhin (call maker for the prayer) wanted to pronounce the Adhan (call) for the Zuhr prayer. The Prophet said, “Let it become cooler.” He again (after a while) wanted to pronounce the Adhan but the Prophet said to him, “Let it become cooler till we see the shadows of hillocks.” The Prophet added, “The severity of heat is from the raging of the Hell-fire, and in very hot weather pray (Zuhr) when it becomes cooler.”


## Hadith 1:515

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle came out as the sun declined at mid-day and offered the Zuhr prayer. He then stood on the pulpit and spoke about the Hour (Day of Judgment) and said that in it there would be tremendous things. He then said, “Whoever likes to ask me about anything he can do so and I shall reply as long as I am at this place of mine.” Most of the people wept and the Prophet said repeatedly, “Ask me.” Abdullah bin Hudhafa As-Sahmi stood up and said, “Who is my father?” The Prophet said, “Your father is Hudhafa.” The Prophet repeatedly said, “Ask me.” Then Umar knelt before him and said, “We are pleased with Allah as our Lord, Islam as our religion, and Muhammad as our Prophet.” The Prophet then became quiet and said, “Paradise and Hell-fire were displayed in front of me on this wall just now and I have never seen a better thing (than the former) and a worse thing (than the latter).”


## Hadith 1:516

_Narrated Abu Al-Minhal:_

Abu Barza said, “The Prophet used to offer the Fajr (prayer) when one could recognize the person sitting by him (after the prayer) and he used to recite between 60 to 100 Ayat (verses) of the Qur'an. He used to offer the Zuhr prayer as soon as the sun declined (at noon) and the 'Asr at a time when a man might go and return from the farthest place in Medina and find the sun still hot. (The sub-narrator forgot what was said about the Maghrib). He did not mind delaying the 'Isha prayer to one third of the night or the middle of the night.”


## Hadith 1:517

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

When we offered the Zuhr prayers behind Allah's Apostle we used to prostrate on our clothes to protect ourselves from the heat.


## Hadith 1:518

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

“The Prophet prayed eight Rakat for the Zuhr and 'Asr, and seven for the Maghrib and 'Isha prayers in Medina.” Aiyub said, “Perhaps those were rainy nights.” Anas said, “May be.”


## Hadith 1:519

_Narrated Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayer when the sunshine had not disappeared from my chamber.


## Hadith 1:520

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayers at a time when the sunshine was still inside my chamber and no shadow had yet appeared in it.


## Hadith 1:521

_Narrated Aisha:_

The Prophet used to pray the 'Asr prayers at a time when the sunshine was still inside my chamber and no shadow had yet appeared in it.


## Hadith 1:522

_Narrated Saiyar bin Salama:_

I along with my father went to Abu- Barza Al-Aslarrni and my father asked him, “How Allah's Apostle used to offer the five compulsory congregational prayers?” Abu- Barza said, "The Prophet used to pray the Zuhr prayer which you (people) call the first one at mid-day when the sun had just declined The Asr prayer at a time when after the prayer, a man could go to the house at the farthest place in Medina (and arrive) while the sun was still hot. (I forgot about the Maghrib prayer). The Prophet Loved to delay the 'Isha which you call Al- Atama and he disliked sleeping before it and speaking after it. After the Fajr prayer he used to leave when a man could recognize the one sitting beside him and he used to recite between 60 to 100 Ayat (in the Fajr prayer) .


## Hadith 1:523

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

We used to pray the Asr prayer and after that if someone happened to go to the tribe of Bani Amr bin Auf, he would find them still praying the Asr (prayer).


## Hadith 1:524

_Narrated Abu Bakr bin Uthman bin Sahl bin Hunaif:_

that he heard Abu Umama saying: We prayed the Zuhr prayer with 'Umar bin Abdul Aziz and then went to Anas bin Malik and found him offering the Asr prayer. I asked him, “O uncle! Which prayer have you offered?” He said 'The Asr and this is (the time of) the prayer of Allah s Apostle which we used to pray with him."


## Hadith 1:525

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayer at a time when the sun was still hot and high and if a person went to Al-'Awali (a place) of Medina, he would reach there when the sun was still high. Some of Al-'Awali of Medina were about four miles or so from the town.


## Hadith 1:526

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

We used to pray the 'Asr and after that if one of US went to Quba'he would arrive there while the sun was still high.


## Hadith 1:527

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever misses the 'Asr prayer (intentionally) then it is as if he lost his family and property.”


## Hadith 1:528

_Narrated Abu Al-Mahh:_

We were with Buraida in a battle on a cloudy day and he said, "Offer the 'Asr prayer early as the Prophet said, “Whoever leaves the 'Asr prayer, all his (good) deeds will be annulled.”


## Hadith 1:529

_Narrated Qais:_

Jarir said, "We were with the Prophet and he looked at the moon—full-moon—and said, 'Certainly you will see your Lord as you see this moon and you will have no trouble in seeing Him. So if you can avoid missing (through sleep or business, etc.) a prayer before the sun-rise (Fajr) and a prayer before sunset ('Asr), you must do so.' He then recited Allah's Statement:

And celebrate the praises Of your Lord before The rising of the sun And before (its) setting." (50.39) Isma'il said, “Offer those prayers and do not miss them.”


## Hadith 1:530

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Angels come to you in succession by night and day and all of them get together at the time of the Fajr and 'Asr prayers. Those who have passed the night with you (or stayed with you) ascend (to the Heaven) and Allah asks them, though He knows everything about you, well, ”In what state did you leave my slaves?" The angels reply: “When we left them they were praying and when we reached them, they were praying.”


## Hadith 1:531

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If anyone of you can get one Rak'a of the 'Asr prayer before sunset, he should complete his prayer. If any of you can get one Rak'a of the Fajr prayer before sunrise, he should complete his prayer.”


## Hadith 1:532

_Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah:_

My father said, “I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'The period of your stay as compared to the previous nations is like the period equal to the time between the 'Asr prayer and sunset. The people of the Torah were given the Torah and they acted (upon it) till mid-day then they were exhausted and were given one Qirat (of gold) each. And then the people of the Gospel were given the Gospel and they acted (upon it) till the 'Asr prayer then they were exhausted and were! given one Qirat each. And then we were given the Qur'an and we acted (upon it) till sunset and we were given two Qirats each. On that the people of both the scriptures said, 'O our Lord! You have given them two Qirats and given us one Qirat, though we have worked more than they.' Allah said, 'Have I usurped some of your right?' They said, 'No.' Allah said: "That is my blessing I bestow upon whomsoever I wish.”


## Hadith 1:533

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

The Prophet said, “The example of Muslims, Jews and Christians is like the example of a man who employed laborers to work for him from morning till night. They worked till mid-day and they said, 'We are not in need of your reward.' SO the man employed another batch and said to them, 'Complete the rest of the day and yours will be the wages I had fixed (for the first batch). They worked Up till the time of the 'Asr prayer and said, 'Whatever we have done is for you.' He employed another batch. They worked for the rest of the day till sunset, and they received the wages of the two former batches.”


## Hadith 1:534

_Narrated Rafi' bin Khadij:_

We used to offer the Maghrib prayer with the Prophet and after finishing the prayer one of us may go away and could still see as Par as the spots where one's arrow might reach when shot by a bow.


## Hadith 1:535

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet used to pray the Zuhr at mid-day, and the 'Asr at a time when the sun was still bright, the Maghrib after sunset (at its stated time) and the Isha at a variable time. Whenever he saw the people assembled (for Isha' prayer) he would pray earlier and if the people delayed, he would delay the prayer. And they or the Prophet used to offer the Fajr Prayers when it still dark.


## Hadith 1:536

_Narrated Salama:_

We used to pray the Maghrib prayer with the Prophet when the sun disappeared from the horizon.


## Hadith 1:537

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet prayed seven Rakat together and eight Rakat together.


## Hadith 1:538

_Narrated 'Abdullah Al-Muzani:_

The Prophet said, “Do not be influenced by bedouins regarding the name of your Maghrib prayer which is called 'Isha' by them.”


## Hadith 1:539

_Narrated Abdullah:_

“One night Allah's Apostle led us in the 'Isha' prayer and that is the one called Al-'Atma by the people.” After the completion of the prayer, he faced us and said, “Do you know the importance of this night? Nobody present on the surface of the earth to-night will be living after one hundred years from this night.” (See Hadith No. 575).


## Hadith 1:540

_Narrated Muhammad bin 'Amr:_

We asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah about the prayers of the Prophet . He said, “He used to pray Zuhr prayer at mid-day, the 'Asr when the sun was still hot, and the Maghrib after sunset (at its stated time). The 'Isha was offered early if the people gathered, and used to be delayed if their number was less; and the morning prayer was offered when it was still dark. ”


## Hadith 1:541

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle once delayed the 'Isha' prayer and that was during the days when Islam still had not spread. The Prophet did not come out till 'Umar informed him that the women and children had slept. Then he came out and said to the people of the mosque:“None amongst the dwellers of the earth has been waiting for it ('Isha prayer) except you.”


## Hadith 1:542

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

My companions, who came with me in the boat and I landed at a place called Baqi Buthan. The Prophet was in Medina at that time. One of us used to go to the Prophet by turns every night at the time of the Isha prayer. Once I along with my companions went to the Prophet and he was busy in some of his affairs, so the 'Isha' prayer was delayed to the middle of the night He then came out and led the people (in prayer). After finishing from the prayer, he addressed the people present there saying, “Be patient! Don't go away. Have the glad tiding. It is from the blessing of Allah upon you that none amongst mankind has prayed at this time save you.” Or said, “None except you has prayed at this time.” Abu Muisa added, 'So we returned happily after what we heard from Alllah's Apostle ."


## Hadith 1:543

_Narrated Abu Barza:_

Allah's Apostle disliked to sleep before the 'Isha' prayer and to talk after it.


## Hadith 1:544

_Narrated Ibn Shihab from 'Urwa:_

'Aisha said, “Once Allah's Apostle delayed the 'Isha' prayer till 'Umar reminded him by saying, “The prayer!” The women and children have slept. Then the Prophet came out and said, 'None amongst the dwellers of the earth has been waiting for it (the prayer) except you.” Urwa said, “Nowhere except in Medina the prayer used to be offered (in those days).” He further said, “The Prophet used to offer the 'Isha' prayer in the period between the disappearance of the twilight and the end of the first third of the night.”


## Hadith 1:545

_Narrated Ibn Juraij from Nafi:_

'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, “Once Allah's Apostle was busy (at the time of the 'Isha'), so the prayer was delayed so much so that we slept and woke up and slept and woke up again. The Prophet came out and said, 'None amongst the dwellers of the earth but you have been waiting for the prayer.” Ibn 'Umar did not find any harm in praying it earlier or in delaying it unless he was afraid that sleep might overwhelm him and he might miss the prayer, and sometimes he used to sleep before the 'Isha' prayer. Ibn Juraij said, “I said to 'Ata', 'I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying: Once Allah's Apostle delayed the 'Isha' prayer to such an extent that the people slept and got up and slept again and got up again. Then 'Umar bin Al-Khattab I, stood up and reminded the Prophet I of the prayer.' 'Ata' said, 'Ibn 'Abbas said: The Prophet came out as if I was looking at him at this time, and water was trickling from his head and he was putting his hand on his head and then said, 'Hadn't I thought it hard for my followers, I would have ordered them to pray ('Isha' prayer) at this time.' I asked 'Ata' for further information, how the Prophet had kept his hand on his head as he was told by Ibn 'Abbas. 'Ata' separated his fingers slightly and put their tips on the side of the head, brought the fingers downwards approximating them till the thumb touched the lobe of the ear at the side of the temple and the beard on the face. He neither slowed nor hurried in this action but he acted like that.” The Prophet said: “Hadn't I thought it hard for my followers I would have ordered them to pray at this time.”


## Hadith 1:546

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet delayed the'lsha' prayer till midnight and then he offered the prayer and said, “The people prayed and slept but you have been in prayer as long as you have been waiting for it (the prayer).” Anas added: As if I am looking now at the glitter of the ring of the Prophet on that night.


## Hadith 1:547

_Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah:_

We were with the Prophet on a full moon night. He looked at the moon and said, "You will certainly see your Lord as you see this moon, and there will be no trouble in seeing Him. So if you can avoid missing (through sleep, business, etc.) a prayer before the rising of the sun (Fajr) and before its setting ('Asr) you must do so. He (the Prophet ) then recited the following verse:

And celebrate the praises Of Your Lord before The rising of the sun And before (its) setting." (50.39)


## Hadith 1:548

_Narrated Abu Bakr bin Abi Musa:_

My father said, “Allah's Apostle said, 'Whoever prays the two cool prayers ('Asr and Fajr) will go to Paradise.' ”


## Hadith 1:549

_Narrated Anas:_

Zaid bin Thabit said, “We took the ”Suhur“ (the meal taken before dawn while fasting is observed) with the Prophet and then stood up for the (morning) prayer.” I asked him how long the interval between the two (Suhur and prayer) was. He replied, 'The interval between the two was just sufficient to recite fifty to Sixth 'Ayat."


## Hadith 1:550

_Narrated Qatada:_

Anas bin Malik said, “The Prophet and Zaid bin Thabit took the 'Suhur' together and after finishing the meal, the Prophet stood up and prayed (Fajr prayer).” I asked Anas, “How long was the interval between finishing their 'Suhur' and starting the prayer?” He replied, “The interval between the two was just sufficient to recite fifty 'Ayat.” (Verses of the Quran)."


## Hadith 1:551

_Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:_

I used to take the “Suhur” meal with my family and hasten so as to catch the Fajr (morning prayer) with Allah's Apostle


## Hadith 1:552

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The believing women covered with their veiling sheets used to attend the Fajr prayer with Allah's Apostle, and after finishing the prayer they would return to their home and nobody could recognize them because of darkness.


## Hadith 1:553

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever could get one Rak'a (of the Fajr prayer) before sunrise, he has got the (morning) prayer and whoever could get one Rak'a of the'Asr prayer before sunset, he has got the ('Asr) prayer.”


## Hadith 1:554

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever could get one Rak'a of a prayer, (in its proper time) he has got the prayer.”


## Hadith 1:555

_Narrated 'Umar:_

“The Prophet forbade praying after the Fajr prayer till the sun rises and after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets.”


## Hadith 1:556

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Some people told me the same narration (as above).


## Hadith 1:557

_Narrated Hisham's father:_

Ibn 'Umar said, “Allah's Apostle said, 'Do not pray at the time of sunrise and at the time of sunset.' ” Ibn 'Umar said, “Allah's Apostle said, 'If the edge of the sun appears (above the horizon) delay the prayer till it becomes high, and if the edge of the sun disappears, delay the prayer till it sets (disappears completely).' ”


## Hadith 1:558

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle forbade two kinds of sales, two kinds of dresses, and two prayers. He forbade offering prayers after the Fajr prayer till the rising of the sun and after the 'Asr prayer till its setting. He also forbade “Ishtimal-Assama” and “al-Ihtiba” in one garment in such a way that one's private parts are exposed towards the sky. He also forbade the sales called “Munabadha” and “Mulamasa.” (See Hadith No. 354 and 355 Vol. 3).


## Hadith 1:559

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “None of you should try to pray at sunrise or sunset.”


## Hadith 1:560

_Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “There is no prayer after the morning prayer till the sun rises, and there is no prayer after the Asr prayer till the sun sets.”


## Hadith 1:561

_Narrated Muawiya:_

You offer a prayer which I did not see being offered by Allah's Apostle when we were in his company and he certainly had forbidden it (i.e. two Rakat after the Asr prayer).


## Hadith 1:562

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the offering of two prayers:

1\. after the morning prayer till the sunrises.

2\. after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets.


## Hadith 1:563

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

I pray as I saw my companions praying. I do not forbid praying at any time during the day or night except at sunset and sunrise.


## Hadith 1:564

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

By Allah, Who took away the Prophet. The Prophet never missed them (two Rakat) after the 'Asr prayer till he met Allah and he did not meet Allah till it became heavy for him to pray while standing so he used to offer most of the prayers while sitting. (She meant the two Rakat after Asr) He used to pray them in the house and never prayed them in the mosque lest it might be hard for his followers and he loved what was easy for them .


## Hadith 1:565

_Narrated Hisham's father:_

'Aisha (addressing me) said, “O son of my sister! The Prophet never missed two prostrations (i.e. Rakat) after the 'Asr prayer in my house.”


## Hadith 1:566

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle never missed two Rakat before the Fajr prayer and after the Asr prayer openly and secretly.


## Hadith 1:567

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Whenever the Prophet come to me after the 'Asr prayer, he always prayed two Rakat.


## Hadith 1:568

_Narrated Ibn Abu Malih:_

I was with Buraida on a cloudy day and he said, “Offer the 'Asr prayer earlier as the Prophet said, 'Whoever leaves the 'Asr prayer will have all his (good) deeds annulled.” (See Hadith No. 527 and 528)


## Hadith 1:569

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:_

My father said, “One night we were traveling with the Prophet and some people said, 'We wish that Allah's Apostle would take a rest along with us during the last hours of the night.' He said, 'I am afraid that you will sleep and miss the (Fajr) prayer.' Bilal said, 'I will make you get up.' So all slept and Bilal rested his back against his Rahila and he too was overwhelmed (by sleep) and slept. The Prophet got up when the edge of the sun had risen and said, 'O Bilal! What about your statement?' He replied, 'I have never slept such a sleep.' The Prophet said, 'Allah captured your souls when He wished, and released them when He wished. O Bilal! Get up and pronounce the Adhan for the prayer.' The Prophet performed ablution and when the sun came up and became bright, he stood up and prayed.”


## Hadith 1:570

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

On the day of Al-Khandaq (the battle of trench.) 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came cursing the disbelievers of Quraish after the sun had set and said, “O Allah's Apostle I could not offer the 'Asr prayer till the sun had set.” The Prophet said, “By Allah! I, too, have not prayed.” So we turned towards Buthan, and the Prophet performed ablution and we too performed ablution and offered the 'Asr prayer after the sun had set, and then he offered the Maghrib prayer.


## Hadith 1:571

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “If anyone forgets a prayer he should pray that prayer when he remembers it. There is no expiation except to pray the same.” Then he recited: “Establish prayer for My (i.e. Allah's) remembrance.” (20.14).


## Hadith 1:572

_Narrated Jabir:_

Umar came cursing the disbelievers (of Quraish) on the day of Al-Khandaq (the battle of Trench) and said, "I could not offer the 'Asr prayer till the sun had set. Then we went to Buthan and he offered the ('Asr) prayer after sunset and then he offered the Maghrib prayer.


## Hadith 1:573

_Narrated Abu-l-Minhal:_

My father and I went to Abi Barza Al-Aslami and my father said to him, “Tell us how Allah's Apostle used to offer the compulsory congregational prayers.” He said, “He used to pray the Zuhr prayer, which you call the first prayer, as the sun declined at noon, the 'Asr at a time when one of US could go to his family at the farthest place in Medina while the sun was still hot. (The narrator forgot what Abu Barza had said about the Maghrib prayer), and the Prophet preferred to pray the 'Isha' late and disliked to sleep before it or talk after it. And he used to return after finishing the morning prayer at such a time when it was possible for one to recognize the person sitting by his side and he (the Prophet) used to recite 60 to 100 'Ayat' (verses) of the Qur'an in it.”


## Hadith 1:574

_Narrated Qurra bin Khalid:_

Once he waited for Al-Hasan and he did not show up till it was about the usual time for him to start his speech; then he came and apologized saying, “Our neighbors invited us.” Then he added, or about midnight. He came and led the prayer, and after finishing it, he addressed us and said, 'All the people prayed and then slept and you had been in prayer as long as you were waiting for it." Al-Hasan said, “The people are regarded as performing good deeds as long as they are waiting for doing good deeds.” Al-Hasan's statement is a portion of Anas's Hadith from the Prophet .


## Hadith 1:575

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

The Prophet prayed one of the'lsha' prayer in his last days and after finishing it with Taslim, he stood up and said, "Do you realize (the importance of) this night? Nobody present on the

surface of the earth to-night would be living after the completion of one hundred years from this night."

The people made a mistake in grasping the meaning of this statement of Allah's Apostle and they indulged in those things which are said about these narrators (i.e. some said that the Day of Resurrection will be established after 100 years etc.) But the Prophet said, “Nobody present on the surface of earth tonight would be living after the completion of 100 years from this night”; he meant “When that century (people of that century) would pass away.”


## Hadith 1:576

_Narrated Abu 'Uthman:_

'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Bakr said, “The Suffa Companions were poor people and the Prophet said, 'Whoever has food for two persons should take a third one from them (Suffa companions). And whosoever has food for four persons he should take one or two from them' Abu Bakr took three men and the Prophet took ten of them.”

'Abdur Rahman added, my father my mother and I were there (in the house). (The sub-narrator is in doubt whether 'Abdur Rahman also said, 'My wife and our servant who was common for both my house and Abu Bakr's house). Abu Bakr took his supper with the Prophet and remained there till the 'Isha' prayer was offered. Abu Bakr went back and stayed with the Prophet till the Prophet took his meal and then Abu Bakr returned to his house after a long portion of the night had passed. Abu Bakr's wife said, 'What detained you from your guests (or guest)?' He said, 'Have you not served them yet?' She said, ‘They refused to eat until you come. The food was served for them but they refused.’ 'Abdur Rahman added, "I went away and hid myself (being afraid of Abu Bakr) and in the meantime he (Abu Bakr) called me, 'O Ghunthar (a harsh word)!' and also called me bad names and abused me and then said (to his family), 'Eat. No welcome for you.' Then (the supper was served). Abu Bakr took an oath that he would not eat that food. The narrator added: By Allah, whenever any one of us (myself and the guests of Suffa companions) took anything from the food, it increased from underneath. We all ate to our fill and the food was more than it was before its serving.

Abu Bakr looked at it (the food) and found it as it was before serving or even more than that. He addressed his wife (saying) 'O the sister of Bani Firas! What is this?' She said, 'O the pleasure of my eyes! The food is now three times more than it was before.' Abu Bakr ate from it, and said, 'That (oath) was from Satan' meaning his oath (not to eat). Then he again took a morsel (mouthful) from it and then took the rest of it to the Prophet. So that meal was with the Prophet. There was a treaty between us and some people, and when the period of that treaty had elapsed the Prophet divided us into twelve (groups) (the Prophet's companions) each being headed by a man. Allah knows how many men were under the command of each (leader). So all of them (12 groups of men) ate of that meal."


## Hadith 1:577

_Narrated Anas:_

The people mentioned the fire and the bell (they suggested those as signals to indicate the starting of prayers), and by that they mentioned the Jews and the Christians. Then Bilal was ordered to pronounce Adhan for the prayer by saying its wordings twice, and for the Iqama (the call for the actual standing for the prayers in rows) by saying its wordings once. (Iqama is pronounced when the people are ready for the prayer).


## Hadith 1:578

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

When the Muslims arrived at Medina, they used to assemble for the prayer, and used to guess the time for it. During those days, the practice of Adhan for the prayers had not been introduced yet. Once they discussed this problem regarding the call for prayer. Some people suggested the use of a bell like the Christians, others proposed a trumpet like the horn used by the Jews, but 'Umar was the first to suggest that a man should call (the people) for the prayer; so Allah's Apostle ordered Bilal to get up and pronounce the Adhan for prayers.


## Hadith 1:579

_Narrated Anas:_

Bilal was ordered to repeat the wording of the Adhan for prayers twice, and to pronounce the wording of the Iqamas once except “Qad-qamat-is-Salat”.


## Hadith 1:580

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

When the number of Muslims increased they discussed the question as to how to know the time for the prayer by some familiar means. Some suggested that a fire be lit (at the time of the prayer) and others put forward the proposal to ring the bell. Bilal was ordered to pronounce the wording of Adhan twice and of the Iqama once only.


## Hadith 1:581

_Narrated Abu Qilaba:_

Anas said, “Bilal was ordered to pronounce the wording of Adhan twice and of Iqama once only.” The sub narrator Isma'li said, "I mentioned that to Aiyub and he added (to that), “Except Iqama (i.e. Qad-Qamatis-Salat which should be said twice).”


## Hadith 1:582

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When the Adhan is pronounced Satan takes to his heels and passes wind with noise during his flight in order not to hear the Adhan. When the Adhan is completed he comes back and again takes to his heels when the Iqama is pronounced and after its completion he returns again till he whispers into the heart of the person (to divert his attention from his prayer) and makes him remember things which he does not recall to his mind before the prayer and that causes him to forget how much he has prayed.”


## Hadith 1:583

_Narrated 'Abdul Rahman:_

Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri told my father, “I see you liking sheep and the wilderness. So whenever you are with your sheep or in the wilderness and you want to pronounce Adhan for the prayer raise your voice in doing so, for whoever hears the Adhan, whether a human being, a jinn or any other creature, will be a witness for you on the Day of Resurrection.” Abu Said added, “I heard it (this narration) from Allah's Apostle.”


## Hadith 1:584

_Narrated Humaid:_

Anas bin Malik said, “Whenever the Prophet went out with us to fight (in Allah's cause) against any nation, he never allowed us to attack till morning and he would wait and see: if he heard Adhan he would postpone the attack and if he did not hear Adhan he would attack them.” Anas added, "We reached Khaibar at night and in the morning when he did not hear the Adhan for the prayer, he (the Prophet ) rode and I rode behind Abi Talha and my foot was touching that of the Prophet.

The inhabitants of Khaibar came out with their baskets and spades and when they saw the Prophet they shouted 'Muhammad! By Allah, Muhammad and his army.' When Allah's Apostle saw them, he said, “Allahu-Akbar! Allahu-Akbar! Khaibar is ruined. Whenever we approach a (hostile) nation (to fight), then evil will be the morning of those who have been warned.”


## Hadith 1:585

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Allah's Apostle said, "Whenever you hear the Adhan, say what the Mu'adhdhin is saying.


## Hadith 1:586

_Narrated 'Isa bin Talha:_

that he had heard Muawiya repeating the words of Adhan up to “Wa ash-hadu Anna Muhammadan Rasulul-lah (and I testify that Muhammad is Allah's Apostle.)”


## Hadith 1:587

_Narrated Yahya as above (586) and added:_

“Some of my companions told me that Hisham had said, ”When the Mu'adhdhin said, “Haiya alas-sala(t) (come for the prayer).” Muawiya said, “La hawla wala quwata illa billah (There is neither might nor any power except with Allah)” and added, “We heard your Prophet saying the same.”


## Hadith 1:588

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever after listening to the Adhan says, 'Allahumma Rabba hadhihi-d-da' watit-tammati was-salatil qa'imati, ati Muhammadan al-wasilata wal-fadilata, wab' athhu maqaman mahmudan-il-ladhi wa' adtahu (O Allah! Lord of this perfect call (of not ascribing partners to You) and of the regular prayer which is going to be established! Kindly give Muhammad the right of intercession and superiority and send him (on the Day of Judgment) to the best and the highest place in Paradise which You promised him)', then intercession for me will be permitted for him on the Day of Resurrection”).


## Hadith 1:589

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If the people knew the reward for pronouncing the Adhan and for standing in the first row (in congregational prayers) and found no other way to get that except by drawing lots they would draw lots, and if they knew the reward of the Zuhr prayer (in the early moments of its stated time) they would race for it (go early) and if they knew the reward of 'Isha' and Fajr (morning) prayers in congregation, they would come to offer them even if they had to crawl.”


## Hadith 1:590

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Al-Harith:_

Once on a rainy muddy day, Ibn 'Abbas delivered a sermon in our presence and when the Mu'adhdhin pronounced the Adhan and said, “Haiya ala-s-sala(t) (come for the prayer)” Ibn 'Abbas ordered him to say 'Pray at your homes.' The people began to look at each other (surprisingly). Ibn 'Abbas said. "It was done by one who was much better than I (i.e. the Prophet or his Mu'adhdhin), and it is a license.'


## Hadith 1:591

_Narrated Salim bin Abdullah:_

My father said that Allah s Apostle said, “Bilal pronounces 'Adhan at night, so keep on eating and drinking (Suhur) till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces Adhan.” Salim added, “He was a blind man who would not pronounce the Adhan unless he was told that the day had dawned.”


## Hadith 1:592

_Narrated Hafsa:_

When the Muadh-dhin pronounced the Adhan for Fajr prayer and the dawn became evident the Prophet ordered a two Rakat light prayer (Sunna) before the Iqama of the compulsory (congregational) prayer.


## Hadith 1:593

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to offer two light Rakat between the Adhan and the Iqama of the Fajr prayer.


## Hadith 1:594

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Bilal pronounces the Adhan at night, so keep on eating and drinking (Suhur) till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces the Adhan.”


## Hadith 1:595

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:_

The Prophet said, “The Adhan pronounced by Bilal should not stop you from taking Suhur, for he pronounces the Adhan at night, so that the one offering the late night prayer (Tahajjud) from among you might hurry up and the sleeping from among you might wake up. It does not mean that dawn or morning has started.” Then he (the Prophet) pointed with his fingers and raised them up (towards the sky) and then lowered them (towards the earth) like this (Ibn Mas'ud imitated the gesture of the Prophet). Az-Zuhri gestured with his two index fingers which he put on each other and then stretched them to the right and left. These gestures illustrate the way real dawn appears. It spreads left and right horizontally. The dawn that appears in the high sky and lowers down is not the real dawn) .


## Hadith 1:596

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “Bilal pronounces the Adhan at night, so eat and drink (Suhur) till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces the Adhan.”


## Hadith 1:597

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal Al-Muzani:_

Allah's Apostle said thrice, “There is a prayer between the two Adhans (Adhan and Iqama),” and added, “For the one who wants to pray.”


## Hadith 1:598

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

“When the Mu'adhdhin pronounced the Adhan, some of the companions of the Prophet would proceed to the pillars of the mosque (for the prayer) till the Prophet arrived and in this way they used to pray two Rakat before the Maghrib prayer. There used to be a little time between the Adhan and the Iqama.” Shu'ba said, “There used to be a very short interval between the two (Adhan and Iqama).”


## Hadith 1:599

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to pray two light Rakat before the morning (compulsory) prayer after the day dawned and the Mu'adhdhin had finished his Adhan. He then would lie on his right side till the Mu'adhdhin came to pronounce the Iqama.


## Hadith 1:600

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal:_

The prophet said, “There is a prayer between the two Adhans (Adhan and Iqama), there is a prayer between the two Adhans.” And then while saying it the third time he added, “For the one who wants to (pray).”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_500">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:401 to 1:500</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_700">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:601 to 1:700</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
