---
title: "Hadith 1:601 to 1:700"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_600">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:501 to 1:600</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_800">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:701 to 1:800</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 1:601

_Narrated Malik bin Huwairth:_

I came to the Prophet with some men from my tribe and stayed with him for twenty nights. He was kind and merciful to us. When he realized our longing for our families, he said to us, “Go back and stay with your families and teach them the religion, and offer the prayer and one of you should pronounce the Adhan for the prayer when its time is due and the oldest one amongst you should lead the prayer.”


## Hadith 1:602

_Narrated Abu Dhar:_

We were in the company of the Prophet on a journey and the Mu'adhdhin wanted to pronounce the Adhan for the (Zuhr) prayer. The Prophet said to him, “Let it become cooler.” Then he again wanted to pronounce the Adhan but the Prophet; said to him, “Let it become cooler.” The Mu'adh-dhin again wanted to pronounce the Adhan for the prayer but the Prophet said, “Let it become cooler,” till the shadows of the hillocks become equal to their sizes. The Prophet added, “The severity of the heat is from the raging of Hell.”


## Hadith 1:603

_Narrated Malik bin Huwairth:_

Two men came to the Prophet with the intention of a journey. The Prophet said, “When (both of) you set out, pronounce Adhan and then Iqama and the oldest of you should lead the prayer.”


## Hadith 1:604

_Narrated Malik:_

We came to the Prophet and stayed with him for twenty days and nights. We were all young and of about the same age. The Prophet was very kind and merciful. When he realized our longing for our families, he asked about our homes and the people there and we told him. Then he asked us to go back to our families and stay with them and teach them (the religion) and to order them to do good things. He also mentioned some other things which I have (remembered or) forgotten. The Prophet then added, "Pray as you have seen me praying and when it is the time for the prayer one of you should pronounce the Adhan and the oldest of you should lead the prayer.


## Hadith 1:605

_Narrated Nafi:_

Once in a cold night, Ibn 'Umar pronounced the Adhan for the prayer at ,Dajnan (the name of a mountain) and then said, “Pray at your homes”, and informed us that Allah's Apostle used to tell the Mu'adhdin to pronounce Adhan and say, “Pray at your homes” at the end of the Adhan on a rainy or a very cold night during the journey."


## Hadith 1:606

_Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:_

My father said, “I saw Allah's Apostle at a place called Al-Abtah. Bilal came and informed him about the prayer and then came out with an Anza and planted it in front of Allah's Apostle at Al-Abtah and pronounced the Iqama.”


## Hadith 1:607

_Narrated 'Aun bin Abi Juhaifa:_

My father said, “I saw Bilal turning his face from side to side while pronouncing the Adhan for the prayer.”


## Hadith 1:608

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:_

My father said, “While we were praying with the Prophet he heard the noise of some people. After the prayer he said, 'What is the matter?' They replied 'We were hurrying for the prayer.' He said, 'Do not make haste for the prayer, and whenever you come for the prayer, you should come with calmness, and pray whatever you get (with the people) and complete the rest which you have missed.”


## Hadith 1:609

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, "When you hear the Iqama, proceed to offer the prayer with calmness and solemnity and do not make haste. And pray whatever you are able to pray and complete whatever you have missed.


## Hadith 1:610

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:_

My father said. “Allah's Apostle said, 'If the Iqama is pronounced then do not stand for the prayer till you see me (in front of you).' ”


## Hadith 1:611

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi:_

Qatada, My father said, “Allah's Apostle said, 'If the Iqama is pronounced, then do not stand for the prayer till you see me (in front of you) and do it calmly.' ”


## Hadith 1:612

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle went out (of the mosque) when the Iqama had been pronounced and the rows straightened. The Prophet stood at his Musalla (praying place) and we waited for the Prophet to begin the prayer with Takbir. He left and asked us to remain in our places. We kept on standing till the Prophet returned and the water was trickling from his head for he had taken a bath (of Janaba).


## Hadith 1:613

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Once iqama was pronounced and the people had straightened the rows, Allah's Apostle went forward (to lead the prayer) but he was Junub, so he said, “Remain in your places.” And he went out, took a bath and returned with water trickling from his head. Then he led the prayer.


## Hadith 1:614

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

On the day of Al-Khandaq (the trench), 'Umar bin Al-Khattab went to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, I could not pray (the 'Asr) till the sun had set.” 'Umar told this to the Prophet at the time when a fasting person had done Iftar (taken his meals). The Prophet then went to Buthan and I was with him. He performed ablution and offered the 'Asr prayer after the sun had set and then the Maghrib prayer.


## Hadith 1:615

_Narrated Anas:_

Once the Iqama was pronounced and the Prophet was talking to a man (in a low voice) in a corner of the mosque and he did not lead the prayer till (some of) the people had slept (dozed in a sitting posture) .


## Hadith 1:616

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Once Iqama was pronounced a man came to the Prophet and detained him (from the prayer).


## Hadith 1:617

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hand my soul is I was about to order for collecting fire-wood (fuel) and then order Someone to pronounce the Adhan for the prayer and then order someone to lead the prayer then I would go from behind and burn the houses of men who did not present themselves for the (compulsory congregational) prayer. By Him, in Whose Hands my soul is, if anyone of them had known that he would get a bone covered with good meat or two (small) pieces of meat present in between two ribs, he would have turned up for the 'Isha' prayer.'


## Hadith 1:618

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The prayer in congregation is twenty seven times superior to the prayer offered by person alone.”


## Hadith 1:619

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

The Prophet said, “The prayer in congregation is twenty five times superior to the prayer offered by person alone.”


## Hadith 1:620

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The reward of the prayer offered by a person in congregation is twenty five times greater than that of the prayer offered in one's house or in the market (alone). And this is because if he performs ablution and does it perfectly and then proceeds to the mosque with the sole intention of praying, then for every step he takes towards the mosque, he is upgraded one degree in reward and his one sin is taken off (crossed out) from his accounts (of deeds). When he offers his prayer, the angels keep on asking Allah's Blessings and Allah's forgiveness for him as long as he is (staying) at his Musalla. They say, 'O Allah! Bestow Your blessings upon him, be Merciful and kind to him.' And one is regarded in prayer as long as one is waiting for the prayer.”


## Hadith 1:621

_Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur Rahman:_

Abu Huraira said, “I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'The reward of a prayer in congregation is twenty five times greater than that of a prayer offered by a person alone. The angels of the night and the angels of the day gather at the time of Fajr prayer.' ” Abu Huraira then added, “Recite the Holy Book if you wish, for ”Indeed, the recitation of the Qur'an in the early dawn (Fajr prayer) is ever witnessed." (17.18).

is twenty seven times greater (than that of the prayer offered by a person alone).


## Hadith 1:622

_Narrated Salim:_

I heard Um Ad-Darda' saying, “Abu Ad-Darda' entered the house in an angry mood. I said to him. 'What makes you angry?' He replied, 'By Allah! I do not find the followers of Muhammad doing those good things (which they used to do before) except the offering of congregational prayer.” (This happened in the last days of Abu Ad-Darda' during the rule of 'Uthman) .


## Hadith 1:623

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

The Prophet said, “The people who get tremendous reward for the prayer are those who are farthest away (from the mosque) and then those who are next farthest and so on. Similarly one who waits to pray with the Imam has greater reward than one who prays and goes to bed. ”


## Hadith 1:624

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “While a man was going on a way, he saw a thorny branch and removed it from the way and Allah became pleased by his action and forgave him for that.” Then the Prophet said, “Five are martyrs: One who dies of plague, one who dies of an abdominal disease, one who dies of drowning, one who is buried alive (and) dies and one who is killed in Allah's cause.” (The Prophet further said, "If the people knew the reward for pronouncing the Adhan and for standing in the first row (in the congregational prayer) and found no other way to get it except by drawing lots they would do so, and if they knew the reward of offering the Zuhr prayer early (in its stated time), they would race for it and they knew the reward for 'Isha' and Fajr prayers in congregation, they would attend them even if they were to crawl')


## Hadith 1:625

_Narrated Humaid:_

Anas said, “The Prophet said, 'O Bani Salima! Don't you think that for every step of yours (that you take towards the mosque) there is a reward (while coming for prayer)?” Mujahid said: “Regarding Allah's Statement: ”We record that which they have sent before (them), and their traces“ (36.12). 'Their traces' means 'their steps.' ” And Anas said that the people of Bani Salima wanted to shift to a place near the Prophet but Allah's Apostle disliked the idea of leaving their houses uninhabited and said, “Don't you think that you will get the reward for your footprints.” Mujahid said, “Their foot prints mean their foot steps and their going on foot.”


## Hadith 1:626

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “No prayer is harder for the hypocrites than the Fajr and the 'Isha' prayers and if they knew the reward for these prayers at their respective times, they would certainly present themselves (in the mosques) even if they had to c awl.” The Prophet added, “Certainly I decided to order the Mu'adh-dhin (call-maker) to pronounce Iqama and order a man to lead the prayer and then take a fire flame to burn all those who had not left their houses so far for the prayer along with their houses.”


## Hadith 1:627

_Narrated Malik bin Huwairith:_

Prophet said (to two persons), “Whenever the prayer time becomes due, you should pronounce Adhan and then Iqama and the older of you should lead the prayer.”


## Hadith 1:628

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The angels keep on asking for Allah's Blessing and Forgiveness for anyone of you as long as he is at his Musalla (praying place) and does not do Hadath (passes wind). The angels say, 'O Allah! Forgive him and be Merciful to him.' Each one of you is in the prayer as long as he is waiting for the prayer and nothing but the prayer detains him from going to his family.”


## Hadith 1:629

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Allah will give shade, to seven, on the Day when there will be no shade but His. (These seven persons are) a just ruler, a youth who has been brought up in the worship of Allah (i.e. worships Allah sincerely from childhood), a man whose heart is attached to the mosques (i.e. to pray the compulsory prayers in the mosque in congregation), two persons who love each other only for Allah's sake and they meet and part in Allah's cause only, a man who refuses the call of a charming woman of noble birth for illicit intercourse with her and says: I am afraid of Allah, a man who gives charitable gifts so secretly that his left hand does not know what his right hand has given (i.e. nobody knows how much he has given in charity), and a person who remembers Allah in seclusion and his eyes are then flooded with tears.”


## Hadith 1:630

_Narrated Humaid:_

Anas was asked, “Did Allah's Apostle wear a ring?” He said, “Yes. Once he delayed the 'Isha' prayer till mid-night and after the prayer, he faced us and said, 'The people prayed and have slept and you remained in prayer as long as you waited for it.' ” Anas added, “As if I were just now observing the glitter of his ring.”


## Hadith 1:631

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, "Allah will prepare for him who goes to the mosque (every) morning and in the afternoon (for the congregational prayer) an honorable place in Paradise with good hospitality for (what he has done) every morning and afternoon goings.


## Hadith 1:632

_Narrated Malik Ibn Buhaina:_

Allah's Apostle passed by a man praying two Rakat after the Iqama (had been pronounced). When Allah's Apostle completed the prayer, the people gathered around him (the Prophet) or that man and Allah's Apostle said to him (protesting), Are there four Rakat in Fajr prayer? Are there four Rakat in Fajr prayer?"


## Hadith 1:633

_Narrated Al-Aswad:_

“We were with 'Aisha discussing the regularity of offering the prayer and dignifying it. She said, 'When Allah's Apostle fell sick with the fatal illness and when the time of prayer became due and Adhan was pronounced, he said, 'Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer.' He was told that Abu Bakr was a soft-hearted man and would not be able to lead the prayer in his place. The Prophet gave the same order again but he was given the same reply. He gave the order for the third time and said, 'You (women) are the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer.' So Abu Bakr came out to lead the prayer. In the meantime the condition of the Prophet improved a bit and he came out with the help of two men one on each side. As if I was observing his legs dragging on the ground owing to the disease. Abu Bakr wanted to retreat but the Prophet beckoned him to remain at his place and the Prophet was brought till he sat beside Abu Bakr.” Al-A'mash was asked, “Was the Prophet praying and Abu Bakr following him, and were the people following Abu Bakr in that prayer?” Al-A'mash replied in the affirmative with a nod of his head. Abu Muawiya said, “The Prophet was sitting on the left side of Abu Bakr who was praying while standing.”


## Hadith 1:634

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

“When the Prophet became seriously ill and his disease became aggravated he asked for permission from his wives to be nursed in my house and he was allowed. He came out with the help of two men and his legs were dragging on the ground. He was between Al-Abbas and another man.”

'Ubaid Ullah said, “I told Ibn 'Abbas what 'Aisha had narrated and he said, 'Do you know who was the (second) man whose name 'Aisha did not mention'” I said, 'No.' Ibn 'Abbas said, 'He was 'Ali Ibn Abi Talib.' "


## Hadith 1:635

_Narrated Nafi':_

Once on a very cold and stormy night, Ibn 'Umar pronounced the Adhan for the prayer and then said, “Pray in your homes.” He (Ibn 'Umar) added. “On very cold and rainy nights Allah's Apostle used to order the Mu'adhdhin to say, 'Pray in your homes.' ”


## Hadith 1:636

_Narrated Mahmuid bin Rabi' Al-Ansari:_

'Itban bin Malik used to lead his people (tribe) in prayer and was a blind man, he said to Allah's Apostle , “O Allah's Apostle! At times it is dark and flood water is flowing (in the valley) and I am blind man, so please pray at a place in my house so that I can take it as a Musalla (praying place).” So Allah's Apostle went to his house and said, “Where do you like me to pray?” 'Itban pointed to a place in his house and Allah's Apostle, offered the prayer there.


## Hadith 1:637

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Al-Harith:_

Ibn Abbas addressed us on a (rainy and) muddy day and when the Mu'adh-dhin said, “Come for the prayer” Ibn 'Abbas ordered him to say, “Pray in your homes.” The people began to look at one another with surprise as if they did not like it. Ibn 'Abbas said, “It seems that you thought ill of it but no doubt it was done by one who was better than I (i.e. the Prophet). It (the prayer) is a strict order and I disliked to bring you out.”

Ibn 'Abbas narrated the same as above but he said, “I did not like you to make you sinful (in refraining from coming to the mosque) and to come (to the mosque) covered with mud up to the knees.”


## Hadith 1:638

_Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:_

A cloud came and it rained till the roof started leaking and in those days the roof used to be of the branches of date-palms. Iqama was pronounced and I saw Allah's Apostles prostrating in water and mud and even I saw the mark of mud on his forehead.


## Hadith 1:639

_Narrated Anas bin Sirin:_

I heard Anas saying, “A man from Ansar said to the Prophet, 'I cannot pray with you (in congregation).' He was a very fat man and he prepared a meal for the Prophet and invited him to his house. He spread out a mat for the Prophet, and washed one of its sides with water, and the Prophet prayed two Rakat on it.” A man from the family of Al-Jaruid asked, “Did the Prophet used to pray the Duha (forenoon) prayer?” Anas said, “I did not see him praying the Duha prayer except on that day.”


## Hadith 1:640

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “If supper is served, and Iqama is pronounced one should start with the supper.”


## Hadith 1:641

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If the supper is served start having it before praying the Maghrib prayer and do not be hasty in finishing it.”


## Hadith 1:642

_Narrated Nafi':_

Ibn 'Umar said, “Allah's Apostle said, 'If the supper is served for anyone of you and the Iqama is pronounced, start with the supper and don't be in haste (and carry on eating) till you finish it.” If food was served for Ibn 'Umar and Iqama was pronounced, he never came to the prayer till he finished it (i.e. food) in spite of the fact that he heard the recitation (of the Qur'an) by the Imam (in the prayer). meals, he should not hurry up till he is; satisfied even if the prayer has been started."


## Hadith 1:643

_Narrated Ja'far bin 'Amr bin Umaiya:_

My father said, "I saw Allah's Apostle eating a piece of meat from the shoulder of a sheep and he was called for the prayer. He stood up, put down the knife and prayed but did not perform ablutilon.''


## Hadith 1:644

_Narrated Al-Aswad:_

That he asked 'Aisha “What did the Prophet use to do in his house?” She replied, “He used to keep himself busy serving his family and when it was the time for prayer he would go for it.”


## Hadith 1:645

_Narrated Aiyub:_

Abu Qilaba said, “Malik bin Huwairith came to this Mosque of ours and said, 'I pray in front of you and my aim is not to lead the prayer but to show you the way in which the Prophet used to pray.' ” I asked Abu Qilaba,“How did he use to pray?' ” He replied, “(The Prophet used to pray) like this Sheikh of ours and the Sheikh used to sit for a while after the prostration, before getting up after the first Rak'a. ”


## Hadith 1:646

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

“The Prophet became sick and when his disease became aggravated, he said, ”Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer.“ 'Aisha said, ”He is a soft-hearted man and would not be able to lead the prayer in your place.“ The Prophet said again, ”Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer.“ She repeated the same reply but he said, ”Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer. You are the companions of Joseph." So the messenger went to Abu Bakr (with that order) and he led the people in prayer in the lifetime of the Prophet.


## Hadith 1:647

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

the mother of the believers: Allah's Apostle in his illness said, “Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer.” I said to him, “If Abu Bakr stands in your place, the people would not hear him owing to his (excessive) weeping. So please order 'Umar to lead the prayer.” 'Aisha added I said to Hafsa, “Say to him: If Abu Bakr should lead the people in the prayer in your place, the people would not be able to hear him owing to his weeping; so please, order 'Umar to lead the prayer.” Hafsa did so but Allah's Apostle said, “Keep quiet! You are verily the Companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer. ” Hafsa said to 'Aisha, “I never got anything good from you.”


## Hadith 1:648

_Narrated Az-Zuhn:_

Anas bin Malik Al-Ansari, told me, “Abu Bakr used to lead the people in prayer during the fatal illness of the Prophet till it was Monday. When the people aligned (in rows) for the prayer the Prophet lifted the curtain of his house and started looking at us and was standing at that time. His face was (glittering) like a page of the Qur'an and he smiled cheerfully. We were about to be put to trial for the pleasure of seeing the Prophet, Abu Bakr retreated to join the row as he thought that the Prophet would lead the prayer. The Prophet beckoned us to complete the prayer and he let the curtain fall. On the same day he died.”


## Hadith 1:649

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet did not come out for three days. The people stood for the prayer and Abu Bakr went ahead to lead the prayer. (In the meantime) the Prophet caught hold of the curtain and lifted it. When the face of the Prophet appeared we had never seen a scene more pleasing than the face of the Prophet as it appeared then. The Prophet beckoned to Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer and then let the curtain fall. We did not see him (again) till he died.


## Hadith 1:650

_Narrated Hamza bin 'Abdullah:_

My father said, “When Allah's Apostle became seriously ill, he was told about the prayer. He said, 'Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer.' 'Aisha said, 'Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted man and he would be over-powered by his weeping if he recited the Qur'an.' He said to them, 'Tell him (Abu Bakr) to lead the prayer. The same reply was given to him. He said again, 'Tell him to lead the prayer. You (women) are the companions of Joseph.”


## Hadith 1:651

_Narrated 'Urwa's father:_

'Aisha said, “Allah's Apostle ordered Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer during his illness and so he led them in prayer.” 'Urwa, a sub narrator, added, “Allah's Apostle felt a bit relieved and came out and Abu Bakr was leading the people. When Abu Bakr saw the Prophet he retreated but the Prophet beckoned him to remain there. Allah's Apostle sat beside Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr was following the prayer of Allah's Apostle and the people were following the prayer of Abu Bakr.”


## Hadith 1:652

_Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd As-Sa'idi:_

Allah's Apostle went to establish peace among Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf. In the meantime the time of prayer was due and the Mu'adh-dhin went to Abu Bakr and said, “Will you lead the prayer, so that I may pronounce the Iqama?” Abu Bakr replied in the affirmative and led the prayer. Allah's Apostle came while the people were still praying and he entered the rows of the praying people till he stood in the (first row). The people clapped their hands. Abu Bakr never glanced sideways in his prayer but when the people continued clapping, Abu Bakr looked and saw Allah's Apostle. Allah's Apostle beckoned him to stay at his place. Abu Bakr raised his hands and thanked Allah for that order of Allah's Apostle and then he retreated till he reached the first row. Allah's Apostle went forward and led the prayer. When Allah's Apostle finished the prayer, he said, “O Abu Bakr! What prevented you from staying when I ordered you to do so?”

Abu Bakr replied, “How can Ibn Abi Quhafa (Abu Bakr) dare to lead the prayer in the presence of Allah's Apostle?” Then Allah's Apostle said, “Why did you clap so much? If something happens to anyone during his prayer he should say Subhan Allah. If he says so he will be attended to, for clapping is for women.”


## Hadith 1:653

_Narrated Malik bin Huwairth:_

We went to the Prophet and we were all young men and stayed with him for about twenty nights. The Prophet was very merciful. He said, “When you return home, impart religious teachings to your families and tell them to offer perfectly such and such a prayer at such and such a time and such and such a prayer at such and such a time. And al the time of the prayer one of you should pronounce the Adhan and the oldest of you should lead the prayer.”


## Hadith 1:654

_Narrated Itban bin Malik Al-Ansari:_

The Prophet (came to my house and) asked permission for entering and I allowed him. He asked, “Where do you like me to pray in your house?” I pointed to a place which I liked. He stood up for prayer and we aligned behind him and he finished the prayer with Taslim and we did the same.


## Hadith 1:655

_Narrated 'Ubaid-Ullah Ibn 'Abdullah bin 'Utba:_

I went to 'Aisha and asked her to describe to me the illness of Allah's Apostle. 'Aisha said, “Yes. The Prophet became seriously ill and asked whether the people had prayed. We replied, 'No. O Allah's Apostle! They are waiting for you.' He added, 'Put water for me in a trough.” 'Aisha added, “We did so. He took a bath and tried to get up but fainted. When he recovered, he again asked whether the people had prayed. We said, 'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle,' He again said, 'Put water in a trough for me.' He sat down and took a bath and tried to get up but fainted again. Then he recovered and said, 'Have the people prayed?' We replied, 'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle.' He said, 'Put water for me in the trough.' Then he sat down and washed himself and tried to get up but he fainted. When he recovered, he asked, 'Have the people prayed?' We said, 'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle! The people were in the mosque waiting for the Prophet for the 'Isha prayer. The Prophet sent for Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer. The messenger went to Abu Bakr and said, 'Allah's Apostle orders you to lead the people in the prayer.' Abu Bakr was a soft-hearted man, so he asked 'Umar to lead the prayer but 'Umar replied, 'You are more rightful.' So Abu Bakr led the prayer in those days. When the Prophet felt a bit better, he came out for the Zuhr prayer with the help of two persons one of whom was Al-'Abbas. while Abu Bakr was leading the people in the prayer. When Abu Bakr saw him he wanted to retreat but the Prophet beckoned him not to do so and asked them to make him sit beside Abu Bakr and they did so. Abu Bakr was following the Prophet (in the prayer) and the people were following Abu Bakr. The Prophet (prayed) sitting.”

'Ubaid-Ullah added "I went to 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas and asked him, Shall I tell you what Aisha has told me about the fatal illness of the Prophet?' Ibn 'Abbas said, 'Go ahead. I told him her narration and he did not deny anything of it but asked whether 'Aisha told me the name of the second person (who helped the Prophet ) along with Al-Abbas. I said. 'No.' He said, 'He was 'Ali (Ibn Abi Talib).


## Hadith 1:656

_Narrated Aisha:_

the mother of the believers: Allah's Apostle during his illness prayed at his house while sitting whereas some people prayed behind him standing. The Prophet beckoned them to sit down. On completion of the prayer, he said, 'The Imam is to be followed: bow when he bows, raise up your heads (stand erect) when he raises his head and when he says, 'Sami a-l-lahu liman-hamida ' (Allah heard those who sent praises to Him) say then 'Rabbana wa laka-l-hamd' (O our Lord! All the praises are for You), and if he prays sitting then pray sitting."


## Hadith 1:657

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Once Allah's Apostle rode a horse and fell down and the right side (of his body) was injured. He offered one of the prayers while sitting and we also prayed behind him sitting. When he completed the prayer, he said, “The Imam is to be followed. Pray standing if he prays standing and bow when he bows; rise when he rises; and if he says, 'Sami a-l-lahu-liman hamida, say then, 'Rabbana wa Lakal-hamd' and pray standing if he prays standing and pray sitting (all of you) if he prays sitting.”

Humaid said: The saying of the Prophet “Pray sitting, if he (Imam) prays sitting” was said in his former illness (during his early life) but the Prophet prayed sitting afterwards (in the last illness) and the people were praying standing behind him and the Prophet did not order them to sit. We should follow the latest actions of the Prophet.


## Hadith 1:658

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

(and he was not a liar) When Allah's Apostle said, “Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida ” none of us bent his back (for prostrations) till the Prophet prostrated and then we would prostrate after him.


## Hadith 1:659

_Narrated Abu Ishaq:_

as above.


## Hadith 1:660

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Isn't he who raises his head before the Imam afraid that Allah may transform his head into that of a donkey or his figure (face) into that of a donkey?”


## Hadith 1:661

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

When the earliest emigrants came to Al-'Usba a place in Quba', before the arrival of the Prophet- Salim, the slave of Abu Hudhaifa, who knew the Qur'an more than the others used to lead them in prayer.


## Hadith 1:662

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “Listen and obey (your chief) even if an Ethiopian whose head is like a raisin were made your chief.”


## Hadith 1:663

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If the Imam leads the prayer correctly then he and you will receive the rewards but if he makes a mistake (in the prayer) then you will receive the reward for the prayer and the sin will be his.”


## Hadith 1:664

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said to Abu-Dhar, “Listen and obey (your chief) even if he is an Ethiopian with a head like a raisin.”


## Hadith 1:665

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Once I passed the night in the house of my aunt Maimuna. Allah's Apostle offered the 'Isha' prayer and then came to the house and offered four Rakat an slept. Later on, he woke up and stood for the prayer and I stood on his left side. He drew me to his right and prayed five Rakat and then two. He then slept till I heard him snoring (or heard his breath sounds). Afterwards he went out for the morning prayer.


## Hadith 1:666

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

One night I slept at the house of (my aunt) Maimuna and the Prophet was there on that night. He performed ablution and stood up for the prayer. I joined him and stood on his left side but he drew me to his right and prayed thirteen Rakat and then slept till I heard his breath sounds. And whenever he slept, he used to breathe with audible sounds. The Mu'adhdhin came to the Prophet and he went out and prayed the morning prayer) without repeating the ablution.


## Hadith 1:667

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Once I passed the night in the house of my aunt Maimuna. The Prophet stood for the night prayer and I joined him and stood on his left side but he drew me to his right by holding me by the head.


## Hadith 1:668

_Narrated Mu'adh bin Jabal:_

I used to pray the 'Isha prayer with the Prophet and then go to lead my people in the prayer.


## Hadith 1:669

_Narrated 'Amr:_

Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, “Mu'adh bin Jabal used to pray with the Prophet and then go to lead his people in prayer Once he led the 'Isha' prayer and recited Surat ”Al-Baqra.“ Somebody left the prayer and Mu'adh criticized him. The news reached the Prophet and he said to Mu'adh, 'You are putting the people to trial,' and repeated it thrice (or said something similar) and ordered him to recite two medium Suras of Mufassal.” ('Amr said that he had forgotten the names of those Suras).


## Hadith 1:670

_Narrated Abu Mas'ud:_

A man came and said, “O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, I keep away from the morning prayer only because So and so prolongs the prayer when he leads us in it.” The narrator said, “I never saw Allah's Apostle more furious in giving advice than he was at that time. He then said, ”Some of you make people dislike good deeds (the prayer). So whoever among you leads the people in prayer should shorten it because among them are the weak, the old and the needy."


## Hadith 1:671

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If anyone of you leads the people in the prayer, he should shorten it for amongst them are the weak, the sick and the old; and if anyone among your prays alone then he may prolong (the prayer) as much as he wishes. ”


## Hadith 1:672

_Narrated Abu Mas'ud:_

A man came and said, “O Allah's Apostle! I keep away from the morning prayer because so-and-so (Imam) prolongs it too much.” Allah's Apostle became furious and I had never seen him more furious than he was on that day. The Prophet said, "O people! Some of you make others dislike the prayer, so whoever becomes an Imam he should shorten the prayer, as behind him are the weak, the old and the needy.''


## Hadith 1:673

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari:_

Once a man was driving two Nadihas (camels used for agricultural purposes) and night had fallen. He found Mu'adh praying so he made his camel kneel and joined Mu'adh in the prayer. The latter recited Surat 'AlBaqara“ or Surat ”An-Nisa“, (so) the man left the prayer and went away. When he came to know that Mu'adh had criticized him, he went to the Prophet, and complained against Mu'adh. The Prophet said thrice, ”O Mu'adh ! Are you putting the people to trial?“ It would have been better if you had recited ”Sabbih Isma Rabbika-l-a-la (87)“, Wash-Shamsi wadu-haha (91)”, or “Wal-laili Idha yaghsha (92)”, for the old, the weak and the needy pray behind you." Jabir said that Mu'adh recited Sura Al-Baqara in the 'Isha' prayer.


## Hadith 1:674

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet used to pray a short prayer (in congregation) but used to offer it in a perfect manner.


## Hadith 1:675

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abi Qatada:_

My father said, “The Prophet said, 'When I stand for prayer, I intend to prolong it but on hearing the cries of a child, I cut it short, as I dislike to trouble the child's mother.' ”


## Hadith 1:676

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

I never prayed behind any Imam a prayer lighter and more perfect than that behind the Prophet and he used to cut short the prayer whenever he heard the cries of a child lest he should put the child's mother to trial.


## Hadith 1:677

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “When I start the prayer I intend to prolong it, but on hearing the cries of a child, I cut short the prayer because I know that the cries of the child will incite its mother's passions.”


## Hadith 1:678

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet, said, “Whenever I start the prayer I intend to prolong it, but on hearing the cries of a child, I cut short the prayer because I know that the cries of the child will incite its mother's passions.”


## Hadith 1:679

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Mu'adh used to pray with the Prophet and then go and lead his people (tribe) in the prayer.


## Hadith 1:680

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When the Prophet, became ill in his fatal illness, Someone came to inform him about the prayer, and the Prophet told him to tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer. I said, “Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted man and if he stands for the prayer in your place, he would weep and would not be able to recite the Qur'an.” The Prophet said, “Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer.” I said the same as before. He (repeated the same order and) on the third or the fourth time he said, “You are the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the prayer.” So Abu Bakr led the prayer and meanwhile the Prophet felt better and came out with the help of two men; as if I see him just now dragging his feet on the ground. When Abu Bakr saw him, he tried to retreat but the Prophet beckoned him to carry on. Abu Bakr retreated a bit and the Prophet sat on his (left) side. Abu Bakr was repeating the Takbir (Allahu Akbar) of Allah's Apostle for the people to hear.


## Hadith 1:681

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When Allah's Apostle became seriously ill, Bilal came to him for the prayer. He said, “Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer.” I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted man and if he stands in your place, he would not be able to make the people hear him. Will you order 'Umar (to lead the prayer)?” The Prophet said, “Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer.” Then I said to Hafsa, “Tell him, Abu i Bakr is a soft-hearted man and if he stands in his place, he would not be able to make the people hear him. Would you order 'Umar to lead the prayer?' ” Hafsa did so. The Prophet said, “Verily you are the companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer.” So Abu- Bakr stood for the prayer. In the meantime Allah's Apostle felt better and came out with the help of two persons and both of his legs were dragging on the ground till he entered the mosque. When Abu Bakr heard him coming, he tried to retreat but Allah's Apostle beckoned him to carry on. The Prophet sat on his left side. Abu Bakr was praying while standing and Allah's Apostle was leading the prayer while sitting. Abu Bakr was following the Prophet and the people were following Abu Bakr (in the prayer).


## Hadith 1:682

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Once Allah's Apostle prayed two Rakat (instead of four) and finished his prayer. Dhu-l-yadain asked him whether the prayer had been reduced or whether he had forgotten. Allah's Apostle asked the people whether Dhu-l-yadain was telling the truth. The people replied in the affirmative. Then Allah's Apostle stood up, offered the remaining two Rakat and then finished his prayer with Taslim and then said, “Allahu Akbar.” He followed it with two prostrations like ordinary prostrations or a bit longer.


## Hadith 1:683

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet prayed two Rakat of Zuhr prayer (instead of four) and he was told that he had prayed two Rakat only. Then he prayed two more Rakat and finished them with the Taslim followed by two prostrations.


## Hadith 1:684

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

the mother of the faithful believers: Allah's Apostle in his last illness said, “Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer.” I said, “If Abu Bakr stood in your place, he would not be able to make the people hear him owing to his weeping. So please order 'Umar to lead the prayer.” He said, “Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer.” I said to Hafsa, “Say to him, 'Abu Bakr is a softhearted man and if he stood in your place he would not be able to make the people hear him owing to his weeping. So order 'Umar to lead the people in the prayer.' ” Hafsa did so but Allah's Apostle said, “Keep quiet. Verily you are the companions of (Prophet) Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer.” Hafsa said to me, “I never got any good from you.”


## Hadith 1:685

_Narrated An-Nu'man bin 'Bashir:_

The Prophet said, “Straighten your rows or Allah will alter your faces.”


## Hadith 1:686

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, "Straighten your rows, for I see you from behind my back.'


## Hadith 1:687

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Once the Iqama was pronounced and Allah's Apostle faced us and said, "Straighten your rows and stand closer together, for I see you from behind my back.'


## Hadith 1:688

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Martyrs are those who die because of drowning, plague, an abdominal disease, or of being buried alive by a falling building.” And then he added, “If the people knew the Reward for the Zuhr prayer in its early time, they would race for it. If they knew the reward for the 'Isha' and the Fajr prayers in congregation, they would join them even if they had to crawl. If they knew the reward for the first row, they would draw lots for it.”


## Hadith 1:689

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The Imam is (appointed) to be followed. So do not differ from him, bow when he bows, and say, ”Rabbana-lakal hamd“ if he says ”Sami'a-l-lahu Liman hamida"; and if he prostrates, prostrate (after him), and if he prays sitting, pray sitting all together, and straighten the rows for the prayer, as the straightening of the rows is amongst those things which make your prayer a correct and perfect one. (See Hadith No. 657).


## Hadith 1:690

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Straighten your rows as the straightening of rows is essential for a perfect and correct prayer. ”


## Hadith 1:691

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

I arrived at Medina and was asked whether I found any change since the days of Allah's Apostle. I said, “I have not found any change except that you do not stand in alignment in your prayers.”


## Hadith 1:692

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Straighten your rows for I see you from behind my back.” Anas added, “Everyone of us used to put his shoulder with the shoulder of his companion and his foot with the foot of his companion.”


## Hadith 1:693

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

I prayed with the Prophet one night and stood on his left side. Allah's Apostle caught hold of my head from behind and drew me to his right and then offered the prayer and slept. Later the Mu'adh-dhin came and the Prophet stood up for prayer without performing ablution.


## Hadith 1:694

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

One night an orphan and I offered the prayers behind the Prophet in my house and my mother (Um Sulaim) was standing behind us (by herself forming a row).


## Hadith 1:695

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

One night I stood to the left of the Prophet in the prayer but he caught hold of me by the hand or by the shoulder (arm) till he made me stand on his right and beckoned with his hand (for me) to go from behind (him). (Al-Kashmaihani-Fateh al-Bari).


## Hadith 1:696

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to pray in his room at night. As the wall of the room was LOW, the people saw him and some of them stood up to follow him in the prayer. In the morning they spread the news. The following night the Prophet stood for the prayer and the people followed him. This went on for two or three nights. Thereupon Allah's Apostle did not stand for the prayer the following night, and did not come out. In the morning, the people asked him about it. He replied, that he way afraid that the night prayer might become compulsory.


## Hadith 1:697

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet had a mat which he used to spread during the day and use as a curtain at night. So a number of people gathered at night facing it and prayed behind him.


## Hadith 1:698

_Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:_

Allah's Apostle made a small room in the month of Ramadan (Sa'id said, “I think that Zaid bin Thabit said that it was made of a mat”) and he prayed there for a few nights, and so some of his companions prayed behind him. When he came to know about it, he kept on sitting. In the morning, he went out to them and said, “I have seen and understood what you did. You should pray in your houses, for the best prayer of a person is that which he prays in his house except the compulsory prayers.”


## Hadith 1:699

_Narrated Anas bin Malik Al-Ansari:_

Allah's Apostle rode a horse and fell down and the right side of his body was injured. On that day he prayed one of the prayers sitting and we also prayed behind him sitting. When the Prophet finished the prayer with Taslim, he said, “The Imam is to be followed and if he prays standing then pray standing, and bow when he bows, and raise your heads when he raises his head; prostrate when he prostrates; and if he says ”Sami'a-l-lahu Liman hamida“, you should say, ”Rabbana wa-laka-l hamd.:


## Hadith 1:700

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle fell from a horse and got injured so he led the prayer sitting and we also prayed sitting. When he completed the prayer he said, “The Imam is to be followed; if he says Takbir then say Takbir, bow if he bows; raise your heads when he raises his head, when he says, 'Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida say, 'Rabbana laka-l-hamd', and prostrate when he prostrates.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_600">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:501 to 1:600</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_800">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:701 to 1:800</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
