---
title: "Hadith 1:701 to 1:800"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_700">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:601 to 1:700</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_834">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:801 to 1:834</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 1:701

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The Imam is to be followed. Say the Takbir when he says it; bow if he bows; if he says ‘Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida’, say, ‘ Rabbana wa-laka-l-hamd’, prostrate if he prostrates and pray sitting altogether if he prays sitting.”


## Hadith 1:702

_Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah:_

My father said, “Allah's Apostle used to raise both his hands up to the level of his shoulders when opening the prayer; and on saying the Takbir for bowing. And on raising his head from bowing he used to do the same and then say ”Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida, Rabbana walaka-l-hamd." And he did not do that (i.e. raising his hands) in prostrations.


## Hadith 1:703

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

I saw that whenever Allah's Apostle stood for the prayer, he used to raise both his hands up to the shoulders, and used to do the same on saying the Takbir for bowing and on raising his head from it and used to say, “Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida”. But he did not do that (i.e. raising his hands) in prostrations.


## Hadith 1:704

_Narrated Abu Qilaba:_

I saw Malik bin Huwairith saying Takbir and raising both his hands (on starting the prayers and raising his hands on bowing and also on raising his head after bowing. Malik bin Huwairith said, “Allah's Apostle did the same.”


## Hadith 1:705

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

I saw Allah's Apostle opening the prayer with the Takbir and raising his hands to the level of his shoulders at the time of saying the Takbir, and on saying the Takbir for bowing he did the same; and when he said, “Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida ”, he did the same and then said, “Rabbana wa laka-l-hamd.” But he did not do the same on prostrating and on lifting the head from it."


## Hadith 1:706

_Narrated Nafi':_

Whenever Ibn 'Umar started the prayer with Takbir, he used to raise his hands: whenever he bowed, he used to raise his hands (before bowing) and also used to raise his hands on saying, “Sami a-l-lahu Liman hamida”, and he used to do the same on rising from the second Rak'a (for the 3rd Rak'a). Ibn 'Umar said: “The Prophet used to do the same.”


## Hadith 1:707

_Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:_

The people were ordered to place the right hand on the left forearm in the prayer. Abu Hazim said, “I knew that the order was from the Prophet .”


## Hadith 1:708

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “You see me facing the Qibla; but, by Allah, nothing is hidden from me regarding your bowing and submissiveness and I see you from behind my back.”


## Hadith 1:709

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Perform the bowing and the prostrations properly. By Allah, I see you from behind me (or from behind my back) when you bow or prostrate.”


## Hadith 1:710

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet, Abu Bakr and 'Umar used to start the prayer with “Al-hamdu lil-lahi Rabbil-'ala-min (All praises are for Allah the Lord of the Worlds).”


## Hadith 1:711

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle used to keep silent between the Takbir and the recitation of Qur'an and that interval of silence used to be a short one. I said to the Prophet “May my parents be sacrificed for you! What do you say in the pause between Takbir and recitation?” The Prophet said, “I say, 'Allahumma, ba'id baini wa baina khatayaya kama ba'adta baina-l-mashriqi wa-l-maghrib. Allahumma, naqqim min khatayaya kama yunaqqa-ththawbu-l-abyadu mina-ddanas. Allahumma, ighsil khatayaya bil-ma'i wa-th-thalji wal-barad (O Allah! Set me apart from my sins (faults) as the East and West are set apart from each other and clean me from sins as a white garment is cleaned of dirt (after thorough washing). O Allah! Wash off my sins with water, snow and hail.)”


## Hadith 1:712

_Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr:_

The Prophet once offered the eclipse prayer. He stood for a long time and then did a prolonged bowing. He stood up straight again and kept on standing for a long time, then bowed a long bowing and then stood up straight and then prostrated a prolonged prostration and then lifted his head and prostrated a prolonged prostration. And then he stood up for a long time and then did a prolonged bowing and then stood up straight again and kept on standing for a long time. Then he bowed a long bowing and then stood up straight and then prostrated a prolonged prostration and then lifted his head and went for a prolonged prostration. On completion o the prayer, he said, “Paradise became s near to me that if I had dared, I would have plucked one of its bunches for you and Hell became so near to me that said, ‘O my Lord will I be among those people?’ Then suddenly I saw a woman and a cat was lacerating her with it claws. On inquiring, it was said that the woman had imprisoned the cat till it died of starvation and she neither fed it no freed it so that it could feed itself.”


## Hadith 1:713

_Narrated Abu Ma'mar:_

We asked Khabbab whether Allah's Apostle used to recite (the Qur'an) in the Zuhr and the 'Asr prayers. He replied in the affirmative. We said, “How did you come to know about it?” He said, “By the movement of his beard.”


## Hadith 1:714

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

(And Al-Bara was not a liar) Whenever we offered prayer with the Prophet and he raised his head from the bowing, we used to remain standing till we saw him prostrating .


## Hadith 1:715

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

Once solar eclipse occurred during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle. He offered the eclipse prayer. His companions asked, “O Allah's Apostle! We saw you trying to take something while standing at your place and then we saw you retreating.” The Prophet said, “I was shown Paradise and wanted to have a bunch of fruit from it. Had I taken it, you would have eaten from it as long as the world remains.”


## Hadith 1:716

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet led us in prayer and then went up to the pulpit and beckoned with both hands towards the Qibla of the mosque and then said, “When I started leading you in prayer, I saw the display of Paradise and Hell on the wall of the mosque (facing the Qibla). I never saw good and bad as I have seen today.” He repeated the last statement thrice.


## Hadith 1:717

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “What is wrong with those people who look towards the sky during the prayer?” His talk grew stern while delivering this speech and he said, “They should stop (looking towards the sky during the prayer); otherwise their eye-sight would be taken away.”


## Hadith 1:718

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I asked Allah's Apostle about looking hither and thither in prayer. He replied, “It is a way of stealing by which Satan takes away (a portion) from the prayer of a person.”


## Hadith 1:719

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Once the Prophet prayed on a Khamisa with marks on it and said, “The marks on it diverted my attention, take this Khamisa to Abu Jahm and bring an Inbijaniya (from him.)”


## Hadith 1:720

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet saw expectoration in the direction of the Qibla of the mosque while he was leading the prayer, and scratched it off. After finishing the prayer, he said, “Whenever any of you is in prayer he should know that Allah is in front of him. So none should spit in front of him in the prayer.”


## Hadith 1:721

_Narrated Anas:_

While the Muslims were offering the Fajr prayer, Al lah's Apostle suddenly appeared before them by living the curtain of the dwelling place of 'Aisha, looked towards the Muslims who were standing in rows. He smiled with pleasure. Abu Bakr started retreating to join the row on the assumption that the Prophet wanted to come out for the prayer. The Muslims intended to leave the prayer (and were on the verge of being put to trial), but the Prophet beckoned them to complete their prayer and then he let the curtain fall. He died in the last hours of that day.


## Hadith 1:722

_Narrated Jabir bin Samura:_

The People of Kufa complained against Sa'd to 'Umar and the latter dismissed him and appointed 'Ammar as their chief . They lodged many complaints against Sa'd and even they alleged that he did not pray properly. 'Umar sent for him and said, “O Aba Ishaq! These people claim that you do not pray properly.” Abu Ishaq said, “By Allah, I used to pray with them a prayer similar to that of Allah's Apostle and I never reduced anything of it. I used to prolong the first two Rakat of 'Isha prayer and shorten the last two Rakat.” 'Umar said, “O Aba Ishaq, this was what I thought about you.” And then he sent one or more persons with him to Kufa so as to ask the people about him. So they went there and did not leave any mosque without asking about him. All the people praised him till they came to the mosque of the tribe of Bani 'Abs; one of the men called Usama bin Qatada with a surname of Aba Sa'da stood up and said, “As you have put us under an oath; I am bound to tell you that Sa'd never went himself with the army and never distributed (the war booty) equally and never did justice in legal verdicts.” (On hearing it) Sa'd said, “I pray to Allah for three things: O Allah! If this slave of yours is a liar and got up for showing off, give him a long life, increase his poverty and put him to trials.” (And so it happened). Later on when that person was asked how he was, he used to reply that he was an old man in trial as the result of Sa'd's curse. 'Abdul Malik, the sub narrator, said that he had seen him afterwards and his eyebrows were over-hanging his eyes owing to old age and he used to tease and assault the small girls in the way.


## Hadith 1:723

_Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever does not recite Al-Fatiha in his prayer, his prayer is invalid.”


## Hadith 1:724

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle entered the mosque and a person followed him. The man prayed and went to the Prophet and greeted him. The Prophet returned the greeting and said to him, “Go back and pray, for you have not prayed.” The man went back prayed in the same way as before, returned and greeted the Prophet who said, “Go back and pray, for you have not prayed.” This happened thrice. The man said, “By Him Who sent you with the Truth, I cannot offer the prayer in a better way than this. Please, teach me how to pray.” The Prophet said, "When you stand for Prayer say Takbir and then recite from the Holy Qur'an (of what you know by heart) and then bow till you feel at ease. Then raise your head and stand up straight, then prostrate till you feel at ease during your prostration, then sit with calmness till you feel at ease (do not hurry) and do the same in all your prayers


## Hadith 1:725

_Narrated Jabir bin Samura:_

Sa'd said, “I used to pray with them a prayer similar to that of Allah's Apostle (the prayer of Zuhr and 'Asr) reducing nothing from them. I used to prolong the first two Rakat and shorten the last two Rak'at.” 'Umar said to Sa'd “This was what we thought about you.”


## Hadith 1:726

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:_

My father said, "The Prophet in Zuhr prayers used to recite Al-Fatiha along with two other Suras in the first two Rakat: a long one in the first Rak'a and a shorter (Sura) in the second, and at times the verses were audible. In the 'Asr prayer the Prophet used to recite Al-Fatiha and two more Suras in the first two Rakat and used to prolong the first Rak'a. And he used to prolong the first Rak'a of the Fajr prayer and shorten the second.


## Hadith 1:727

_Narrated Abu Ma'mar:_

I asked Khabbab whether the Prophet used to recite the Qur'an in the Zuhr and the 'Asr prayers. He replied in the affirmative. We said, “How did you come to know that?” He said, “From the movement of his beard.”


## Hadith 1:728

_Narrated Abu Ma'mar:_

I asked Khabbab bin Al-Art whether the Prophet used to recite the Qur'an in the Zuhr and the 'Asr prayers. He replied in the affirmative. I said, “How did you come to know that?” He replied, “From the movement of his beard.”


## Hadith 1:729

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:_

My father said, “The Prophet used to recite Al-Fatiha along with another Sura in the first two Rakat of the Zuhr and the 'Asr prayers and at times a t verse or so was audible to us.”


## Hadith 1:730

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

(My mother) Umu-l-Fadl heard me reciting “Wal Mursalati 'Urfan” (77) and said, “O my son! By Allah, your recitation made me remember that it was the last Sura I heard from Allah's Apostle. He recited it in the Maghrib prayer. ”


## Hadith 1:731

_Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam:_

Zaid bin Thabit said to me, “Why do you recite very short S&ras in the Maghrib prayer while I heard the Prophet reciting the longer of the two long Suras?”


## Hadith 1:732

_Narrated Jubair bin Mut'im:_

My father said, “I heard Allah's Apostle reciting ”At-Tur“ (52) in the Maghrib prayer.”


## Hadith 1:733

_Narrated Abu Rafi:_

I offered the ‘Isha’ prayer behind Abu Huraira and he recited, “Idha-s-Sama'u-n-Shaqqat” (84) and prostrated. On my inquiring, he said, “I prostrated behind Abu-l-Qasim (the Prophet) (when he recited that Sura) and I will go on doing it till I meet him.”


## Hadith 1:734

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

The Prophet was on a journey and recited in one of the first two Rakat of the ‘Isha’ prayer “Wat-tini waz-zaituni.” (95)


## Hadith 1:735

_Narrated Abu Rafi':_

Once I prayed the ‘Isha’ prayer with Abu Huraira and he recited, “Idha-s-Sama' u-nShaqqat” (84) and prostrated. I said, “What is that?” He said, “I prostrated behind Abu-l-Qasim, (the Prophet) (when he recited that Sura) and I will go on doing it till I meet him.”


## Hadith 1:736

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

I heard the Prophet reciting wat-tini wazzaituni" (95) in the ‘Isha’ prayer, and I never heard a sweeter voice or a better way of recitation than that of the Prophet.


## Hadith 1:737

_Narrated Jabir bin Samura:_

'Umar said to Sa'd, “The people complained against you in everything, even in prayer.” Sa'd replied, “Really I used to prolong the first two Rakat and shorten the last two and I will never shorten the prayer in which I follow Allah's Apostle.” 'Umar said, “You are telling the truth and that is what I think a tout you.”


## Hadith 1:738

_Narrated Saiyar bin Salama:_

My father and I went to Abu Barza-al-Aslami to ask him about the stated times for the prayers. He replied, “The Prophet used to offer the Zuhr prayer when the sun just declined from its highest position at noon; the 'Asr at a time when if a man went to the farthest place in Medina (after praying) he would find the sun still hot (bright). (The sub narrator said: I have forgotten what Abu Barza said about the Maghrib prayer). The Prophet never found any harm in delaying the 'Isha' prayer to the first third of the night and he never liked to sleep before it and to talk after it. He used to offer the morning prayer at a time when after finishing it one could recognize the person sitting beside him and used to recite between 60 to 100 verses in one or both the Rakat.”


## Hadith 1:739

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Qur'an is recited in every prayer and in those prayers in which Allah's Apostle recited aloud for us, we recite aloud in the same prayers for you; and the prayers in which the Prophet recited quietly, we recite quietly. If you recite “Al-Fatiha” only it is sufficient but if you recite something else in addition, it is better.


## Hadith 1:740

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet set out with the intention of going to Suq 'Ukaz (market of 'Ukaz) along with some of his companions. At the same time, a barrier was put between the devils and the news of heaven. Fire commenced to be thrown at them. The Devils went to their people, who asked them, “What is wrong with you?” They said, “A barrier has been placed between us and the news of heaven. And fire has been thrown at us.” They said, “The thing which has put a barrier between you and the news of heaven must be something which has happened recently. Go eastward and westward and see what has put a barrier between you and the news of heaven.” Those who went towards Tuhama came across the Prophet at a place called Nakhla and it was on the way to Suq 'Ukaz and the Prophet was offering the Fajr prayer with his companions. When they heard the Qur'an they listened to it and said, “By Allah, this is the thing which has put a barrier between us and the news of heaven.” They went to their people and said, “O our people; verily we have heard a wonderful recital (Qur'an) which shows the true path; we believed in it and would not ascribe partners to our Lord.” Allah revealed the following verses to his Prophet (Sura 'Jinn') (72): “Say: It has been revealed to me.” And what was revealed to him was the conversation of the Jinns.


## Hadith 1:741

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet recited aloud in the prayers in which he was ordered to do so and quietly in the prayers in which he was ordered to do so. “And your Lord is not forgetful.” “Verily there was a good example for you in the ways of the Prophet.”


## Hadith 1:742

_Narrated Abu Wa'il:_

A man came to Ibn Mas'ud and said, “I recited the Mufassal (Suras) at night in one Rak'a.” Ibn Mas'ud said, “This recitation is (too quick) like the recitation of poetry. I know the identical Suras which the Prophet used to recite in pairs.” Ibn Mas'ud then mentioned 20 Mufassal Suras including two Suras from the family of (i.e. those verses which begin with) AL, HA, MIM (which the Prophet used to recite) in each Rak'a.


## Hadith 1:743

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:_

My father said, “The Prophet uses to recite Al-Fatiha followed by another Sura in the first two Rakat of the prayer and used to recite only Al-Fatiha in the last two Rakat of the Zuhr prayer. Sometimes a verse or so was audible and he used to prolong the first Rak'a more than the second and used to do the same in the 'Asr and Fajr prayers.”


## Hadith 1:744

_Narrated Abu Ma'mar:_

We said to Khabbab “Did Allah's Apostle used to recite in Zuhr and 'Asr prayers?” He replied in the affirmative. We said, “How did you come to know about it?” He said, “By the movement of his beard.”


## Hadith 1:745

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:_

My father said, “The Prophet used to recite Al-Fatiha along with another Sura in the first two Rakat of the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers. A verse or so was audible at times and he used to prolong the first Rak'a.”


## Hadith 1:746

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:_

My father said, “The Prophet used to prolong the first Rak'a of the Zuhr prayer and shorten the second one and used to do the same in the Fajr prayer.”


## Hadith 1:747

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Say Amin” when the Imam says it and if the Amin of any one of you coincides with that of the angels then all his past sins will be forgiven.“ Ibn Shihab said, ”Allah's Apostle used to Say “Amin.”


## Hadith 1:748

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If any one of you says, ”Amin“ and the angels in the heavens say ”Amin“ and the former coincides with the latter, all his past sins will be forgiven.”


## Hadith 1:749

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Say Amen' when the Imam says ”Ghair-il-maghdubi 'alaihim wala-ddal-lin; not the path of those who earn Your Anger (such as Jews) nor of those who go astray (such as Christians); all the past sins of the person whose saying (of Amin) coincides with that of the angels, will be forgiven.


## Hadith 1:750

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

I reached the Prophet in the mosque while he was bowing in prayer and I too bowed before joining the row mentioned it to the Prophet and he said to me, “May Allah increase your love for the good. But do not repeat it again (bowing in that way).”


## Hadith 1:751

_Narrated Imran bin Husain:_

I offered the prayer with 'Ali in Basra and he made us remember the prayer which we used to pray with Allah's Apostle. 'Ali said Takbir on each rising and bowing.


## Hadith 1:752

_Narrated Abu Salama:_

When Abu Huraira led us in prayer he used to say Takbir on each bowing and rising. On the completion of the prayer he used to say, “My prayer is more similar to the prayer of Allah's Apostle than that of anyone of you.”


## Hadith 1:753

_Narrated Mutarrif bin 'Abdullah:_

'Imran bin Husain and I offered the prayer behind Ali bin Abi Talib. When 'Ali prostrated, he said the Takbir, when he raised his head, he said the Takbir and when he got up for the third Rak'a he said the Takbir. On completion of the prayer Imran took my hand and said, “This (i.e. 'Ali) made me remember the prayer of Muhammad” Or he said, “He led us in a prayer like that of Muhammad.”


## Hadith 1:754

_Narrated 'Ikrima:_

I saw a person praying at Muqam-lbrahim (the place of Abraham by the Ka'ba) and he was saying Takbir on every bowing, rising, standing and sitting. I asked Ibn 'Abbas (about this prayer). He admonished me saying: “Isn't that the prayer of the Prophet?”


## Hadith 1:755

_Narrated 'Ikrima:_

I prayed behind a Sheikh at Mecca and he said twenty two Takbirs (during the prayer). I told Ibn 'Abbas that he (i.e. that Sheikh) was foolish. Ibn 'Abbas admonished me and said, “This is the tradition of Abu-l-Qasim.” And narrated Abu Huraira: Whenever Allah's Apostle stood for the prayer, he said Takbir on starting the prayer and then on bowing. On rising from bowing he said, “Sami' a-l-lahu liman hamida,” and then while standing straight he used to say, “Rabbana laka-l hamd” (Al-Laith said, “(The Prophet said), ‘Walaka-l-hamd’.” He used to say Takbir on prostrating and on raising his head from prostration; again he would Say Takbir on prostrating and raising his head. He would then do the same in the whole of the prayer till it was completed. On rising from the second Rak'a (after sitting for At-Tahiyyat), he used to say Takbir.


## Hadith 1:756

_Narrated Mus'ab bin Sa'd:_

I offered prayer beside my father and approximated both my hands and placed them in between the knees. My father told me not to do so and said, “We used to do the same but we were forbidden (by the Prophet) to do it and were ordered to place the hands on the knees.”


## Hadith 1:757

_Narrated Zaid binWahb:_

Hudhaifa saw a person who was not performing the bowing and prostrations perfectly. He said to him, “You have not prayed and if you should die you would die on a religion other than that of Muhammad.”


## Hadith 1:758

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

The bowing, the prostration the sitting in between the two prostrations and the standing after the bowing of the Prophet but not Qiyam (standing in the prayer) and Qu'ud (sitting in the prayer) used to be approximately equal (in duration).


## Hadith 1:759

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Once the Prophet entered the mosque, a man came in, offered the prayer and greeted the Prophet. The Prophet returned his greeting and said to him, “Go back and pray again for you have not prayed.” The man offered the prayer again, came back and greeted the Prophet. He said to him thrice, “Go back and pray again for you have not prayed.” The man said, “By Him Who has sent you with the truth! I do not know a better way of praying. Kindly teach Me how to pray.” He said, “When you stand for the prayer, say Takbir and then recite from the Qur'an what you know and then bow with calmness till you feel at ease, then rise from bowing till you stand straight. Afterwards prostrate calmly till you feel at ease and then raise (your head) and sit with Calmness till you feel at ease and then prostrate with calmness till you feel at ease in prostration and do the same in the whole of your prayer.”


## Hadith 1:760

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to say in his bowing and prostrations, “Subhanaka-Allahumma Rabbana wa-bihamdika Allahumma-ighfirli.' (I honor Allah from all what (unsuitable things) is ascribed to Him. O Allah Our Lord! And all the praises are for You. O Allah! Forgive me).”


## Hadith 1:761

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

When the Prophet said, “Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida,” (Allah heard those who sent praises to Him), he would say, “Rabbana wa-laka-l-hamd.” On bowing and raising his head from it the Prophet used to say Takbir. He also used to say Takbir on rising after the two prostrations. (See Hadith No. 656).


## Hadith 1:762

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When the Imam says, ”Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida,“ you should say, ”Allahumma Rabbana laka-l-hamd.“ And if the saying of any one of you coincides with that of the angels, all his past sins will be forgiven.”


## Hadith 1:763

_Narrated Anas:_

The Qunut used to be recited in the Maghrib and the Fajr prayers.


## Hadith 1:764

_Narrated Rifa'a bin Rafi AzZuraqi:_

One day we were praying behind the Prophet. When he raised his head from bowing, he said, “Sami'a-l-lahu Liman hamida.” A man behind him said, “Rabbana walaka-l hamd hamdan Kathiran taiyiban mubarakan fihi” (O our Lord! All the praises are for You, many good and blessed praises). When the Prophet completed the prayer, he asked, “Who has said these words?” The man replied, “I.” The Prophet said, “I saw over thirty angels competing to write it first.” Prophet rose (from bowing) and stood straight till all the vertebrae of his spinal column came to a natural position.


## Hadith 1:765

_Narrated Thabit:_

Anas used to demonstrate to us the prayer of the Prophet and while demonstrating, he used to raise his head from bowing and stand so long that we would say that he had forgotten (the prostration).


## Hadith 1:766

_Narrated Al-Bara':_

The bowing, the prostrations, the period of standing after bowing and the interval between the two prostrations of the Prophet used to be equal in duration .


## Hadith 1:767

_Narrated Aiyub:_

Abu Qilaba said, “Malik bin Huwairith used to demonstrate to us the prayer of the Prophet at times other than that of the compulsory prayers. So (once) he stood up for prayer and performed a perfect Qiyam (standing and reciting from the Holy Qur'an) and then bowed and performed bowing perfectly; then he raised his head and stood straight for a while.” Abu Qilaba added, “Malik bin Huwairith in that demonstration prayed like this Sheikh of ours, Abu Yazid.” Abu, Yazid used to sit (for a while) on raising his head from the second prostration before getting up.


## Hadith 1:768

_Narrated Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur Rahman Ibn Harith bin Hisham and Abu_

Salama bin 'Abdur Rahman:

Abu Huraira used to say Takbir in all the prayers, compulsory and optional — in the month of Ramadan or other months. He used to say Takbir on standing for prayer and on bowing; then he would say, “Salmi'a-l-lahu Liman hamida,” and before prostrating he would say “Rabbana walaka-l-hamd.” Then he would say Takbir on prostrating and on raising his head from the prostration, then another Takbir on prostrating (for the second time), and on raising his head from the prostration. He also would say the Takbir on standing from the second Rak'a. He used to do the same in every Rak'a till he completed the prayer. On completion of the prayer, he would say, “By Him in Whose Hands my soul is! No doubt my prayer is closer to that of Allah's Apostle than yours, and this was His prayer till he left this world.” And Abu Huraira said, “When Allah's Apostle raised his head from (bowing) he used to say ”Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida, Rabbana walakal-hamd.“ He Would invoke Allah for some people by naming them: ”O Allah! Save Al-Walid bin Al-Walid and Salama bin Hisham and 'Aiyash bin Abi Rabi'a and the weak and the helpless people among the faithful believers O Allah! Be hard on the tribe of Mudar and let them suffer from famine years like that of the time of Joseph." In those days the Eastern section of the tribe of Mudar was against the Prophet.


## Hadith 1:769

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle fell from a horse and the right side of his body was injured. We went to enquire about his health meanwhile it was time for the prayer and he led the prayer sitting and we also prayed while sitting. On completion of the prayer he said, “The Imam is to be followed; say Takbir when he says it; bow when he bows; rise when he rises and when he says ”Sami'a-l-lahu Liman hamida,“ say, ”Rabbana walaka-lhamd“, and prostrate if he prostrates.” Sufyan narrated the same from Ma'mar. Ibn Juraij said that his (the Prophet's) right leg had been injured.


## Hadith 1:770

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The people said, “O Allah's Apostle! Shall we see our Lord on the Day of Resurrection?” He replied, “Do you have any doubt in seeing the full moon on a clear (not cloudy) night?” They replied, “No, O Allah's Apostle!” He said, “Do you have any doubt in seeing the sun when there are no clouds?” They replied in the negative. He said, "You will see Allah (your Lord) in the same way. On the Day of Resurrection, people will be gathered and He will order the people to follow what they used to worship. So some of them will follow the sun, some will follow the moon, and some will follow other deities; and only this nation (Muslims) will be left with its hypocrites. Allah will come to them and say, ‘I am Your Lord.’ They will say, 'We shall stay in this place till our Lord comes to us and when our Lord will come, we will recognize Him. Then Allah will come to them again and say, ‘I am your Lord.’ They will say, ‘You are our Lord.’ Allah will call them, and As-Sirat (a bridge) will be laid across Hell and I (Muhammad) shall be the first amongst the Apostles to cross it with my followers. Nobody except the Apostles will then be able to speak and they will be saying then, ‘O Allah! Save us. O Allah Save us.’

There will be hooks like the thorns of Sa'dan in Hell. Have you seen the thorns of Sa'dan?“ The people said, ”Yes.“ He said, ”These hooks will be like the thorns of Sa'dan but nobody except Allah knows their greatness in size and these will entangle the people according to their deeds; some of them will fall and stay in Hell forever; others will receive punishment (torn into small pieces) and will get out of Hell, till when Allah intends mercy on whomever He likes amongst the people of Hell, He will order the angels to take out of Hell those who worshipped none but Him alone. The angels will take them out by recognizing them from the traces of prostrations, for Allah has forbidden the (Hell) fire to eat away those traces. So they will come out of the Fire, it will eat away from the whole of the human body except the marks of the prostrations. At that time they will come out of the Fire as mere skeletons. The Water of Life will be poured on them and as a result they will grow like the seeds growing on the bank of flowing water. Then when Allah had finished from the Judgments amongst his creations, one man will be left between Hell and Paradise and he will be the last man from the people of Hell to enter paradise. He will be facing Hell, and will say, 'O Allah! Turn my face from the fire as its wind has dried me and its steam has burnt me.' Allah will ask him, “Will you ask for anything more in case this favor is granted to you?' He will say, ”No by Your (Honor) Power!“ And he will give to his Lord (Allah) what he will of the pledges and the covenants. Allah will then turn his face from the Fire. When he will face Paradise and will see its charm, he will remain quiet as long as Allah will. He then will say, ‘O my Lord! Let me go to the gate of Paradise.’ Allah will ask him, ‘Didn't you give pledges and make covenants (to the effect) that you would not ask for anything more than what you requested at first?’ He will say, ‘O my Lord! Do not make me the most wretched, amongst Your creatures.’ Allah will say, ‘If this request is granted, will you then ask for anything else?’ He will say, ‘No! By Your Power! I shall not ask for anything else.’ Then he will give to his Lord what He will of the pledges and the covenants. Allah will then let him go to the gate of Paradise. On reaching then and seeing its life, charm, and pleasure, he will remain quiet as long as Allah wills and then will say, ‘O my Lord ! Let me enter Paradise.’ Allah will say, May Allah be merciful unto you, O son of Adam! How treacherous you are! Haven't you made covenants and given pledges that you will not ask for anything more that what you have been given?' He will say, ‘O my Lord! Do not make me the most wretched amongst Your creatures.’ So Allah will laugh and allow him to enter Paradise and will ask him to request as much as he likes. He will do so till all his desires have been fulfilled . Then Allah will say, ‘Request more of such and such things.’ Allah will remind him and when all his desires and wishes; have been fulfilled, Allah will say ”All this is granted to you and a similar amount besides.“ Abu Said Al-Khudri, said to Abu Huraira, 'Allah's Apostle said, ”Allah said, ‘That is for you and ten times more like it.’ “Abu Huraira said, ”I do not remember from Allah's Apostle except (his saying), 'All this is granted to you and a similar amount besides.“ Abu Sahd said, “I heard him saying, 'That is for you and ten times more the like of it.”


## Hadith 1:771

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik bin Buhaina:_

Whenever the Prophet used to offer prayer he used to keep arms away (from the body) so that the whiteness of his armpits was visible.


## Hadith 1:772

_Narrated Abu Wail:_

Hudhaifa said, “I saw a person not performing his bowing and prostrations perfectly. When he completed the prayer, I told him that he had not prayed.” I think that Hudhaifa added (i.e. said to the man), “Had you died, you would have died on a tradition other than that of the Prophet Muhammad.”


## Hadith 1:773

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet was ordered (by Allah) to prostrate on seven parts and not to tuck up the clothes or hair (while praying). Those parts are: the forehead (along with the tip of nose), both hands, both knees, and (toes of) both feet.


## Hadith 1:774

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “We have been ordered to prostrates on seven bones and not to tuck up the clothes or hair.”


## Hadith 1:775

_Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:_

(and he was not a liar) We used to pray behind the Prophet and when he said, “Sami' a-l-lahu Liman hamida”, none of us would bend his back (to go for prostration) till the Prophet had placed his, forehead on the ground.


## Hadith 1:776

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “I have been ordered to prostrate on seven bones i.e. on the forehead along with the tip of the nose and the Prophet pointed towards his nose, both hands, both knees and the toes of both feet and not to gather the clothes or the hair.”


## Hadith 1:777

_Narrated Abu Salama:_

Once I went to Abu- Sa'id Al-Khudri and asked him, “Won't you come with us to the date-palm trees to have a talk?” So Abu Said went out and I asked him, “Tell me what you heard from the Prophet about the Night of Qadr.” Abu Said replied, “Once Allah's Apostle performed I'tikaf (seclusion) on the first ten days of the month of Ramadan and we did the same with him. Gabriel came to him and said, ‘The night you are looking for is ahead of you.’ So the Prophet performed the I'tikaf in the middle (second) ten days of the month of Ramadan and we too performed I'tikaf with him. Gabriel came to him and said, ‘The night which you are looking for is ahead of you.’ In the morning of the 20th of Ramadan the Prophet delivered a sermon saying, 'Whoever has performed I'tikaf with me should continue it. I have been shown the Night of ”Qadr“, but have forgotten its date, but it is in the odd nights of the last ten nights. I saw in my dream that I was prostrating in mud and water.' In those days the roof of the mosque was made of branches of date-palm trees. At that time the sky was clear and no cloud was visible, but suddenly a cloud came and it rained. The Prophet led us in the prayer and I saw the traces of mud on the forehead and on the nose of Allah's Apostle. So it was the confirmation of that dream.”


## Hadith 1:778

_Narrated Sahl bin Sa'd:_

The people used to pray with the Prophet tying their Izars around their necks because of their small sizes and the women were directed that they should not raise their heads from the prostrations till the men had sat straight.


## Hadith 1:779

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet was ordered to prostrate on seven bony parts and not to tuck up his clothes or hair.


## Hadith 1:780

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “I have been ordered to prostrate on seven (bones) and not to tuck up the hair or garment.”


## Hadith 1:781

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to say frequently in his bowing and prostrations “Subhanaka-Allahumma Rabbana Wabihamdika, Allahumma Ighfir-li” (I honor Allah from all what (unsuitable things) is ascribed to Him, O Allah! Our Lord! All praises are for You. O Allah! Forgive me). In this way he was acting on what was explained to him in the Holy Qur'an.


## Hadith 1:782

_Narrated Abu Qilaba:_

Once Malik bin Huwairith said to his friends, “Shall I show you how Allah's Apostle used to offer his prayers?” And it was not the time for any of the compulsory congregational prayers. So he stood up (for the prayer) bowed and said the Takbir, then he raised his head and remained standing for a while and then prostrated and raised his head for a while (sat up for a while). He prayed like our Sheikh 'Amr Ibn Salama. (Aiyub said, “The latter used to do a thing which I did not see the people doing i.e. he used to sit between the third and the fourth Rak'a). IMalik bin Huwairith said, ”We came to the Prophet (after embracing Islam) and stayed with him. He said to us, 'When you go back to your families, pray such and such a prayer at such and such a time, pray such and such a prayer at such and such a time, and when there is the time for the prayer then only of you should pronounce the Adhan for the prayer and the oldest of you should lead the prayer."


## Hadith 1:783

_Narrated Al-Bara':_

The time taken by the Prophet in prostrations, bowing, and the sitting interval between the two prostrations was about the same.


## Hadith 1:784

_Narrated Thabit:_

Anas said, “I will leave no stone unturned in making you offer the prayer as I have seen the Prophet making us offer it.” Anas used to do a thing which I have not seen you doing. He used to stand after the bowing for such a long time that one would think that he had forgotten (the prostrations) and he used to sit in-between the prostrations so long that one would think that he had forgotten the second prostration.


## Hadith 1:785

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Be straight in the prostrations and none of you should put his forearms on the ground (in the prostration) like a dog.”


## Hadith 1:786

_Narrated Malik bin Huwairith Al-Laithi:_

I saw the Prophet praying and in the odd Rakat, he used to sit for a moment before getting up.


## Hadith 1:787

_Narrated Aiyub:_

Abu Qilaba said, “Malik bin Huwairith came to us and led us in the prayer in this mosque of ours and said, 'I lead you in prayer but I do not want to offer the prayer but just to show you how Allah's Apostle performed his prayers.” I asked Abu Qilaba, “How was the prayer of Malik bin Huwairith?” He replied, “Like the prayer of this Sheikh of ours— i.e. 'Amr bin Salima.” That Sheikh used to pronounce the Takbir perfectly and when he raised his head from the second prostration he would sit for a while and then support himself on the ground and get up.


## Hadith 1:788

_Narrated Said bin Al-Harith:_

Abu Said led us in the prayer and said the Takbir aloud on arising from the prostration, and on prostrating, on rising again, and on getting up from the second Rak'a. Abu Said said, “I saw the Prophet doing the same.”


## Hadith 1:789

_Narrated Mutarrif:_

'Imran and I prayed behind 'Ali bin Abi Talib and he said Takbir on prostrating, on rising and on getting up after the two Rakat (i.e. after the second Rak'a). When the prayer was finished, 'Imran took me by the hand and said, “He ('Ali) has prayed the prayer of Muhammad” (or said, “He made us remember the prayer of Muhammad).”


## Hadith 1:790

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah:_

I saw 'Abdullah bin 'Umar crossing his legs while sitting in the prayer and I, a mere youngster in those days, did the same. Ibn 'Umar forbade me to do so, and said, “The proper way is to keep the right foot propped up and bend the left in the prayer.” I said questioningly, “But you are doing so (crossing the legs).” He said, “My feet cannot bear my weight.”


## Hadith 1:791

_Narrated Muhammad bin 'Amr bin 'Ata':_

I was sitting with some of the companions of Allah's Apostle and we were discussing about the way of praying of the Prophet. Abu Humaid As-Saidi said, “I remember the prayer of Allah's Apostle better than any one of you. I saw him raising both his hands up to the level of the shoulders on saying the Takbir; and on bowing he placed his hands on both knees and bent his back straight, then he stood up straight from bowing till all the vertebrate took their normal positions. In prostrations, he placed both his hands on the ground with the forearms away from the ground and away from his body, and his toes were facing the Qibla. On sitting In the second Rak'a he sat on his left foot and propped up the right one; and in the last Rak'a he pushed his left foot forward and kept the other foot propped up and sat over the buttocks ”


## Hadith 1:792

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina:_

(he was from the tribe of Uzd Shan'u'a and was the ally of the tribe of 'Abdul-Manaf and was one of the companions of the Prophet): Once the Prophet led us in the Zuhr prayer and stood up after the second Rak'a and did not sit down. The people stood up with him. When the prayer was about to end and the people were waiting for him to say the Taslim, he said Takbir while sitting and prostrated twice before saying the Taslim and then he said the Taslim."


## Hadith 1:793

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Malik bin Buhaina:_

Once Allah's Apostle led us in the Zuhr prayer and got up (after the prostrations of the second Rak'a) although he should have sat (for the Tashah-hud). So at the end of the prayer, he prostrated twice while sitting (prostrations of Sahu).


## Hadith 1:794

_Narrated Shaqlq bin Salama:_

'Abdullah said, “Whenever we prayed behind the Prophet we used to recite (in sitting) 'Peace be on Gabriel, Michael, peace be on so and so. Once Allah's Apostle looked back at us and said, 'Allah Himself is As-Salam (Peace), and if anyone of you prays then he should say, At-Tahiyatu lil-lahi wassalawatu wat-taiyibatu. AsSalamu 'alalika aiyuha-n-Nabiyu wa rahmatu-l-lahi wa barakatuhu. As-Salam alaina wa ala ibadil-lah is-salihin. (All the compliments, prayers and good things are due to Allah: peace be on you, O Prophet and Allah's mercy and blessings be on you. Peace be on us an on the true pious slaves of Allah). (If you say that, it will be for all the slaves in the heaven and the earth). Ash-hadu an la-ilaha illa-l-lahu wa ash-hadu anna Muhammadan 'abduhu wa Rasuluhu. (I testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and I also testify that Muhammad is His slave and His Apostle).”


## Hadith 1:795

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to invoke Allah in the prayer saying “Allahumma inni a'udhu bika min adhabil-qabri, wa a'udhu bika min fitnatil-masihid-dajjal, wa a'udhu bika min fitnatil-mahya wa fitnatil-mamati. Allahumma inni a'udhu bika minal-ma thami wal-maghrami. (O Allah, I seek refuge with You from the punishment of the grave and from the afflictions of Masi,h Ad-Dajjal and from the afflictions of life and death. O Allah, I seek refuge with You from the sins and from being in debt).” Somebody said to him, “Why do you so frequently seek refuge with Allah from being in debt?” The Prophet replied, “A person in debt tells lies whenever he speaks, and breaks promises whenever he makes (them).” 'Aisha also narrated: I heard Allah's Apostle in his prayer seeking refuge with Allah from the afflictions of Ad-dajjal.


## Hadith 1:796

_Narrated Abu Bakr As-Siddiq:_

I asked Allah's Apostle to teach me an invocation so that I may invoke Allah with it in my prayer. He told me to say, “Allahumma inni zalumtu nafsi zulman kathiran, Wala yaghfirudhdhunuba illa anta faghfirli maghfiratan min 'Indika, war-hamni innaka antal-ghafururrahim (O Allah! I have done great injustice to myself and none except You forgives sins, so please forgive me and be Merciful to me as You are the Forgiver, the Merciful).”


## Hadith 1:797

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

When we prayed with the Prophet we used to say, “Peace be on Allah from His slaves and peace be on so and so.” The Prophet said, “Don't say As-Salam be on Allah, for He Himself is As-Salam, but say, 'At-tahiyatu lil-lahi was-salawatu wat-taiyibatu. As-salamu 'Alaika aiyuhan-Nabiyu warahmatu-l-lahi wa barakatuhu. As-salamu 'alaina wa 'ala ibadillahis-salihin. (If you say this then it will be for all the slaves in heaven or between heaven and earth). Ashhadu an la-ilaha illallahu wa ashhadu anna Muhammadan 'Abduhu wa Rasuluhu.' Then select the invocation you like best and recite it.” (See Hadith No. 794, 795 & 796).


## Hadith 1:798

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

I saw Allah's Apostle prostrating in mud and water and saw the mark of mud on his forehead.


## Hadith 1:799

_Narrated Um Salama:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle finished his prayers with Taslim, the women would get up and he would stay on for a while in his place before getting up. Ibn Shihab said, “I think (and Allah knows better), that the purpose of his stay was that the women might leave before the men who had finished their prayer. ”


## Hadith 1:800

_Narrated 'Itban bin Malik:_

We prayed with the Prophet and used to finish our prayer with the Taslim along with him.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_700">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:601 to 1:700</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_834">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 1:801 to 1:834</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
