---
title: "Hadith 1:801 to 1:834"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_800">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:701 to 1:800</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_100">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:1 to 2:100</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 1:801

_Narrated Mahmud bin Ar-Rabi':_

I remember Allah's Apostle and also the mouthful of water which he took from a bucket in our house and ejected (on me). I heard from ltban bin Malik Al-Ansari, who was one from Bani Salim, saying, “I used to lead my tribe of Bani Salim in prayer. Once I went to the Prophet and said to him, 'I have weak eye-sight and at times the rainwater flood intervenes between me and the mosque of my tribe and I wish that you would come to my house and pray at some place so that I could take that place as a place for praying (mosque). He said, ”Allah willing, I shall do that.“ Next day Allah's Apostle along with Abu Bakr, came to my house after the sun had risen high and he asked permission to enter. I gave him permission, but he didn't sit till he said to me, ”Where do you want me to pray in your house?“ I pointed to a place in the house where I wanted him to pray. So he stood up for the prayer and we aligned behind him. He completed the prayer with Taslim and we did the same simultaneously.”


## Hadith 1:802

_Narrated Abu Ma'bad:_

(the freed slave of Ibn 'Abbas) Ibn 'Abbas told me, “In the lifetime of the Prophet it was the custom to celebrate Allah's praises aloud after the compulsory congregational prayers.” Ibn 'Abbas further said, “When I heard the Dhikr, I would learn that the compulsory congregational prayer had ended.”


## Hadith 1:803

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

I used to recognize the completion of the prayer of the Prophet by hearing Takbir.


## Hadith 1:804

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Some poor people came to the Prophet and said, “The wealthy people will get higher grades and will have permanent enjoyment and they pray like us and fast as we do. They have more money by which they perform the Hajj, and 'Umra; fight and struggle in Allah's Cause and give in charity.” The Prophet said, “Shall I not tell you a thing upon which if you acted you would catch up with those who have surpassed you? Nobody would overtake you and you would be better than the people amongst whom you live except those who would do the same. Say ”Sub-han-al-lah“, ”Alhamdu-lillah“ and ”Allahu Akbar“ thirty three times each after every (compulsory) prayer.” We differed and some of us said that we should say, “Subhan-al-lah” thirty three times and “Alhamdu lillah” thirty three times and “Allahu Akbar” thirty four times. I went to the Prophet who said, “Say, ”Subhan-al-lah“ and ”Alhamdu lillah“ and ”Allahu Akbar“ all together for thirty three times.”


## Hadith 1:805

_Narrated Warrad:_

(the clerk of Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba) Once Al-Mughira dictated to me in a letter addressed to Mu'awiya that the Prophet used to say after every compulsory prayer, “La ilaha ilallah wahdahu la sharika lahu, lahul-mulku wa-lahul-hamdu, wahuwa ala kulli shai in qadir. Allahumma la mani 'a lima a'taita, wa la mu'tiya lima mana'ta, wa la yanfa'u dhal-jaddi minka-l-jadd. (None has the right to be worshipped but Allah and He has no partner in Lordship or in worship or in the Names and the Qualities, and for Him is the Kingdom and all the praises are for Him and He is omnipotent. O Allah! Nobody can hold back what you give and nobody can give what You hold back. Hard (efforts by anyone for anything cannot benefit one against Your Will).” And Al-Hasan said, “Al-jadd' means prosperity.”


## Hadith 1:806

_Narrated Samura bin Jundab:_

The Prophet used to face us on completion of the prayer.


## Hadith 1:807

_Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:_

The Prophet led us in the Fajr prayer at Hudaibiya after a rainy night. On completion of the prayer, he faced the people and said, “Do you know what your Lord has said (revealed)?” The people replied, “Allah and His Apostle know better.” He said, “Allah has said, 'In this morning some of my slaves remained as true believers and some became non-believers; whoever said that the rain was due to the Blessings and the Mercy of Allah had belief in Me and he disbelieves in the stars, and whoever said that it rained because of a particular star had no belief in Me but believes in that star.' ”


## Hadith 1:808

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Once the Prophet delayed the ‘Isha’ prayer until midnight and then came to us. Having prayed he faced us and said, “The people had prayed and slept but you were in the prayer as long as you were waiting for it.”


## Hadith 1:809

_Narrated Um Salama:_

“The Prophet after finishing the prayer with Taslim used to stay at his place for a while.” Ibn Shihab said, “I think (and Allah knows better), that he used to wait for the departure of the women who had prayed.” Ibn Shihab wrote that he had heard it from Hind bint Al-Harith Al-Firasiya from Um Salama, the wife of the Prophet (Hind was from the companions of Um Salama) who said, “When the Prophet finished the prayer with Taslim, the women would depart and enter their houses before Allah's Apostle departed.”


## Hadith 1:810

_Narrated 'Uqba:_

I offered the 'Asr prayer behind the Prophet at Medina. When he had finished the prayer with Taslim, he got up hurriedly and went out by crossing the rows of the people to one of the dwellings of his wives. The people got scared at his speed . The Prophet came back and found the people surprised at his haste and said to them, “I remembered a piece of gold Lying in my house and I did not like it to divert my attention from Allah's worship, so I have ordered it to be distributed (in charity).”


## Hadith 1:811

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

You should not give away a part of your prayer to Satan by thinking that it is necessary to depart (after finishing the prayer) from one's right side only; I have seen the Prophet often leave from the left side.


## Hadith 1:812

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

During the holy battle of Khaibar the Prophet said, “Whoever ate from this plant (i.e. garlic) should not enter our mosque.”


## Hadith 1:813

_Narrated 'Ata':_

I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, “The Prophet said, 'Whoever eats (from) this plant (he meant garlic) should keep away from our mosque.” I said, “What does he mean by that?” He replied, “I think he means only raw garlic.”


## Hadith 1:814

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever eats garlic or onion should keep away from our mosque or should remain in his house.” (Jabir bin 'Abdullah, in another narration said, “Once a big pot containing cooked vegetables was brought. On finding unpleasant smell coming from it, the Prophet asked, 'What is in it?' He was told all the names of the vegetables that were in it. The Prophet ordered that it should be brought near to some of his companions who were with him. When the Prophet saw it he disliked to eat it and said, 'Eat. (I don't eat) for I converse with those whom you don't converse with (i.e. the angels).”


## Hadith 1:815

_Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz:_

A man asked Anas, “What did you hear from the Prophet about garlic?” He said, “The Prophet said, 'Whoever has eaten this plant should neither come near us nor pray with us.”


## Hadith 1:816

_Narrated Sulaiman Ash-Shaibam:_

I heard Ash-Sha'bi saying, “A person who was accompanying the Prophet passed by a grave that was separated from the other graves told me that the Prophet once led the people in the (funeral) prayer and the people had aligned behind him. I said, ”O Aba 'Amr! Who told you about it?“ He said, ”Ibn Abbas."


## Hadith 1:817

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

The Prophet said, “Ghusl (taking a bath) on Friday is compulsory for every Muslim reaching the age of puberty.”


## Hadith 1:818

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

One night I slept at the house of my aunt Maimuna and the Prophet slept (too). He got up (for prayer) in the last hours of the night and performed a light ablution from a hanging leather skin. ('Amr, the sub-narrator described that the ablution was very light). Then he stood up for prayer and I got up too and performed the ablution in the same way and joined him on his left side. He pulled me to the right and prayed as much as Allah will. Then he lay down and slept and I heard his breath sounds till the Mu'adh-dhin came to him to inform him about the (Fajr) prayer. He left with him for the prayer and prayed without repeating the ablution. (Sufyan the subnarrator said: We said to 'Amr, “Some people say, ‘The eyes of the Prophet sleep but his heart never sleeps.’ ” 'Amr said, “'Ubai bin 'Umar said, 'The dreams of the Prophets are Divine Inspirations. Then he recited, '(O my son), I have seen in dream that I was slaughtering you (offering you in sacrifice).”) (37.102)


## Hadith 1:819

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

My grandmother Mulaika invited Allah's Apostle for a meal which she had prepared specially for him. He ate some of it and said, “Get up. I shall lead you in the prayer.” I brought a mat that had become black owing to excessive use and I sprinkled water on it. Allah's Apostle stood on it and prayed two Rakat; and the orphan was with me (in the first row), and the old lady stood behind us.


## Hadith 1:820

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Once I came riding a she-ass and I, then, had just attained the age of puberty. Allah's Apostle was leading the people in prayer at Mina facing no wall. I passed in front of the row and let loose the she-ass for grazing and joined the row and no one objected to my deed.


## Hadith 1:821

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Once Allah's Apostle delayed the 'Isha' prayer till 'Umar informed him that the women and children had slept. Then Allah's Apostle came out and said: “None from amongst the dwellers of earth have prayed this prayer except you.” In those days none but the people of Medina prayed.


## Hadith 1:822

_Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Abis:_

A person asked Ibn Abbas, “Have you ever presented yourself at the ('Id) prayer with Allah's Apostle?” He replied, “Yes.” And had it not been for my kinship (position) with the Prophet it would not have been possible for me to do so (for he was too young). The Prophet went to the mark near the house of Kathir bin As-Salt and delivered a sermon. He then went towards the women. He advised and reminded them and asked them to give alms. So the woman would bring her hand near her neck and take off her necklace and put it in the garment of Bilal. Then the Prophet and Bilal came to the house."


## Hadith 1:823

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Once Allah's Apostle delayed the 'Isha' prayer till 'Umar informed him that the women and children had slept. The Prophet came out and said, “None except you from amongst the dwellers of earth is waiting for this prayer.” In those days, there was no prayer except in Medina and they used to pray the ‘Isha’ prayer between the disappearance of the twilight and the first third of the night.


## Hadith 1:824

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “If your women ask permission to go to the mosque at night, allow them.”


## Hadith 1:825

_Narrated Um Salama:_

(the wife of the Prophet) In the lifetime of Allah's Apostle the women used to get up when they finished their compulsory prayers with Taslim. The Prophet and the men would stay on at their places as long as Allah will. When the Prophet got up, the men would then get up.


## Hadith 1:826

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When Allah's Apostle finished the Fajr prayer, the women would leave covered in their sheets and were not recognized owing to the darkness.


## Hadith 1:827

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada Al-Ansari:_

My father said, “Allah's Apostle said, ”Whenever I stand for prayer, I want to prolong it but on hearing the cries of a child, I would shorten it as I dislike to put its mother in trouble."


## Hadith 1:828

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Had Allah's Apostle known what the women were doing, he would have forbidden them from going to the mosque as the women of Bani Israel had been forbidden. Yahya bin Said (a sub-narrator) asked 'Amra (another sub-narrator), “Were the women of Bani Israel forbidden?” She replied “Yes.”


## Hadith 1:829

_Narrated Um Salama:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle completed the prayer with Taslim, the women used to get up immediately and Allah's Apostle would remain at his place for someone before getting up. (The sub-narrator (Az-Zuhri) said, “We think, and Allah knows better, that he did so, so that the women might leave before men could get in touch with them).”


## Hadith 1:830

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet prayed in the house of Um Sulaim; and I, along with an orphan stood behind him while Um Sulaim (stood) behind us.


## Hadith 1:831

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to offer the Fajr prayer when it was still dark and the believing women used to return (after finishing their prayer) and nobody could recognize them owing to darkness, or they could not recognize one another.


## Hadith 1:832

_Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah:_

My father said, “The Prophet said, 'If the wife of any one of you asks permission (to go to the mosque) do not forbid her.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/1_800">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 1:701 to 1:800</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_100">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:1 to 2:100</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
