---
title: "Hadith 2:101 to 2:200"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:1 to 2:100</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_300">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:201 to 2:300</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 2:101

_Narrated Jundab:_

On the day of Nahr the Prophet offered the prayer and delivered the Khutba and then slaughtered the sacrifice and said, “Anybody who slaughtered (his sacrifice) before the prayer should slaughter another animal in lieu of it, and the one who has not yet slaughtered should slaughter the sacrifice mentioning Allah's name on it.”


## Hadith 2:102

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

On the Day of 'Id the Prophet used to return (after offering the 'Id prayer) through a way different from that by which he went.


## Hadith 2:103

_Narrated 'Urwa on the authority of 'Aisha:_

On the days of Mina, (11th, 12th, and 13th of Dhul-Hijjah) Abu Bakr came to her while two young girls were beating the tambourine and the Prophet was lying covered with his clothes. Abu Bakr scolded them and the Prophet uncovered his face and said to Abu Bakr, “Leave them, for these days are the days of 'Id and the days of Mina.” 'Aisha further said, “Once the Prophet was screening me and I was watching the display of black slaves in the Mosque and ('Umar) scolded them. The Prophet said, 'Leave them. O Bani Arfida! (carry on), you are safe (protected)'.”


## Hadith 2:104

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet went out and offered a two Rakat prayer on the Day of 'Id ul Fitr and did not offer any other prayer before or after it and at that time Bilal was accompanying him.


## Hadith 2:105

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

Once a person asked Allah's Apostle about the night prayer. Allah's Apostle replied, “The night prayer is offered as two Rakat followed by two Rakat and so on and if anyone is afraid of the approaching dawn (Fajr prayer) he should pray one Raka and this will be a Witr for all the Rakat which he has prayed before.” Nafi' told that 'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to say Taslim between (the first) two Rakat and (the third) odd one in the Witr prayer, when he wanted to attend to a certain matter (during that interval between the Rakat).


## Hadith 2:106

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Once I passed the night in the house of Maimuna (his aunt). I slept across the bed while Allah's Apostle and his wife slept length-wise. The Prophet slept till midnight or nearly so and woke up rubbing his face and recited ten verses from Surat “Aal-Imran.” Allah's Apostle went towards a leather skin and performed ablution in the most perfect way and then stood for the prayer. I did the same and stood beside him. The Prophet put his right hand on my head, twisted my ear and then prayed two Rakat five times and then ended his prayer with Witr. He laid down till the Muadh-dhin came then he stood up and offered two Rakat (Sunna of Fajr prayer) and then went out and offered the Fajr prayer.

(See Hadith No. 183, Vol. 1)


## Hadith 2:107

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :_

The Prophet said, “Night prayer is offered as two Rakat followed by two Rakat and so on, and if you want to finish it, pray only one Raka which will be Witr for all the previous Rakat.” Al-Qasim said, “Since we attained the age of puberty we have seen some people offering a three-Rakat prayer as Witr and all that is permissible. I hope there will be no harm in it.”


## Hadith 2:108

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to pray eleven Rakat at night and that was his night prayer and each of his prostrations lasted for a period enough for one of you to recite fifty verses before Allah's Apostle raised his head. He also used to pray two Rakat (Sunna) before the (compulsory) Fajr prayer and then lie down on his right side till the Muadh-dhin came to him for the prayer.


## Hadith 2:109

_Narrated Anas bin Sirin:_

I asked Ibn 'Umar, “What is your opinion about the two Rakat before the Fajr (compulsory) prayer, as to prolonging the recitation in them?” He said, “The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to pray at night two Rakat followed by two and so on, and end the prayer by one Raka Witr. He used to offer two Rakat before the Fajr prayer immediately after the Adhan.” (Hammad, the sub-narrator said, “That meant (that he prayed) quickly.)”


## Hadith 2:110

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle offered Witr prayer at different nights at various hours extending (from the 'Isha' prayer) up to the last hour of the night.


## Hadith 2:111

_Narrated 'Aisha :_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to offer his night prayer while I was sleeping across in his bed. Whenever he intended to offer the Witr prayer, he used to wake me up and I would offer the Witr prayer too.


## Hadith 2:112

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “Make s your last prayer at night.”


## Hadith 2:113

_Narrated Said bin Yasar:_

I was going to Mecca in the company of 'Abdullah bin 'Umar and when I apprehended the approaching dawn, I dismounted and offered the Witr prayer and then joined him. 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, “Where have you been?” I replied, “I apprehended the approaching dawn so I dismounted and prayed the Witr prayer.” 'Abdullah said, “Isn't it sufficient for you to follow the good example of Allah's Apostle?” I replied, “Yes, by Allah.” He said, “Allah's Apostle used to pray Witr on the back of the camel (while on a journey).”


## Hadith 2:114

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet used to offer (Nawafil) prayers on his Rahila (mount) facing its direction by signals, but not the compulsory prayer. He also used to pray Witr on his (mount) Rahila.


## Hadith 2:115

_Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin:_

Anas was asked, “Did the Prophet recite Qunut in the Fajr prayer?” Anas replied in the affirmative. He was further asked, “Did he recite Qunut before bowing?” Anas replied, “He recited Qunut after bowing for some time (for one month).”


## Hadith 2:116

_Narrated 'Asim:_

I asked Anas bin Malik about the Qunut. Anas replied, “Definitely it was (recited)”. I asked, “Before bowing or after it?” Anas replied, “Before bowing.” I added, “So and so has told me that you had informed him that it had been after bowing.” Anas said, “He told an untruth (i.e. ”was mistaken,“ according to the Hijazi dialect). Allah's Apostle recited Qunut after bowing for a period of one month.” Anas added, “The Prophet sent about seventy men (who knew the Quran by heart) towards the pagans (of Najd) who were less than they in number and there was a peace treaty between them and Allah's Apostles (but the Pagans broke the treaty and killed the seventy men). So Allah's Apostle recited Qunut for a period of one month asking Allah to punish them.”


## Hadith 2:117

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet recited Qunut for one month (in the Fajr prayer) asking Allah to punish the tribes of Ral and Dhakwan.


## Hadith 2:118

_Narrated Anas:_

The Qunut used to be recited in the Maghrib and the Fajr prayers.


## Hadith 2:119

_Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim's uncle:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) went out to offer the Istisqa' prayer and turned (and put on) his cloak inside out.


## Hadith 2:120

_Narrated Abu Huraira;_

Whenever the Prophet (p.b.u.h) lifted his head from the bowing in the last Raka he used to say: “O Allah! Save 'Aiyash bin Abi Rabi'a. O Allah! Save Salama bin Hisham. O Allah! Save Walid bin Walid. O Allah! Save the weak faithful believers. O Allah! Be hard on the tribes of Mudar and send (famine) years on them like the famine years of (Prophet) Joseph .” The Prophet further said, “Allah forgive the tribes of Ghifar and save the tribes of Aslam.” Abu Az-Zinad (a sub-narrator) said, “The Qunut used to be recited by the Prophet in the Fajr prayer.”


## Hadith 2:121

_Narrated Masruq:_

We were with 'Abdullah and he said, “When the Prophet saw the refusal of the people to accept Islam he said, ”O Allah! Send (famine) years on them for (seven years) like the seven years (of famine during the time) of (Prophet) Joseph.“ So famine overtook them for one year and destroyed every kind of life to such an extent that the people started eating hides, carcasses and rotten dead animals. Whenever one of them looked towards the sky, he would (imagine himself to) see smoke because of hunger. So Abu Sufyan went to the Prophet and said, ”O Muhammad! You order people to obey Allah and to keep good relations with kith and kin. No doubt the people of your tribe are dying, so please pray to Allah for them.“ So Allah revealed: ”Then watch you For the day that The sky will bring forth a kind Of smoke Plainly visible ... Verily! You will return (to disbelief) On the day when We shall seize You with a mighty grasp. (44.10-16) Ibn Masud added, "Al-Batsha (i.e. grasp) happened in the battle of Badr and no doubt smoke, Al-Batsha, Al-Lizam, and the verse of Surat Ar-Rum have all passed .


## Hadith 2:122

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar:_

My father said, “I heard Ibn 'Umar reciting the poetic verses of Abu Talib: And a white (person) (i.e. the Prophet) who is requested to pray for rain and who takes care of the orphans and is the guardian of widows.” Salim's father (Ibn 'Umar) said, “The following poetic verse occurred to my mind while I was looking at the face of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) while he was praying for rain. He did not get down till the rain water flowed profusely from every roof-g utter: And a white (person) who is requested to pray for rain and who takes care of the orphans and is the guardian of widows . . . And these were the words of Abu Talib.”


## Hadith 2:123

_Narrated Anas:_

Whenever drought threatened them, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, used to ask Al-Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib to invoke Allah for rain. He used to say, “O Allah! We used to ask our Prophet to invoke You for rain, and You would bless us with rain, and now we ask his uncle to invoke You for rain. O Allah ! Bless us with rain.”(1) And so it would rain.


## Hadith 2:124

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:_

The Prophet turned his cloak inside out on Istisqa.


## Hadith 2:125

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid_

The Prophet went towards the Musalla and invoked Allah for rain. He faced the Qibla and wore his cloak inside out, and offered two Rakat.


## Hadith 2:126

_Narrated Sharik bin 'Abdullah bin Abi Namir:_

I heard Anas bin Malik saying, “On a Friday a person entered the main Mosque through the gate facing the pulpit while Allah's Apostle was delivering the Khutba. The man stood in front of Allah's Apostle and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and the roads are cut off; so please pray to Allah for rain.' ” Anas added, “Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) raised both his hands and said, ‘O Allah! Bless us with rain! O Allah! Bless us with rain! O Allah! Bless us with rain!’ ” Anas added, “By Allah, we could not see any trace of cloud in the sky and there was no building or a house between us and (the mountains of) Sila.” Anas added, “A heavy cloud like a shield appeared from behind it (i.e. Sila' Mountain). When it came in the middle of the sky, it spread and then rained.” Anas further said, “By Allah! We could not see the sun for a week. Next Friday a person entered through the same gate and at that time Allah's Apostle was delivering the Friday's Khutba. The man stood in front of him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and the roads are cut off, please pray to Allah to with-hold rain.' ” Anas added, “Allah's Apostle I raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Round about us and not on us. O Allah! On the plateaus, on the mountains, on the hills, in the valleys and on the places where trees grow.' So the rain stopped and we came out walking in the sun.” Sharik asked Anas whether it was the same person who had asked for the rain (the last Friday). Anas replied that he did not know.


## Hadith 2:127

_Narrated Sharik:_

Anas bin Malik said, “A person entered the Mosque on a Friday through the gate facing the Daril-Qada' and Allah's Apostle was standing delivering the Khutba (sermon). The man stood in front of Allah's Apostle and said, 'O Allah's Apostle, livestock are dying and the roads are cut off; please pray to Allah for rain.' So Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) raised both his hands and said, 'O Allah! Bless us with rain. O Allah! Bless us with rain. O Allah! Bless us with rain!” Anas added, “By Allah, there were no clouds in the sky and there was no house or building between us and the mountain of Silas'. Then a big cloud like a shield appeared from behind it (i.e. Silas Mountain) and when it came in the middle of the sky, it spread and then rained. By Allah! We could not see the sun for a week. The next Friday, a person entered through the same gate and Allah's Apostle was delivering the Friday Khutba and the man stood in front of him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and the roads are cut off; Please pray to Allah to withhold rain.' ” Anas added, “Allah's Apostle raised both his hands and said, ‘O Allah! Round about us and not on us. O Allah!’ On the plateaus, on the mountains, on the hills, in the valleys and on the places where trees grow.' ” Anas added, “The rain stopped and we came out, walking in the sun.” Sharik asked Anas whether it was the same person who had asked for rain the previous Friday. Anas replied that he did not know.


## Hadith 2:128

_Narrated Qatada:_

Anas I said, “While Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was delivering the Friday Khutba (sermon) a man came and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Rain is scarce; please ask Allah to bless us with rain.' So he invoked Allah for it, and it rained so much that we could hardly reach our homes and it continued raining till the next Friday.” Anas further said, “Then the same or some other person stood up and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to withhold the rain.' On that, Allah's Apostle I said, ‘O Allah! Round about us and not on us.’ ” Anas added, “I saw the clouds dispersing right and left and it continued to rain but not over Medina.”


## Hadith 2:129

_Narrated Anas:_

A man came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and said, “Livestock are destroyed and the roads are cut off.” So Allah's Apostle invoked Allah for rain and it rained from that Friday till the next Friday. The same person came again and said, “Houses have collapsed, roads are cut off, and the livestock are destroyed. Please pray to Allah to withhold the rain.” Allah's Apostle (stood up and) said, “O Allah! (Let it rain) on the plateaus, on the hills, in the valleys and over the places where trees grow.” So the clouds cleared away from Medina as clothes are taken off .


## Hadith 2:130

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Livestock are destroyed and the roads are cut off. So please invoke Allah.” So Allah's Apostle prayed and it rained from that Friday to the next Friday. Then he came to Allah's Apostle I and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Houses have collapsed, roads are cut off and the livestock are destroyed.” So Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) prayed, “O Allah! (Let it rain) on the tops of mountains, on the plateaus, in the valleys and over the places where trees grow.” So the clouds cleared away from Medina as clothes are taken off.


## Hadith 2:131

_Narrated Anas bin Malik_

I p man complained to the Prophet about the destruction of livestock and property and the hunger of the offspring. So he invoked (Allah for rain. The narrator (Anas) did not mention that the Prophet had worn his cloak inside out or faced the Qibla.


## Hadith 2:132

_Narrated Anas bin Malik_

A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Livestock are destroyed and the roads are cut off; so please invoke Allah.” So Allah's Apostle prayed for rain and it rained from that Friday till the next Friday. Then a man came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and said, “O Allah's Apostle! The houses have collapsed, roads are cut off and the livestock are destroyed.” So Allah's Apostle said, “O Allah ! (Let it rain) on the tops of the mountains, on the plateaus, in the valleys and over the places where trees grow.” So the clouds cleared away from Medina as clothes are taken off.


## Hadith 2:133

_Narrated Masruq:_

One day I went to Ibn Masud who said, “When Quraish delayed in embracing Islam, the Prophet I invoked Allah to curse them, so they were afflicted with a (famine) year because of which many of them died and they ate the carcasses and Abu Sufyan came to the Prophet and said, 'O Muhammad! You came to order people to keep good relation with kith and kin and your nation is being destroyed, so invoke Allah I ? So the Prophet I recited the Holy verses of Sirat-Ad-Dukhan: 'Then watch you For the day that The sky will Bring forth a kind Of smoke Plainly visible.' (44.10) When the famine was taken off, the people renegade once again as nonbelievers. The statement of Allah, (in Sura ”Ad-Dukhan“-44) refers to that: 'On the day when We shall seize You with a mighty grasp.' (44.16) And that was what happened on the day of the battle of Badr.” Asbath added on the authority of Mansur, “Allah's Apostle prayed for them and it rained heavily for seven days. So the people complained of the excessive rain. The Prophet said, ‘O Allah! (Let it rain) around us and not on us.’ So the clouds dispersed over his head and it rained over the surroundings.”


## Hadith 2:134

_Narrated Anas:_

Allah's Apostle I was delivering the Khutba (sermon) on a Friday when the people stood up, shouted and said, “O Allah's Apostle! There is no rain (drought), the trees have dried and the livestock are destroyed; Please pray to Allah for rain.” So Allah's Apostle said twice, “O Allah! Bless us with rain.” By Allah, there was no trace of cloud in the sky and suddenly the sky became overcast with clouds and it started raining. The Prophet came down the pulpit and offered the prayer. When he came back from the prayer (to his house) it was raining and it rained continuously till the next Friday. When the Prophet started delivering the Friday Khutba (sermon), the people started shouting and said to him, “The houses have collapsed and the roads are cut off; so please pray to Allah to withhold the rain.” So the Prophet smiled and said, “O Allah! Round about us and not on us.” So the sky became clear over Medina but it kept on raining over the outskirts (of Medina) and not a single drop of rain fell over Median. I looked towards the sky which was as bright and clear as a crown.


## Hadith 2:135

_Narrated Abbas bin Tamim_

that his uncle (who was one of the companions of the Prophet) had told him, “The Prophet went out with the people to invoke Allah for rain for them. He stood up and invoked Allah for rain, then faced the Qibla and turned his cloak (inside out) and it rained.”


## Hadith 2:136

_Narrated Abbas bin Tamim_

from his uncle who said, “The Prophet went out to invoke Allah for rain. He faced the Qibla invoking Allah. He turned over his cloak (inside out) and then offered two Rakat and recited the Quran aloud in them.”


## Hadith 2:137

_Narrated Abbas bin Tamim from his uncle,_

“I saw the Prophet on the day when he went out to offer the Istisqa' prayer. He turned his back towards the people and faced the Qibla and asked Allah for rain. Then he turned his cloak inside out and led us in a two Rakat prayer and recited the Qur'an aloud in them.”


## Hadith 2:138

_Narrated Abbas bin Tamlm from his uncle who said,_

“The Prophet invoked Allah for rain and offered a two Rakat prayer and he put his cloak inside out.”


## Hadith 2:139

_Narrated Abbas bin Tamim from his uncle who said,_

“The Prophet went out to the Musalla to offer the Istisqa' prayer, faced the Qibla and offered a two-Rakat prayer and turned his cloak cloak on his left side.”


## Hadith 2:140

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid Al-Ansari:_

The Prophet went out towards the Musalla in order to offer the Istisqa' prayer and when he intended to invoke (Allah) or started invoking, he faced the Qibla and turned his cloak inside out.


## Hadith 2:141

_Narrated Anas bin Malik_

The Prophet never raised his hands for any invocation except for that of Istisqa' and he used to raise them so much that the whiteness of his armpits became visible. (Note: It may be that Anas did not see the Prophet raising his hands, but it is narrated that the Prophet used to raise his hands for invocations other than Istisqa. See Hadith No. 807 & 808 and also see Hadith No. 612, Vol. 5).


## Hadith 2:142

_Narrated Aisha:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle saw the rain, he used to say, “O Allah! Let it be a strong fruitful rain.”


## Hadith 2:143

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

In the life-time of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) the people were afflicted with a (famine) year. While the Prophet was delivering the Khutba (sermon) on the pulpit on a Friday, a Bedouin stood up and said, “O Allah's Apostle! The livestock are dying and the families (offspring) are hungry: please pray to Allah to bless us with rain.” Allah's Apostle raised both his hands towards the sky and at that time there was not a trace of cloud in they sky. Then the clouds started gathering like mountains. Before he got down from the pulpit I saw rain-water trickling down his beard. It rained that day, the next day, the third day, the fourth day and till the next Friday, when the same Bedouin or some other person stood up (during the Friday Khutba) and said, “O Allah's Apostle! The houses have collapsed and the livestock are drowned. Please invoke Allah for us.” So Allah's Apostle raised both his hands and said, “O Allah! Around us and not on us.” Whichever side the Prophet directed his hand, the clouds dispersed from there till a hole (in the clouds) was formed over Medina. The valley of Qanat remained flowing (with water) for one month and none, came from outside who didn't talk about the abundant rain.


## Hadith 2:144

_Narrated Anas:_

Whenever a strong wind blew, anxiety appeared on the face of the Prophet (fearing that wind might be a sign of Allah's wrath).


## Hadith 2:145

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet said, "I was granted victory with As-Saba and the nation of 'Ad was destroyed by Ad-Dabur (westerly wind) .


## Hadith 2:146

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The Hour (Last Day) will not be established until (religious) knowledge will be taken away (by the death of religious learned men), earthquakes will be very frequent, time will pass quickly, afflictions will appear, murders will increase and money will overflow amongst you.” (See Hadith No. 85 Vol 1).


## Hadith 2:147

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

(The Prophet) said, “O Allah! Bless our Sham and our Yemen.” People said, “Our Najd as well.” The Prophet again said, “O Allah! Bless our Sham and Yemen.” They said again, “Our Najd as well.” On that the Prophet said, “There will appear earthquakes and afflictions, and from there will come out the side of the head of Satan.”


## Hadith 2:148

_Narrated Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:_

Allah's Apostle led the morning prayer in Al-Hudaibiya and it had rained the previous night. When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) had finished the prayer he faced the people and said, “Do you know what your Lord has said?” They replied, “Allah and His Apostle know better.” (The Prophet said), “Allah says, 'In this morning some of My worshipers remained as true believers and some became non-believers; he who said that it had rained with the blessing and mercy of Allah is the one who believes in Me and does not believe in star, but he who said it had rained because of such and such (star) is a disbeliever in Me and is a believer in star.' ”


## Hadith 2:149

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, “Keys of the unseen knowledge are five which nobody knows but Allah . . . nobody knows what will happen tomorrow; nobody knows what is in the womb; nobody knows what he will gain tomorrow; nobody knows at what place he will die; and nobody knows when it will rain.”


## Hadith 2:150

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

We were with Allah's Apostle when the sun eclipsed. Allah's Apostle stood up dragging his cloak till he entered the Mosque. He led us in a two-Rakat prayer till the sun (eclipse) had cleared. Then the Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of someone's death. So whenever you see these eclipses pray and invoke (Allah) till the eclipse is over.”


## Hadith 2:151

_Narrated Abu Masud:_

The Prophet said, “The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of the death of someone from the people but they are two signs amongst the signs of Allah. When you see them stand up and pray.”


## Hadith 2:152

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of the death or life (i.e. birth) of someone but they are two signs amongst the signs of Allah. When you see them offer the prayer.”


## Hadith 2:153

_Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:_

“The sun eclipsed in the life-time of Allah's Apostle on the day when (his son) Ibrahim died. So the people said that the sun had eclipsed because of the death of Ibrahim. Allah's Apostle said, ”The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of the death or life (i.e. birth) of some-one. When you see the eclipse pray and invoke Allah."


## Hadith 2:154

_Narrated 'Aisha :_

In the life-time of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) the sun eclipsed, so he led the people in prayer, and stood up and performed a long Qiyam, then bowed for a long while. He stood up again and performed a long Qiyam but this time the period of standing was shorter than the first. He bowed again for a long time but shorter than the first one, then he prostrated and prolonged the prostration. He did the same in the second Raka as he did in the first and then finished the prayer; by then the sun (eclipse) had cleared. He delivered the Khutba (sermon) and after praising and glorifying Allah he said, “The sun and the moon are two signs against the signs of Allah; they do not eclipse on the death or life of anyone. So when you see the eclipse, remember Allah and say Takbir, pray and give Sadaqa.” The Prophet then said, "O followers of Muhammad! By Allah! There is none who has more ghaira (self-respect) than Allah as He has forbidden that His slaves, male or female commit adultery (illegal sexual intercourse). O followers of Muhammad! By Allah! If you knew that which I know you would laugh little and weep much.


## Hadith 2:155

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr :_

“When the sun eclipsed in the life-time of Allah's Apostle an announcement was made that a prayer was to be offered in congregation.”


## Hadith 2:156

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) In the lifetime of the Prophet the sun eclipsed and he went to the Mosque and the people aligned behind him. He said the Takbir (starting the prayer) and prolonged the recitation (from the Quran) and then said Takbir and performed a prolonged bowing; then he (lifted his head and) said, “Sami allahu liman hamidah” (Allah heard him who sent his praises to Him). He then did not prostrate but stood up and recited a prolonged recitation which was shorter than the first recitation. He again said Takbir and then bowed a prolonged bowing but shorter than the first one and then said, “Sami 'a-l-lahu Lyman hamidah Rabbana walak-lhamd, (Allah heard him who sent his praises to Him. O our Sustainer! All the praises are for You)” and then prostrated and did the same in the second Raka; thus he completed four bowing and four prostrations. The sun (eclipse) had cleared before he finished the prayer. (After the prayer) he stood up, glorified and praised Allah as He deserved and then said, “The sun and the moon are two of the signs of Allah. They do not eclipse because of the death or the life (i.e. birth) of someone. When you see ”When the sun eclipsed at Medina your brother ('Abdullah bin Az-Zubair) offered only a two-Rakat prayer like that of the morning (Fajr) prayer.“ 'Ursa replied, ”Yes, for he missed the Prophet's tradition (concerning this matter)."


## Hadith 2:157

_Narrated Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) On the day when the sun Khasafat (eclipsed) Allah's Apostle prayed; he stood up and said Takbir and recited a prolonged recitation, then he performed a prolonged bowing, then he raised his head and said, “Sami'a-l-lahu Lyman Hamidah,” and then remained standing and recited a prolonged recitation which was shorter than the first. Then he performed a prolonged bowing which was shorter than the first. Then he prostrated and prolonged the prostration and he did the same in the second Raka as in the first and then finished the prayer with Taslim. By that time the sun (eclipse) had cleared He addressed the people and said, “The sun and the moon are two of the signs of Allah; they do not eclipse (Yakhsifan) because of the death or the life (i.e. birth) of someone. So when you see them make haste for the prayer.”


## Hadith 2:158

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

Allah's Apostle said: “The sun and the moon are two signs amongst the signs of Allah and they do not eclipse because of the death of someone but Allah frightens His devotees with them.”


## Hadith 2:159

_Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman:_

A Jewess came to ask 'Aisha (the wife of the Prophet) about something. She said to her, “May Allah give you refuge from the punishment of the grave.” So 'Aisha ' asked Allah's Apostle “Would the people be punished in their graves?” Allah's Apostle after seeking refuge with Allah from the punishment of the grave (and thus replied in the affirmative). Then one day, Allah's Apostle rode to go to some place but the sun eclipsed. He returned in the forenoon and passed through the rear of the dwellings (of his wives) and stood for the (eclipse) prayer, and the people stood behind him. He stood up for a long period and then performed a prolonged bowing which was shorter than the first bowing. Then he raised his head and prostrated. Then he stood up (for the second Raka) for a long while but the standing was shorter than that of the first Raka. Then he performed a prolonged bowing which was shorter than the first one. Then he raised his head and prostrated. Then he stood up for a long time but shorter than the first. Then he performed a prolonged bowing but shorter than the first. Then he raised his head and prostrated and finished the prayer and (then delivered the sermon and) said as much as Allah wished. And then he ordered the people to seek refuge with Allah from the punishment of the grave.


## Hadith 2:160

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr_

When the sun eclipsed in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and an announcement was made that the prayer was to be held in congregation. The Prophet performed two bowing in one Raka. Then he stood up and performed two bowing in one Raka. Then he sat down and finished the prayer; and by then the (eclipse) had cleared 'Aisha said, “I had never performed such a long prostration.”


## Hadith 2:161

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:_

The sun eclipsed in the life-time of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) . Allah's Apostle offered the eclipse prayer and stood for a long period equal to the period in which one could recite Surat-al-Baqara. Then he bowed for a long time and then stood up for a long period which was shorter than that of the first standing, then bowed again for a long time but for a shorter period than the first; then he prostrated twice and then stood up for a long period which was shorter than that of the first standing; then he bowed for a long time which was shorter than the previous one, and then he raised his head and stood up for a long period which was shorter than the first standing, then he bowed for a long time which was shorter than the first bowing, and then prostrated (twice) and finished the prayer. By then, the sun (eclipse) had cleared. The Prophet then said, “The sun and the moon are two of the signs of Allah. They eclipse neither because of the death of somebody nor because of his life (i.e. birth). So when you see them, remember Allah.” The people say, “O Allah's Apostle! We saw you taking something from your place and then we saw you retreating.” The Prophet replied, “I saw Paradise and stretched my hands towards a bunch (of its fruits) and had I taken it, you would have eaten from it as long as the world remains. I also saw the Hell-fire and I had never seen such a horrible sight. I saw that most of the inhabitants were women.” The people asked, “O Allah's Apostle! Why is it so?” The Prophet replied, “Because of their ungratefulness.” It was asked whether they are ungrateful to Allah. The Prophet said, “They are ungrateful to their companions of life (husbands) and ungrateful to good deeds. If you are benevolent to one of them throughout the life and if she sees anything (undesirable) in you, she will say, 'I have never had any good from you.' ”


## Hadith 2:162

_Narrated Fatima bint Al-Mundhir:_

Asma' bint Al Bakr said, “I came to 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) during the solar eclipse. The people were standing and offering the prayer and she was also praying too. I asked her, ‘What has happened to the people?’ She pointed out with her hand towards the sky and said, ‘Subhan-Allah’. I said, ‘Is there a sign?’ She pointed out in the affirmative.” Asma' further said, “I too then stood up for the prayer till I fainted and then poured water on my head. When Allah's Apostle had finished his prayer, he thanked and praised Allah and said, ‘I have seen at this place of mine what I have never seen even Paradise and Hell. No doubt, it has been inspired to me that you will be put to trial in the graves like or nearly like the trial of (Masih) Ad-Dajjal. (I do not know which one of the two Asma’ said.) (The angels) will come to everyone of you and will ask what do you know about this man (i.e. Muhammad). The believer or a firm believer (I do not know which word Asma' said) will reply, 'He is Muhammad, Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) who came to us with clear evidences and guidance, so we accepted his teachings, believed and followed him.' The angels will then say to him, ‘Sleep peacefully as we knew surely that you were a firm believer.’ The hypocrite or doubtful person (I do not know which word Asma' said) will say, 'I do not know. I heard the people saying something so I said it (the same).' ”


## Hadith 2:163

_Narrated Asma:_

No doubt the Prophet ordered people to manumit slaves during the solar eclipse.


## Hadith 2:164

_Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman:_

A Jewess came to 'Aisha to ask her about something and then she said, “May Allah give you refuge from the punishment of the grave.” So 'Aisha asked Allah's Apostle, “Would the people be punished in their graves?” Allah's Apostle asked Allah's refuge from the punishment of the grave (indicating an affirmative reply). Then one day Allah's Apostle rode (to leave for some place) but the sun eclipsed. He returned on the forenoon and passed through the rear of the dwellings (of his wives) and stood up and started offering the (eclipse) prayer and the people stood behind him. He stood for a long period and then performed a long bowing and then stood straight for a long period which was shorter than that of the first standing, then he performed a prolonged bowing which was shorter than the first bowing, then he raised his head and prostrated for a long time and then stood up (for the second Raka) for a long while, but the standing was shorter than the standing of the first Raka. Then he performed a prolonged bowing which was shorter than that of the first one. He then stood up for a long time but shorter than the first, then again performed a long bowing which was shorter than the first and then prostrated for a shorter while than that of the first prostration. Then he finished the prayer and delivered the sermon and) said what Allah wished; and ordered the people to seek refuge with Allah from the punishment of the grave.


## Hadith 2:165

_Narrated Abu Masud:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of someone's death or life but they are two signs amongst the signs of Allah, so pray whenever you see them.”


## Hadith 2:166

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

In the lifetime of the Prophet the sun eclipsed and the Prophet (p.b.u.h) stood up to offer the prayer with the people and recited a long recitation, then he performed a prolonged bowing, and then lifted his head and recited a prolonged recitation which was shorter than the first. Then he performed a prolonged bowing which was shorter than the first and then lifted his head and performed two prostrations. He then stood up for the second Raka and offered it like the first. Then he stood up and said, “The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of someone's life or death but they are two signs amongst the signs of Allah which He shows to His worshipers. So whenever you see them, make haste for the prayer.”


## Hadith 2:167

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

The sun eclipsed and the Prophet got up, being afraid that it might be the Hour (i.e. Day of Judgment). He went to the Mosque and offered the prayer with the longest Qiyam, bowing and prostration that I had ever seen him doing. Then he said, “These signs which Allah sends do not occur because of the life or death of somebody, but Allah makes His worshipers afraid by them. So when you see anything thereof, proceed to remember Allah, invoke Him and ask for His forgiveness.”


## Hadith 2:168

_Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba :_

On the day of Ibrahim's death, the sun eclipsed and the people said that the eclipse was due to the death of Ibrahim (the son of the Prophet). Allah's Apostle said, “The sun and the moon are two signs amongst the signs of Allah. They do not eclipse because of someone's death or life. So when you see them, invoke Allah and pray till the eclipse is clear.”


## Hadith 2:169

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

In the life-time of the Prophet the sun eclipsed and then he offered a two Rakat prayer.


## Hadith 2:170

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

In the life-time of the Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) the sun eclipsed and he went out dragging his clothes till he reached the Mosque. The people gathered around him and he led them and offered two Rakat. When the sun (eclipse) cleared, he said, “The sun and the moon are two signs amongst the signs of Allah; they do not eclipse because of the death of someone, and so when an eclipse occurs, pray and invoke Allah till the eclipse is over.” It happened that a son of the Prophet called Ibrahim died on that day and the people were talking about that (saying that the eclipse was caused by his death).


## Hadith 2:171

_Narrated Aisha:_

The Prophet led us and performed four bowing in two Rakat during the solar eclipse and the first Raka was longer.


## Hadith 2:172

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) recited (the Quran) aloud during the eclipse prayer and when he had finished the eclipse prayer he said the Takbir and bowed. When he stood straight from bowing he would say “Sami 'al-l-ahu Lyman hamidah Rabbana walaka-l-hamd.” And he would again start reciting. In the eclipse prayer there are four bowing and four prostrations in two Rakat. Al-Auza'i and others said that they had heard Az-Zuhi from 'Ursa from 'Aisha saying, “In the life-time of Allah's Apostle the sun eclipsed, and he made a person to announce: 'Prayer in congregation.' He led the prayer and performed four bowing 'Abdur-Rahman bin Namir had informed him that he had heard the same. Ibn Shihab heard the same. Az-Zuhrl said, ”I asked ('Ursa), 'What did your brother 'Abdullah bin AzZubair do? He prayed two Rakat (of the eclipse prayer) like the morning prayer, when he offered the (eclipse) prayer in Median.' 'Ursa replied that he had missed (i.e. did not pray according to) the Prophet's tradition." Sulaiman bin Kathir and Sufyan bin Husain narrated from Az-Zuhri that the prayer for the eclipse used to be offered with loud recitation.


## Hadith 2:173

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud :_

The Prophet recited Suratan-Najm (103) at Mecca and prostrated while reciting it and those who were with him did the same except an old man who took a handful of small stones or earth and lifted it to his forehead and said, “This is sufficient for me.” Later on, I saw him killed as a non-believer.


## Hadith 2:174

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

On Fridays the Prophet used to recite Alf Lam Mim Tanzil-As-Sajda (in the first Raka) and Hal ata'alal-lnsani i.e. Suratad-Dahr (LXXVI) (in the second Raka), in the Fajr prayer.


## Hadith 2:175

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The prostration of Sad is not a compulsory one but I saw the Prophet prostrating while reciting it.


## Hadith 2:176

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud:_

The Prophet recited Surat-an-Najm (53) and prostrated while reciting it and all the people prostrated and a man amongst the people took a handful of stones or earth and raised it to his face and said, “This is sufficient for me. Later on I saw him killed as a Nobel ever. ”


## Hadith 2:177

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet I prostrated while reciting An-Najm and with him prostrated the Muslims, the pagans, the jinns, and all human beings.


## Hadith 2:178

_Narrated 'Ata' bin Yasar:_

I asked Zaid bin Thabit about prostration on which he said that he had recited An-Najm before the Prophet, yet he (the Prophet) had not performed a prostration.


## Hadith 2:179

_Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:_

I recited An-Najm before the Prophet, yet he did not perform a prostration.


## Hadith 2:180

_Narrated Abu Salma:_

I saw Abu Huraira reciting Idha-Sama' un-Shaqqat and he prostrated during its recitation. I asked Abu Huraira, “Didn't I see you prostrating?” Abu Huraira said, “Had I not seen the Prophet prostrating, I would not have prostrated.”


## Hadith 2:181

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

When the Prophet recited a Sura that contained the prostration he would prostrate and we would do the same and some of us (because of the heavy rush) could not find a place for prostration.


## Hadith 2:182

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar,_

When the Prophet recited Surat As-Sajda and we were with him, he would prostrate and we also would prostrate with him and some of us (because of the heavy rush) would not find a place (for our foreheads) to prostrate on.


## Hadith 2:183

_Narrated Rabi'a:_

'Umar bin Al-Khattab recited Surat-an-Nahl on a Friday on the pulpit and when he reached the verse of Sajda he got down from the pulpit and prostrated and the people also prostrated. The next Friday 'Umar bin Al-Khattab recited the same Sura and when he reached the verse of Sajda he said, “O people! When we recite the verses of Sajda (during the sermon) whoever prostrates does the right thing, yet it is no sin for the one who does not prostrate.” And 'Umar did not prostrate (that day). Added Ibn 'Umar “Allah has not made the prostration of recitation compulsory but if we wish we can do it.”


## Hadith 2:184

_Narrated Abu Rafi:_

I offered the ‘Isha’ prayer behind Abu Huraira and he recited Idhas-Sama' Un-Shaqqat, and prostrated. I said, “What is this?” Abu Huraira said, “I prostrated behind Abu-l-Qasim and I will do the same till I meet him.”


## Hadith 2:185

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar._

Whenever the Prophet recited the Sura which contained the prostration of recitation he used to prostrate and then, we, too, would prostrate and some of us did not find a place for prostration.


## Hadith 2:186

_Narrated Ibn Abbas :_

The Prophet once stayed for nineteen days and prayed shortened prayers. So when we travel led (and stayed) for nineteen days, we used to shorten the prayer but if we travelled (and stayed) for a longer period we used to offer the full prayer.


## Hadith 2:187

_Narrated Yahya bin Ishaq:_

I heard Anas saying, “We travelled with the Prophet from Medina to Mecca and offered two Rakat (for every prayer) till we returned to Medina.” I said, “Did you stay for a while in Mecca?” He replied, “We stayed in Mecca for ten days.”


## Hadith 2:188

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

I offered the prayer with the Prophet, Abu Bakr and 'Umar at Mina and it was of two Rakat. 'Uthman in the early days of his caliphate did the same, but later on he started praying the full prayer.


## Hadith 2:189

_Narrated Haritha bin Wahab:_

The Prophet I led us in the prayer at Mina during the peace period by offering two Rakat.


## Hadith 2:190

_Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Yazid:_

We offered a four Rakat prayer at Mina behind Ibn 'Affan . 'Abdullah bin Masud was informed about it. He said sadly, “Truly to Allah we belong and truly to Him we shall return.” And added, “I prayed two Rakat with Allah's Apostle at Mina and similarly with Abu Bakr and with 'Umar (during their caliphates).” He further said, “May I be lucky enough to have two of the four Rakat accepted (by Allah).”


## Hadith 2:191

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet and his companions reached Mecca in the morning of the 4th Dhul-Hijja reciting Talbiya (O Allah! We are obedient to your orders, we respond 4 to your call) . . . intending to perform Hajj. The Prophet ordered his companions to assume the lhram for Umra instead of Hajj, excepting those who had Hadi (sacrifice) with them.


## Hadith 2:192

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “A woman should not travel for more than three days except with a Dhi-Mahram (i.e. a male with whom she cannot marry at all, e.g. her brother, father, grandfather, etc.) or her own husband.)”


## Hadith 2:193

_Narrated Ibn'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “A woman should not travel for more than three days except with a Dhi-Mahram.”


## Hadith 2:194

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “It is not permissible for a woman who believes in Allah and the Last Day to travel for one day and night except with a Mahram.”


## Hadith 2:195

_Narrated Anas bin Malik :_

offered four Rakat of Zuhr prayer with the Prophet (p.b.u.h) at Medina and two Rakat at Dhul-Hulaifa. (i.e. shortened the 'Asr prayer).


## Hadith 2:196

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

“When the prayers were first enjoined they were of two Rakat each. Later the prayer in a journey was kept as it was but the prayers for non-travellers were completed.” Az-Zuhri said, “I asked 'Urwa what made Aisha pray the full prayers (in journey).” He replied, “She did the same as 'Uthman did.”


## Hadith 2:197

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

“I saw Allah's Apostle delaying the Maghrib prayer till he offered it along with the 'Isha' prayer whenever he was in a hurry during the journey.” Salim narrated, “Ibn 'Umar used to do the same whenever he was in a hurry during the journey.” And Salim added, “Ibn 'Umar used to pray the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together in Al-Muzdalifa.” Salim said, “Ibn 'Umar delayed the Maghrib prayer because at that time he heard the news of the death of his wife Safiya bint Abi 'Ubaid. I said to him, 'The prayer (is due).' He said, 'Go on.' Again I said, 'The prayer (is due).' He said, 'Go on,' till we covered two or three miles. Then he got down, prayed and said, 'I saw the Prophet praying in this way, whenever he was in a hurry during the journey.' 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) added, ”Whenever the Prophet was in a hurry, he used to delay the Maghrib prayer and then offer three Rakat (of the Maghrib) and perform Taslim, and after waiting for a short while, Iqama used to be pronounced for the 'Isha' prayer when he would offer two Rakat and perform Taslim. He would never offer any optional prayer till the middle of the night (when he used to pray the Tahajjud)."


## Hadith 2:198

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amir from his father who said:_

I saw the Prophet (p.b.u.h) offering the prayer on his mount (Rahila) whatever direction it took.


## Hadith 2:199

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah,_

The Prophet used to offer the Nawafil, while riding, facing a direction other than that of the Qibla.


## Hadith 2:200

_Narrated Nafi:_

Ibn 'Umar (while on a journey) used to offer the prayer and the Witr on his mount (Rahila). He said that the Prophet used to do so.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:1 to 2:100</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_300">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:201 to 2:300</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
