---
title: "Hadith 2:201 to 2:300"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_200">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:101 to 2:200</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_400">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:301 to 2:400</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 2:201

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar:_

On traveling, 'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to offer the prayer on his Mount by signs whatever direction it took. 'Abdullah said that the Prophet used to do so.


## Hadith 2:202

_Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a,_

I saw the Prophet on his Mount praying Nawafil by nodding his head, whatever direction he faced, but Allah's Apostle never did the same in 'Umar used to offer the prayer on the back of his animal during the journey and never cared about the direction he faced. Ibn 'Umar said, “Allah's Apostle used to offer the optional prayer on the back of his Mount facing any direction and also used to pray the Witr on it but never offered the compulsory prayer on it.”


## Hadith 2:203

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah_

The Prophet used to pray (the Nawafil) on his Mount facing east and whenever he wanted to offer the compulsory prayer, he used to dismount and face the Qibla.


## Hadith 2:204

_Narrated Anas bin Sirin:_

We went to receive Anas bin Malik when he returned from Sham and met him at a place called 'Ain-at-Tamr. I saw him praying riding the donkey, with his face to this direction, i.e. to the left of the Qibla. I said to him, “I have seen you offering the prayer in a direction other than that of the Qibla.” He replied, “If I had not seen Allah's Apostle doing it, I would not have done it.”


## Hadith 2:205

_Narrated Hafs bin 'Asim:_

Ibn 'Umar went on a journey and said, “I accompanied the Prophet and he did not offer optional prayers during the journey, and Allah says: 'Verily! In Allah's Apostle you have a good example to follow.' ” (33.21)


## Hadith 2:206

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar :_

I accompanied Allah's Apostle and he never offered more than two Rakat during the journey. Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman used to do the same.


## Hadith 2:207

_Narrated Ibn Abu Laila:_

Only Um Hani told us that she had seen the Prophet (p.b.u.h) offering the Duha (forenoon prayer). She said, "On the day of the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet took a bath in my house and offered eight Rakat. I never saw him praying such a light prayer but he performed perfect had told him that he had seen the Prophet (p.b.u.h) praying Nawafil at night on the back of his Mount on a journey, facing whatever direction it took.


## Hadith 2:208

_Narrated Salim bin Abdullah:_

Ibn 'Umar said, “Allah's Apostle used to pray the Nawafil on the back of his Mount (carriage) by signs facing any direction.” Ibn 'Umar used to do the same.


## Hadith 2:209

_Narrated Salim's father:_

The Prophet used to offer the Maghrib and Isha' prayers together whenever he was in a hurry on a journey.

prayers together on journeys, and also used to offer the Maghrib and ‘Isha’ prayers together.

‘Isha’ prayers together on journeys.


## Hadith 2:210

_Narrated Az-Zuhri:_

Salim told me, “'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, 'I saw Allah's Apostle delaying the Maghrib prayer till he offered it along with the Isha prayer whenever he was in a hurry during the journey.' ” Salim said, “Abdullah bin Umar used to do the same whenever he was in a hurry during the journey. After making the call for Iqama, for the Maghrib prayer he used to offer three Rakat and then perform Tasllm. After waiting for a short while, he would pronounce the Iqama for the 'Isha' prayer and offer two Rakat and perform Taslim. He never prayed any Nawafil in between the two prayers or after the 'Isha' prayers till he got up in the middle of the night (for Tahajjud prayer).”


## Hadith 2:211

_Narrated Anas:_

Allah's Apostle used to offer these two prayers together on journeys i.e. the Maghrib and the 'Isha'.


## Hadith 2:212

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Whenever the Prophet started a journey before noon, he used to delay the Zuhr prayer till the time of 'Asr and then offer them together; and if the sun declined (at noon) he used to offer the Zuhr prayer and then ride (for the journey).


## Hadith 2:213

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Whenever the Prophet started the journey before noon, he used to delay the Zuhr prayer till the time for the 'Asr prayer and then he would dismount and pray them together; and whenever the sun declined before he started the journey he used to offer the Zuhr prayer and then ride (for the journey).


## Hadith 2:214

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle prayed in his house while sitting during his illness and the people prayed behind him standing and he pointed to them to sit down. When he had finished the prayer, he said, “The Imam is to be followed and so when he bows you should bow; and when he lifts his head you should also do the same.”


## Hadith 2:215

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) fell down from a horse and his right side was either injured or scratched, so we went to inquire about his health. The time for the prayer became due and he offered the prayer while sitting and we prayed while standing. He said, “The Imam is to be followed; so if he says Takbir, you should also say Takbir, and if he bows you should also bow; and when he lifts his head you should also do the same and if he says: Sami'a-l-lahu Liman Hamidah (Allah hears whoever sends his praises to Him) you should say: Rabbana walakal-Hamd (O our Lord! All the praises are for You.”) (See Hadith No. 656 Vol. 1).


## Hadith 2:216

_Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:_

(who had piles) I asked Allah's Apostle about the praying of a man while sitting. He said, “If he prays while standing it is better and he who prays while sitting gets half the reward of that who prays standing; and whoever prays while Lying gets half the reward of that who prays while sitting.”


## Hadith 2:217

_Narrated_

Narrated'Abdullah bin Buraida:

'Imran bin Husain had piles. Once Abu Ma mar narrated from 'Imran bin Husain had said, “I asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h) about the prayer of a person while sitting. He said, ‘It is better for one to pray standing; and whoever prays sitting gets half the reward of that who prays while standing; and whoever prays while Lying gets half the reward of that who prays while sitting.’ ”


## Hadith 2:218

_Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:_

had piles, so I asked the Prophet about the prayer. He said, “Pray while standing and if you can't, pray while sitting and if you cannot do even that, then pray Lying on your side.”


## Hadith 2:219

_Narrated Aisha:_

(the mother of the faithful believers) I never saw Allah's Apostle offering the night prayer while sitting except in his old age and then he used to recite while sitting and whenever he wanted to bow he would get up and recite thirty or forty verses (while standing) and then bow.


## Hadith 2:220

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the mother of the faithful believers) Allah's Apostle (in his last days) used to pray sitting. He would recite while sitting, and when thirty or forty verses remained from the recitation he would get up and recite them while standing and then he would bow and prostrate. He used to do the same in the second Raka. After finishing the Prayer he used to look at me and if I was awake he would talk to me and if I was asleep, he would lie down.


## Hadith 2:221

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

When the Prophet got up at night to offer the Tahajjud prayer, he used to say: Allahumma lakal-hamd. Anta qaiyimus-samawati wal-ard wa man fihinna. Walakal-hamd, Laka mulkus-samawati wal-ard wa man fihinna. Walakal-hamd, anta nurus-samawati wal-ard. Walakalhamd, anta-l-haq wa wa'duka-l-haq, wa liqa'uka Haq, wa qualuka Haq, wal-jannatu Han wan-naru Haq wannabiyuna Haq. Wa Muhammadun, sallal-lahu'alaihi wasallam, Haq, was-sa'atu Haq. Allahumma aslamtu Laka wabika amantu, wa 'Alaika tawakkaltu, wa ilaika anabtu wa bika khasamtu, wa ilaika hakamtu faghfir li ma qaddamtu wama akh-khartu wama as-rartu wama'a lantu, anta-l-muqaddim wa anta-l-mu akh-khir, la ilaha illa anta (or la ilaha ghairuka). (O Allah! All the praises are for you, You are the Holder of the Heavens and the Earth, And whatever is in them. All the praises are for You; You have the possession of the Heavens and the Earth And whatever is in them. All the praises are for You; You are the Light of the Heavens and the Earth And all the praises are for You; You are the King of the Heavens and the Earth; And all the praises are for You; You are the Truth and Your Promise is the truth, And to meet You is true, Your Word is the truth And Paradise is true And Hell is true And all the Prophets (Peace be upon them) are true; And Muhammad is true, And the Day of Resurrection is true. O Allah ! I surrender (my will) to You; I believe in You and depend on You. And repent to You, And with Your help I argue (with my opponents, the non-believers) And I take You as a judge (to judge between us). Please forgive me my previous And future sins; And whatever I concealed or revealed And You are the One who make (some people) forward And (some) backward. There is none to be worshipped but you . Sufyan said that 'Abdul Karim Abu Umaiya added to the above, 'Wala haula Wala quwata illa billah' (There is neither might nor power except with Allah).


## Hadith 2:222

_Narrated Salim's father:_

In the life-time of the Prophet whosoever saw a dream would narrate it to Allah's Apostle. I had a wish of seeing a dream to narrate it to Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) I was a grown up boy and used to sleep in the Mosque in the life-time of the Prophet. I saw in the dream that two angels caught hold of me and took me to the Fire which was built all round like a built well and had two poles in it and the people in it were known to me. I started saying, “I seek refuge with Allah from the Fire.” Then I met another angel who told me not to be afraid. I narrated the dream to Hafsa who told it to Allah's Apostle. The Prophet said, “Abdullah is a good man. I wish he prayed Tahajjud.” After that 'Abdullah (i.e. Salim's father) used to sleep but a little at night.


## Hadith 2:223

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to offer eleven Rakat and that was his prayer. He used to prolong the prostration to such an extent that one could recite fifty verses (of the Quran) before he would lift his head. He used to pray two Rakat (Sunna) before the Fajr prayer and then used to lie down on his right side till the call-maker came and informed him about the prayer.


## Hadith 2:224

_Narrated Jundab:_

The Prophet became sick and did not get up (for Tahajjud prayer) for a night or two.


## Hadith 2:225

_Narrated Jundab bin 'Abdullah :_

Gabriel did not come to the Prophet (for some time) and so one of the Quraish women said, “His Satan has deserted him.” So came the Divine Revelation: “By the forenoon And by the night When it is still! Your Lord (O Muhammad) has neither Forsaken you Nor hated you.” (93.1-3)


## Hadith 2:226

_Narrated Um Salama:_

One night the Prophet got up and said, “Subhan Allah! How many afflictions Allah has revealed tonight and how many treasures have been sent down (disclosed). Go and wake the sleeping lady occupants of these dwellings up (for prayers), perhaps a well-dressed in this world may be naked in the Hereafter.”


## Hadith 2:227

_Narrated 'Ali bin Abi Talib_

One night Allah's Apostle came to me and Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet and asked, “Won't you pray (at night)?” I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Our souls are in the hands of Allah and if He wants us to get up He will make us get up.” When I said that, he left us without saying anything and I heard that he was hitting his thigh and saying, “But man is more quarrelsome than anything.” (18.54)


## Hadith 2:228

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to give up a good deed, although he loved to do it, for fear that people might act on it and it might be made compulsory for them. The Prophet never prayed the Duha prayer, but I offer it.


## Hadith 2:229

_Narrated 'Aisha, the mother of the faithful believers:_

One night Allah's Apostle offered the prayer in the Mosque and the people followed him. The next night he also offered the prayer and too many people gathered. On the third and the fourth nights more people gathered, but Allah's Apostle did not come out to them. In the morning he said, “I saw what you were doing and nothing but the fear that it (i.e. the prayer) might be enjoined on you, stopped me from coming to you.” And that happened in the month of Ramadan.


## Hadith 2:230

_Narrated Al-Mughira:_

The Prophet used to stand (in the prayer) or pray till both his feet or legs swelled. He was asked why (he offered such an unbearable prayer) and he said, “should I not be a thankful slave.”


## Hadith 2:231

_Narrated Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:_

Allah's Apostle told me, “The most beloved prayer to Allah is that of David and the most beloved fasts to Allah are those of David. He used to sleep for half of the night and then pray for one third of the night and again sleep for its sixth part and used to fast on alternate days.”


## Hadith 2:232

_Narrated Masruq:_

I asked 'Aisha which deed was most loved by the Prophet. She said, “A deed done continuously.” I further asked, “When did he used to get up (in the night for the prayer).” She said, “He used to get up on hearing the crowing of a cock.”


## Hadith 2:233

_Narrated Al-Ashath:_

He (the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) used to get up for the prayer on hearing the crowing of a cock.


## Hadith 2:234

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

In my house he (Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) never passed the last hours of the night but sleeping.


## Hadith 2:235

_Narrated Qatada:_

Anas bin Malik said, “The Prophet (p.b.u.h) and Zaid bin Thabit took their Suhur together. When they finished it, the Prophet stood for the (Fajr) prayer and offered it.” We asked Anas, “What was the interval between their finishing the Suhur and the starting of the morning prayer?” Anas replied, “It was equal to the time taken by a person in reciting fifty verses of the Quran.”


## Hadith 2:236

_Narrated Abu-Wa il:_

'Abdullah said, “One night I offered the Tahajjud prayer with the Prophet and he kept on standing till an ill-thought came to me.” We said, “What was the ill-thought?” He said, “It was to sit down and leave the Prophet (standing).”


## Hadith 2:237

_Narrated Hudhaifa :_

Whenever the Prophet got up for Tahajjud prayer he used to clean his mouth (and teeth) with Siwak.


## Hadith 2:238

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :_

A man said, “O Allah's Apostle! How is the prayer of the night?” He said, “Two Rakat followed by two Rakat and so on, and when you apprehend the approaching dawn, offer one Raka as Witr.”


## Hadith 2:239

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The prayer of the Prophet used to be of thirteen Rakat, i.e. of the night prayer.


## Hadith 2:240

_Narrated Masruq:_

I asked Aisha about the night prayer of Allah's Apostle and she said, “It was seven, nine or eleven Rakat besides the two Rakat of the Fajr prayer (i.e. Sunna). ”


## Hadith 2:241

_Narrated 'Aisha,_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to offer thirteen Rakat of the night prayer and that included the Witr and two Rakat (Sunna) of the Fajr prayer.


## Hadith 2:242

_Narrated Anas bin Malik_

Sometimes Allah's Apostle would not fast (for so many days) that we thought that he would not fast that month and he sometimes used to fast (for so many days) that we thought he would not leave fasting through-out that month and (as regards his prayer and sleep at night), if you wanted to see him praying at night, you could see him praying and if you wanted to see him sleeping, you could see him sleeping.


## Hadith 2:243

_Narrated Abu Huraira_

Allah's Apostle said, “Satan puts three knots at the back of the head of any of you if he is asleep. On every knot he reads and exhales the following words, 'The night is long, so stay asleep.' When one wakes up and remembers Allah, one knot is undone; and when one performs ablution, the second knot is undone, and when one prays the third knot is undone and one gets up energetic with a good heart in the morning; otherwise one gets up lazy and with a mischievous heart.”


## Hadith 2:244

_Narrated Samura bin Jundab:_

The Prophet said in his narration of a dream that he saw, “He whose head was being crushed with a stone was one who learnt the Quran but never acted on it, and slept ignoring the compulsory prayers.”


## Hadith 2:245

_Narrated 'Abdullah :_

A person was mentioned before the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and he was told that he had kept on sleeping till morning and had not got up for the prayer. The Prophet said, “Satan urinated in his ears.”


## Hadith 2:246

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, “Our Lord, the Blessed, the Superior, comes every night down on the nearest Heaven to us when the last third of the night remains, saying: ”Is there anyone to invoke Me, so that I may respond to invocation? Is there anyone to ask Me, so that I may grant him his request? Is there anyone seeking My forgiveness, so that I may forgive him?"


## Hadith 2:247

_Narrated Al-Aswad:_

I asked 'Aisha “How is the night prayer of the Prophet?” She replied, “He used to sleep early at night, and get up in its last part to pray, and then return to his bed. When the Muadh-dhin pronounced the Adhan, he would get up. If he was in need of a bath he would take it; otherwise he would perform ablution and then go out (for the prayer).”


## Hadith 2:248

_Narrated Abu Salma bin 'Abdur Rahman:_

I asked 'Aisha, “How is the prayer of Allah's Apostle during the month of Ramadan.” She said, “Allah's Apostle never exceeded eleven Rakat in Ramadan or in other months; he used to offer four Rakat— do not ask me about their beauty and length, then four Rakat, do not ask me about their beauty and length, and then three Rakat.” Aisha further said, “I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Do you sleep before offering the Witr prayer?' He replied, 'O 'Aisha! My eyes sleep but my heart remains awake'!”


## Hadith 2:249

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I did not see the Prophet reciting (the Quran) in the night prayer while sitting except when he became old; when he used to recite while sitting, and when thirty or forty verses remained from the Sura, he would get up and recite them and then bow.


## Hadith 2:250

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

At the time of the Fajr prayer the Prophet asked Bilal, “Tell me of the best deed you did after embracing Islam, for I heard your footsteps in front of me in Paradise.” Bilal replied, “I did not do anything worth mentioning except that whenever I performed ablution during the day or night, I prayed after that ablution as much as was written for me.”


## Hadith 2:251

_Narrated Anas bin Malik_

Once the Prophet (p.b.u.h) entered the Mosque and saw a rope hanging in between its two pillars. He said, “What is this rope?” The people said, “This rope is for Zainab who, when she feels tired, holds it (to keep standing for the prayer.)” The Prophet said, “Don't use it. Remove the rope. You should pray as long as you feel active, and when you get tired, sit down.”


## Hadith 2:251

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

A woman from the tribe of Bani Asad was sitting with me and Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) came to my house and said, “Who is this?” I said, “(She is) So and so. She does not sleep at night because she is engaged in prayer.” The Prophet said disapprovingly: Do (good) deeds which is within your capacity as Allah never gets tired of giving rewards till you get tired of doing good deeds."


## Hadith 2:252

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:_

Allah's Apostle said to me, “O 'Abdullah! Do not be like so and so who used to pray at night and then stopped the night prayer.”


## Hadith 2:253

_Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:_

The Prophet “Whoever gets up at night and says: — 'La ilaha il-lallah Wahdahu la Sharika lahu Lahu-l-mulk, waLahu-l-hamd wahuwa 'ala kullishai'in Qadir. Alhamdu lil-lahi wa subhanal-lahi wa la-ilaha il-lal-lah wa-l-lahu akbar wa la hawla Wala Quwata il-la-bil-lah.' (None has the right to be worshipped but Allah. He is the Only One and has no partners . For Him is the Kingdom and all the praises are due for Him. He is Omnipotent. All the praises are for Allah. All the glories are for Allah. And none has the right to be worshipped but Allah, And Allah is Great And there is neither Might nor Power Except with Allah). And then says: — Allahumma, Ighfir li(O Allah! Forgive me). Or invokes (Allah), he will be responded to and if he performs ablution (and prays), his prayer will be accepted.”


## Hadith 2:254

_Narrated Abu Huraira_

That once Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, “Your brother, i.e. 'Abdullah bin Rawaha does not say obscene (referring to his verses): Amongst us is Allah's Apostle, who recites His Book when it dawns. He showed us the guidance, after we were blind. We believe that whatever he says will come true. And he spends his nights in such a way as his sides do not touch his bed. While the pagans were deeply asleep.”


## Hadith 2:255

_Narrated Nafi:_

Ibn 'Umar said, “In the life-time of the Prophet I dreamt that a piece of silk cloth was in my hand and it flew with me to whichever part of Paradise I wanted. I also saw as if two persons (i.e. angels) came to me and wanted to take me to Hell. Then an angel met us and told me not to be afraid. He then told them to leave me. Hafsa narrated one of my dreams to the Prophet and the Prophet said, ”Abdullah is a good man. Would that he offer the night prayer (Tahajjud)!“ So after that day 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) started offering Tahajjud. The companions of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to tell him their dreams that (Laila-tul-Qadr) was on the 27th of the month of Ramadan. The Prophet said, ”I see that your dreams agree on the last ten nights of Ramadan and so whoever is in search of it should seek it in the last ten nights of Ramadan."


## Hadith 2:256

_Narrated 'Aisha;_

Allah's Apostle offered the ‘Isha’ prayer (and then got up at the Tahajjud time) and offered eight Rakat and then offered two Rakat while sitting. He then offered two Rakat in between the Adhan and Iqama (of the Fajr prayer) and he never missed them.


## Hadith 2:257

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to lie down on his right side, after offering two Rakat (Sunna) of the Fajr prayer.


## Hadith 2:258

_Narrated 'Aisha :_

After offering the Sunna of the Fajr prayer, the Prophet used to talk to me, if I happen to be awake; otherwise he would lie down till the Iqama call was proclaimed (for the Fajr prayer).


## Hadith 2:259

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

After offering the two Rakat (Sunna) the Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to talk to me, if I happen to be awake; otherwise he would lie down.


## Hadith 2:260

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet was never more regular and particular in offering any Nawafil than the two Rakat (Sunna) of the Fajr prayer.


## Hadith 2:261

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to offer thirteen Rakat in the night prayer and on hearing the Adhan for the morning prayer, he used to offer two light Rakat.


## Hadith 2:262

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to make the two Rakat before the Fajr prayer so light that I would wonder whether he recited Al-Fatiha (or not).


## Hadith 2:263

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) used to teach us the way of doing Istikhara (Istikhara means to ask Allah to guide one to the right sort of action concerning any job or a deed), in all matters as he taught us the Suras of the Quran. He said, "If anyone of you thinks of doing any job he should offer a two Rakat prayer other than the compulsory ones and say (after the prayer): — 'Allahumma inni astakhiruka bi'ilmika, Wa astaqdiruka bi-qudratika, Wa as'alaka min fadlika al-'azlm Fa-innaka taqdiru Wala aqdiru, Wa ta'lamu Wala a'lamu, Wa anta 'allamu l-ghuyub. Allahumma, in kunta ta'lam anna hadha-l-amra Khairun li fi dini wa ma'ashi wa'aqibati amri (or 'ajili amri wa'ajilihi) Faqdirhu wa yas-sirhu li thumma barik li Fihi, Wa in kunta ta'lamu anna hadha-lamra shar-run li fi dini wa ma'ashi wa'aqibati amri (or fi'ajili amri wa ajilihi) Fasrifhu anni was-rifni anhu. Waqdir li al-khaira haithu kana Thumma ardini bihi.' (O Allah! I ask guidance from Your knowledge, And Power from Your Might and I ask for Your great blessings. You are capable and I am not. You know and I do not and You know the unseen. O Allah! If You know that this job is good for my religion and my subsistence and in my Hereafter—(or said: If it is better for my present and later needs)—Then You ordain it for me and make it easy for me to get, And then bless me in it, and if You know that this job is harmful to me In my religion and subsistence and in the Hereafter—(or said: If it is worse for my present and later needs)—Then keep it away from me and let me be away from it. And ordain for me whatever is good for me, And make me satisfied with it). The Prophet added that then the person should name (mention) his need.


## Hadith 2:264

_Narrated Abu Qatada bin Rabi Al-Ansari;_

The Prophet said, “If anyone of you enters a Mosque, he should not sit until he has offered a two-Rakat prayer.”


## Hadith 2:265

_Narrated Anas bin Malik_

Allah's Apostle led us and offered a two Rakat prayer and then went away.


## Hadith 2:266

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar Abu,_

I offered with Allah's Apostle a two Rakat prayer before the Zuhr prayer and two Rakat after the Zuhr prayer, two Rakat after Jumua, Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers.


## Hadith 2:267

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

While delivering a sermon, Allah's Apostle said, “If anyone of you comes while the Imam is delivering the sermon or has come out for it, he should offer a two Rakat prayer.”


## Hadith 2:268

_Narrated Mujahid:_

Somebody came to the house of Ibn 'Umar and told him that Allah's Apostles had entered the Ka'ba. Ibn 'Umar said, “I went in front of the Ka'ba and found that Allah's Apostle had come out of the Ka'ba and I saw Bilal standing by the side of the gate of the Ka'ba. I said, 'O Bilal! Has Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) prayed inside the Ka'ba?' Bilal replied in the affirmative. I said, 'Where (did he pray)?' He replied, '(He prayed) Between these two pillars and then he came out and offered a two Rakat prayer in front of the Ka'ba.' ” Abu 'Abdullah said: Abu Huraira said, “The Prophet (p.b.u.h) advised me to offer two Rakat of Duha prayer (prayer to be offered after sunrise and before midday). ” Itban (bin Malik) said, "Allah's Apostle

(p.b.u.h) and Abu Bakr, came to me after sunrise and we aligned behind the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and offered two Rakat."


## Hadith 2:269

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

I offered with the Prophet two Rakat before the Zuhr and two Rakat after the Zuhr prayer; two Rakat after Maghrib, Isha' and the Jumua prayers. Those of the Maghrib and 'Isha' were offered in his house. My sister Hafsa told me that the Prophet used to offer two light Rakat after dawn and it was the time when I never went to the Prophet."


## Hadith 2:270

_Narrated 'Amr:_

I heard Abu Ash-sha'tha' Jabir saying, “I heard Ibn Abbas saying, 'I offered with Allah's Apostle eight Rakat (of Zuhr and 'Asr prayers) together and seven Rakat (the Maghrib and the 'Isha' prayers) together.' ” I said, “O Abu Ash-shatha! I think he must have prayed the Zuhr late and the 'Asr early; the 'Isha early and the Maghrib late.” Abu Ash-sha'tha' said, “I also think so.” (See Hadith No. 518 Vol. 1).


## Hadith 2:271

_Narrated Muwarriq:_

I asked Ibn 'Umar “Do you offer the Duha prayer?” He replied in the negative. I further asked, “Did 'Umar use to pray it?” He (Ibn 'Umar) replied in the negative. I again asked, “Did Abu Bakr use to pray it?” He replied in the negative. I again asked, “Did the Prophet use to pray it?” Ibn 'Umar replied, “I don't think he did.”


## Hadith 2:272

_Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Laila:_

Only Um Hani narrated to me that she had seen the Prophet offering the Duha prayer. She said, "On the day of the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet entered my house, took a bath and offered eight Rakat (of Duha prayers. I had never seen the Prophet offering such a light prayer but he performed bowing and prostrations perfectly .


## Hadith 2:273

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I never saw the Prophet offering the Duha prayer but I always offer it.


## Hadith 2:274

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

My friend (the Prophet) advised me to do three things and I shall not leave them till I die, these are: To fast three days every month, to offer the Duha prayer, and to offer Witr before sleeping.


## Hadith 2:275

_Narrated Anas bin Sirin:_

I heard Anas bin Malik al-Ansari saying, “An Ansari man, who was very fat, said to the Prophet, 'I am unable to present myself for the prayer with you.' He prepared a meal for the Prophet and invited him to his house. He washed one side of a mat with water and the Prophet offered two Rakat on it.” So and so, the son of so and so, the son of Al-Jarud asked Anas, “Did the Prophet use to offer the Duha prayer?” Anas replied, “I never saw him praying (the Duha prayer) except on that day.”


## Hadith 2:275

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

I remember ten Rakat of Nawafil from the Prophet, two Rakat before the Zuhr prayer and two after it; two Rakat after Maghrib prayer in his house, and two Rakat after ‘Isha’ prayer in his

house, and two Rakat before the Fajr prayer and at that time nobody would enter the house of the Prophet Hafsa told me that the Prophet used to offer two Rakat after the call maker had made the Adhan and the day had dawned.


## Hadith 2:276

_Narrated Aisha:_

The Prophet never missed four Rakat before the Zuhr prayer and two Rakat before the Fajr prayer.


## Hadith 2:277

_Narrated 'Abdullah Al-Muzni:_

The Prophet said, “Pray before the Maghrib (compulsory) prayer.” He (said it thrice) and in the third time, he said, “Whoever wants to offer it can do so.” He said so because he did not like the people to take it as a tradition.


## Hadith 2:278

_Narrated Marthad bin 'Abdullah Al-Yazani:_

I went to 'Uqba bin 'Amir Al-Juhani and said, “Is it not surprising that Abi Tamim offers two Rakat before the Maghrib prayer?” 'Uqba said, “We used to do so in the life-time of Allah's Apostle.” I asked him, “What prevents you from offering it now?” He replied, “Business.”


## Hadith 2:279

_Narrated Mahmud bin Ar-rabi' Al-Ansari,_

that he remembered Allah's Apostle and he also remembered a mouthful of water which he had thrown on his face, after taking it from a well that was in their house. Mahmud said that he had heard Itban bin Malik, who was present with Allah's Apostle in the battle of Badr saying, “I used to lead my people at Bani Salim in the prayer and there was a valley between me and those people. Whenever it rained it used to be difficult for me to cross it to go to their mosque. So I went to Allah's Apostle and said, 'I have weak eye-sight and the valley between me and my people flows during the rainy season and it becomes difficult for me to cross it; I wish you would come to my house and pray at a place so that I could take that place as a praying place.' Allah's Apostle said, 'I will do so.' So Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr came to my house in the (next) morning after the sun had risen high. Allah's Apostle asked my permission to let him in and I admitted him. He did not sit before saying, 'Where do you want us to offer the prayer in your house?' I pointed to the place where I wanted him to pray. So Allah's Apostle stood up for the prayer and started the prayer with Takbir and we aligned in rows behind him; and he offered two Rakat, and finished them with Taslim, and we also performed Taslim with him. I detained him for a meal called ”Khazir“ which I had prepared for him.—(”Khazir" is a special type of dish prepared from barley flour and meat soup)—

When the neighbors got the news that Allah's Apostle was in my house, they poured it till there were a great number of men in the house. One of them said, 'What is wrong with Malik, for I do not see him?' One of them replied, 'He is a hypocrite and does not love Allah and His Apostle.' On that Allah's Apostle said, 'Don't say this. Haven't you seen that he said, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah for Allah's sake only.' The man replied, 'Allah and His Apostle know better; but by Allah, we never saw him but helping and talking with the hypocrites.' Allah's Apostle replied, 'No doubt, whoever says. None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and by that he wants the pleasures of Allah, then Allah will save him from Hell.“ Mahmud added, ”I told the above narration to some people, one of whom was Ab-u Aiyub, the companion of Allah's Apostle in the battle in which he (Ab-u Aiyub) died and Yazid bin Mu'aw7ya was their leader in Roman Territory. Abu Aiyub denounced the narration and said, 'I doubt that Allah's Apostle ever said what you have said.' I felt that too much, and I vowed to Allah that if I remained alive in that holy battle, I would (go to Medina and) ask Itban bin Malik if he was still living in the mosque of his people. So when he returned, I assumed Ihram for Hajj or 'Umra and then I proceeded on till I reached Medina. I went to Bani Salim and Itban bin Malik, who was by then an old blind man, was leading his people in the prayer. When he finished the prayer, I greeted him and introduced myself to him and then asked him about that narration. He told that narration again in the same manner as he had narrated it the first time."


## Hadith 2:280

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar,_

Allah's Apostle said, “Offer some of your prayers in your houses and do not make them graves.”


## Hadith 2:281

_Narrated Quza'a:_

I heard Abu Said saying four words. He said, “I heard the Prophet (saying the following narrative).” He had participated in twelve holy battles with the Prophet.

except for three Mosques i.e. Al-Masjid-AI-Haram, the Mosque of Allah's Apostle , and the Mosque of Al-Aqsa, (Mosque of Jerusalem)."


## Hadith 2:282

_Narrated Abu Huraira_

Allah's Apostle said, “One prayer in my Mosque is better than one thousand prayers in any other mosque excepting Al-Masjid-AI-Haram.”


## Hadith 2:283

_Narrated Nafi':_

Ibn 'Umar never offered the Duha prayer except on two occasions:

(1) Whenever he reached Mecca; and he always used to reach Mecca in the forenoon. He would perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba and then offer two Rakat at the rear of Maqam Ibrahim.

(2) Whenever he visited Quba, for he used to visit it every Saturday. When he entered the Mosque, he disliked to leave it without offering a prayer. Ibn 'Umar narrated that Allah's Apostle used to visit the Mosque of Quba (sometime) walking and (sometime) riding. And he (i.e. Ibn 'Umar) used to say, “I do only what my companions used to do and I don't forbid anybody to pray at any time during the day or night except that one should not intend to pray at sunrise or sunset.”


## Hadith 2:284

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Dinar:_

Ibn 'Umar said, “The Prophet used to go to the Mosque of Quba every Saturday (sometimes) walking and (sometimes) riding.” 'Abdullah (Ibn 'Umar) used to do the same.


## Hadith 2:285

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet used to go to the Mosque of Quba (sometimes) walking and sometimes riding. Added Nafi (in another narration), “He then would offer two Rakat (in the Mosque of Quba).”


## Hadith 2:286

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid Al-Mazini:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Between my house and the pulpit there is a garden of the gardens of Paradise.”


## Hadith 2:287

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Between my house and my pulpit there is a garden of the gardens of Paradise, and my pulpit is on my fountain tank (i.e. Al-Kauthar).”


## Hadith 2:288

_Narrated Qaza'a Maula:_

(freed slave of) Ziyad: I heard Abu Said Al-khudri narrating four things from the Prophet and I appreciated them very much. He said, conveying the words of the Prophet.

(1) "A woman should not go on a two day journey except with her husband or a Dhi-Mahram.

(2) No fasting is permissible on two days: 'Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha.

(3) No prayer after two prayers, i.e. after the Fajr prayer till the sunrises and after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets.

(4) Do not prepare yourself for a journey except to three Mosques, i.e. Al-Masjid-AI-Haram, the Mosque of Aqsa (Jerusalem) and my Mosque."


## Hadith 2:289

_Narrated Kuraib Maula Ibn Abbas:_

'Abdullah bin Abbas said that he had passed a night in the house of Maimuna the mother of the faithful believers , who was his aunt. He said, “I slept across the bed, and Allah's Apostle along with his wife slept lengthwise. Allah's Apostle slept till mid-night or slightly before or after it. Then Allah's Apostle woke up, sat, and removed the traces of sleep by rubbing his hands over his face. Then he recited the last ten verses of Surat-Al Imran (2). Then he went towards a hanging leather water-container and performed a perfect ablution and then stood up for prayer.” 'Abdullah bin Abbas added, “I got up and did the same as Allah's Apostle had done and then went and stood by his side. Allah's Apostle then put his right hand over my head and caught my right ear and twisted it. He offered two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat, then two Rakat and then offered one Raka Witr. Then he lay down till the Muadh-dhin came and then he prayed two light Rakat and went out and offered the early morning (Fajr) prayer.”


## Hadith 2:290

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

We used to greet the Prophet while he was praying and he used to answer our greetings. When we returned from AnNajashi (the ruler of Ethiopia), we greeted him, but he did not answer us (during the prayer) and (after finishing the prayer) he said, “In the prayer one is occupied (with a more serious matter).”


## Hadith 2:291

_Narrated 'Abdullah_

the same as No. 290. from the Prophet


## Hadith 2:292

_Narrated Zaid bin Arqam:_

In the life-time of the Prophet we used to speak while praying, and one of us would tell his needs to his companions, till the verse, 'Guard strictly your prayers (2.238) was revealed. After that we were ordered to remain silent while praying.


## Hadith 2:293

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

The Prophet went out to affect a reconciliation between the tribes of Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf and the time of the prayer became due; Bilal went to Abu Bakr and said, “The Prophet is detained. Will you lead the people in the prayer?” Abu Bakr replied, “Yes, if you wish.” So Bilal pronounced the Iqama and Abu Bakr led the prayer. In the meantime the Prophet came crossing the rows (of the praying people) till he stood in the first row and the people started clapping. Abu Bakr never looked hither and thither during the prayer but when the people clapped too much, he looked back and saw the Prophet in the (first) row. The Prophet waved him to remain at his place, but Abu Bakr raised both his hands and sent praises to Allah and then retreated and the Prophet went forward and led the prayer. (See Hadith No. 295 & 296)


## Hadith 2:294

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud:_

We used to say the greeting, name and greet each other in the prayer. Allah's Apostle heard it and said:—“Say, 'At-tahiyyatu lil-lahi was-salawatu wat-taiyibatu . Assalamu 'Alaika aiyuha-n-Nabiyu wa-rahmatu-l-lahi wa-barakatuhu. \_ Assalamu alaina wa-'ala 'ibadi-l-lahi as-salihin.. Ashhadu an la ilaha illa-l-lah wa ashhadu anna Muhammadan 'abdu hu wa Rasuluh. (All the compliments are for Allah and all the prayers and all the good things (are for Allah). Peace be on you, O Prophet, and Allah's mercy and blessings (are on you). And peace be on us and on the good (pious) worshipers of Allah. I testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is His slave and Apostle.) So, when you have said this, then you have surely sent the greetings to every good (pious) worship per of Allah, whether he be in the Heaven or on the Earth . ”


## Hadith 2:295

_Narrated Abu Huraira :_

The Prophet said, “The saying ‘Sub Han Allah’ is for men and clapping is for women.” (If something happens in the prayer, the men can invite the attention of the Imam by saying “Sub Han Allah”. And women, by clapping their hands).


## Hadith 2:296

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad,_

The Prophet said, "The saying ‘Sub Han Allah’ is for men and clapping is for women.


## Hadith 2:297

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

While Abu Bakr was leading the people in the morning prayer on a Monday, the Prophet came towards them suddenly having lifted the curtain of 'Aisha's house, and looked at them as they were standing in rows and smiled. Abu Bakr tried to come back thinking that Allah's Apostle wanted to come out for the prayer. The attention of the Muslims was diverted from the prayer because they were delighted to see the Prophet. The Prophet waved his hand to them to complete their prayer, then he went back into the room and let down the curtain. The Prophet expired on that very day.


## Hadith 2:297

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “A woman called her son while he was in his hermitage and said, 'O Juraij' He said, 'O Allah, my mother (is calling me) and (I am offering) my prayer (what shall I do)?' She again said, 'O Juraij!' He said again, 'O Allah ! My mother (is calling me) and (I am offering) my prayer (what shall I do)?' She again said, 'O Juraij' He again said, 'O Allah! My mother (is calling me) and (I am offering) my prayer. (What shall I do?)' She said, 'O Allah! Do not let Juraij die till he sees the faces of prostitutes.' A shepherdess used to come by his hermitage for grazing her sheep and she gave birth to a child. She was asked whose child that was, and she replied that it was from Juraij and that he had come out from his hermitage. Juraij said, 'Where is that woman who claims that her child is from me?' (When she was brought to him along with the child), Juraij asked the child, 'O Babus, who is your father?' The child replied, 'The shepherd.' ” (See Hadith No 662. Vol 3).


## Hadith 2:298

_Narrated Mu'aiqib:_

The Prophet talked about a man leveling the earth on prostrating, and said, “If you have to do so, then do it once.”


## Hadith 2:299

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

We used to pray with the Prophet in scorching heat, and if someone of us could not put his face on the earth (because of the heat) then he would spread his clothes and prostrate over them.


## Hadith 2:300

_Narrated Aisha:_

I used to stretch my legs towards the Qibla of the Prophet while he was praying; whenever he prostrated he touched me, and I would withdraw my legs, and whenever he stood up, I would restretch my legs.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_200">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:101 to 2:200</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_400">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:301 to 2:400</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
