---
title: "Hadith 2:301 to 2:400"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_300">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:201 to 2:300</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_500">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:401 to 2:500</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 2:301

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet once offered the prayer and said, “Satan came in front of me and tried to interrupt my prayer, but Allah gave me an upper hand on him and I choked him. No doubt, I thought of tying him to one of the pillars of the mosque till you get up in the morning and see him. Then I remembered the statement of Prophet Solomon, 'My Lord ! Bestow on me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after me.' Then Allah made him (Satan) return with his head down (humiliated).”


## Hadith 2:302

_Narrated Al-Azraq bin Qais:_

We were at Al-Ahwaz fighting the AlHaruriya (tribe). While I was at the bank of a river a man was praying and the reins of his animal were in his hands and the animal was struggling and he was following the animal. (Shu'ba, a sub-narrator, said that man was Abu Barza al-Aslaml). A man from the Khawarij said, “O Allah! Be harsh to this sheik.” And when the sheik (Abu Barza) finished his prayer, he said, “I heard your remark. No doubt, I participated with Allah's Apostle in six or seven or eight holy battles and saw his leniency, and no doubt, I would rather retain my animal than let it return to its stable, as it would cause me much trouble. ”


## Hadith 2:303

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Once the sun eclipsed and Allah's Apostle stood up for the prayer and recited a very long Sura and when bowed for a long while and then raised his head and started reciting another Sura. Then he bowed, and after finishing, he prostrated and did the same in the second Raka and then said, “These (lunar and solar eclipses) are two of the signs of Allah and if you see them, pray till the eclipse is over. No doubt, while standing at this place I saw everything promised to me by Allah and I saw (Paradise) and I wanted to pluck a bunch (of grapes) therefrom, at the time when you saw me stepping forward. No doubt, I saw Hell with its different parts destroying each other when you saw me retreating and in it I saw 'Amr bin Luhai who started the tradition of freeing animals (set them free) in the name of idols.”


## Hadith 2:304

_Narrated Ibn'Umar:_

The Prophet saw some sputum on the wall facing the Qibla of the mosque and became furious with the people of the mosque and said, “During the prayer, Allah is in front of everyone of you and so he should not spit (or said, 'He should not expectorate').” Then he got down and scratched the sputum with his hand. Ibn 'Umar said (after narrating), “If anyone of you has to spit during the prayer, he should spit to his left.”


## Hadith 2:305

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “Whenever anyone of you is in prayer, he is speaking in private to his Lord and so he should neither spit in front of him nor on his right side but to his left side under his left foot.”


## Hadith 2:306

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

The people used to offer the prayer with the Prophet with their waist-sheets tied round their necks because of the shortness of the sheets and the women were ordered not to lift their heads till the men had sat straight.


## Hadith 2:307

_Narrated_

Narrated'Abdullah:

I used to greet the Prophet while he was in prayer and he would return my greeting, but when we returned (from Ethiopia) I greeted the Prophet (while he was praying) but he did not return the greeting, and (after finishing the prayer) he said, “In the prayer one is occupied (with a more serious matter).”


## Hadith 2:308

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle sent me for some job and when I had finished it I returned and came to the Prophet and greeted him but he did not return my greeting. So I felt so sorry that only Allah knows it and I said to myself,, 'Perhaps Allah's Apostle is angry because I did not come quickly, then again I greeted him but he did not reply. I felt even more sorry than I did the first time. Again I greeted him and he returned the greeting and said, “The thing which prevented me from returning the greeting was that I was praying.” And at that time he was on his Rahila and his face was not towards the Qibla.


## Hadith 2:309

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

The news about the differences amongst the people of Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf at Quba reached Allah's Apostle and so he went to them along with some of his companions to affect a reconciliation. Allah's Apostle was delayed there and the time for the prayer became due. Bilal came to Abu Bakr! and said, “O Abu Bakr! Allah's Apostle is detained (there) and the time for the prayer is due. Will you lead the people in prayer?” Abu Bakr replied, “Yes, if you wish.” So Bilal pronounced the Iqama and Abu Bakr went forward and the people said Takbir. In the meantime, Allah's Apostle came piercing through the rows till he stood in the (first) row and the people started clapping. Abu Bakr, would never look hither and thither during the prayer but when the people clapped much he looked back and saw Allah's Apostle. The Prophet beckoned him to carry on. Abu Bakr raised both his hands, praised Allah and retreated till he stood in the row and Allah's Apostle went forward and led the people in the prayer. When he had finished the prayer, he addressed the people and said, “O people! Why did you start clapping when something happened to you in the prayer? Clapping is for women. Whenever one is confronted with something unusual in the prayer one should say, ‘Sub Han Allah’.” Then the Prophet looked towards Abu Bakr and asked, “What prevented you from leading the prayer when I beckoned you to carry on?” Abu Bakr replied, "It does not befit the son of Al Quhafa to lead the prayer in the presence of Allah's Apostle


## Hadith 2:310

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

It was forbidden to keep the hands on the hips during the prayer. (This is narrated by Abu Huraira from the Prophet.)


## Hadith 2:311

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

It was forbidden to pray with the hands over one's hips.


## Hadith 2:312

_Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:_

I offered the 'Asr prayer with the Prophet and after finishing the prayer with Taslim he got up quickly and went to some of his wives and then came out. He noticed the signs of astonishment on the faces of the people caused by his speed. He then said, “I remembered while I was in my prayer that a piece of gold was Lying in my house and I disliked that it should remain with us throughout the night, and so I have ordered it to be distributed.”


## Hadith 2:313

_Narrated Abu Huraira,_

Allah's Apostle said, “When the Adhan for the prayer is pronounced, then Satan takes to his heels passing wind so that he may not hear the Adhan and when the Muadh-dhin finishes, he comes back; and when the Iqama is pronounced he again takes to his heels and when it is finished, he again comes back and continues reminding the praying person of things that he used not to remember when not in prayer till he forgets how much he has prayed.” Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman said, “If anyone of you has such a thing (forgetting the number of Rakat he has prayed) he should perform two prostrations of Sahu (i.e. forgetfulness) while sitting.” Abu Salama narrates this from Abu Huraira.


## Hadith 2:314

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

People say that I narrate too many narrations of the Prophet; once I met a man (during the life-time of the Prophet) and asked him, “Which Sura did Allah's Apostle s recite yesterday in the 'Isha' prayer?” He said, “I do not know.” I said, “Did you not attend the prayer?” He said, “Yes, (I did).” I said, “I know. He recited such and such Sura.”


## Hadith 2:315

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina :_

Allah's Apostle once led us in a prayer and offered two Rakat and got up (for the third Raka) without sitting (after the second Raka). The people also got up with him, and when he was about to finish his prayer, we waited for him to finish the prayer with Taslim but he said Takbir before Taslim and performed two prostrations while sitting and then finished the prayer with Taslim.


## Hadith 2:316

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina :_

Allah's Apostle got up after the second Raka of the Zuhr prayer without sitting in between (the second and the third Rakat). When he finished the prayer he performed two prostrations (of Sahu) and then finished the prayer with Tasllm.


## Hadith 2:317

_Narrated_

Narrated' Abdullah:

Once Allah's Apostle offered five Rakat in the Zuhr prayer, and somebody asked him whether there was some increase in the prayer. Allah's Apostle said, “What is that?” He said, “You have offered five Rakat.” So Allah's Apostle performed two prostrations of Sahu after Taslim.


## Hadith 2:318

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet led us in the 'Asr or the Zuhr prayer and finished it with Taslim. Dhul-Yadain said to him, “O Allah's Apostle! Has the prayer been reduced?” The Prophet asked his companions in the affirmative. So Allah's Apostle I offered two more Rakat and then performed two prostrations (of Sahu). Sad said, “I saw that 'Ursa bin Az-Zubair had offered two Rakat in the Maghrib prayer and finished it with Taslim. He then talked (and when he was informed about it) he completed the rest of his prayer and performed two prostrations, and said, ‘The Prophet prayed like this.’ ”


## Hadith 2:319

_Narrated Abu Huraira._

Once Allah's Apostle offered two Rakat and finished his prayer. So Dhul-Yadain asked him, “Has the prayer been reduced or have you forgotten?” Allah's Apostle said, “Has DhulYadain spoken the truth?” The people replied in the affirmative. Then Allah's Apostle stood up and offered the remaining two Rakat and performed Taslim, and then said Takbir and performed two prostrations like his usual prostrations, or a bit longer, and then got up.


## Hadith 2:320

_Narrated Salama bin 'Alqama:_

I asked Muhammad (bin Sirin) whether Tashah-hud should be recited after the two prostrations of Sahu. He replied, “It is not (mentioned) in Abu Huraira's narration . ”


## Hadith 2:321

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet offered one of the evening prayers (the sub-narrator Muhammad said, “I think that it was most probably the 'Asr prayer”) and he finished it after offering two Rakat only. He then stood near a price of wood in front of the Mosque and put his hand over it. Abu Bakr and 'Umar were amongst those who were present, but they dared not talk to him about that (because of excessive respect for him), and those who were in a hurry went out. They said, “Has the prayer been reduced?” A man who was called DhulYadain by the Prophet said (to the Prophet), “Has the prayer been reduced or have you forgotten?” He said, “Neither have I forgotten, nor has the prayer been reduced.” He said, “Certainly you have forgotten.” So the Prophet offered two more Rakat and performed Tashm and then said Takbir and performed a prostration of Sahu like his ordinary prostration or a bit longer and then raised his head and said Takbir and then put his head down and performed a prostration like his ordinary prostration or a bit longer, and then raised his head and said Takbir.


## Hadith 2:322

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Buhaina Al-Asdi:_

(the ally of Bani 'Abdul Muttalib) Allah's Apostle stood up for the Zuhr prayer and he should have sat (after the second Raka but he stood up for the third Raka without sitting for Tashah-hud) and when he finished the prayer he performed two prostrations and said Takbir on each prostration while sitting, before ending (the prayer) with Taslim; and the people too performed the two prostrations with him instead of the sitting he forgot.


## Hadith 2:323

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When the call for prayer is made, Satan takes to his heels passing wind so that he may not hear the Adhan and when the call is finished he comes back, and when the Iqama is pronounced, Satan again takes to his heels, and when the Iqama is finished he comes back again and tries to interfere with the person and his thoughts and say, ”Remember this and that (which he has not thought of before the prayer)", till the praying person forgets how much he has prayed. If anyone of you does not remember whether he has offered three or four Rakat then he should perform two prostrations of Sahu while sitting.


## Hadith 2:324

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, "When anyone of you stands for the prayers, Satan comes and puts him in doubts till he forgets how many Rakat he has prayed. So if this happens to anyone of you, he should perform two prostrations of Sahu while sitting.


## Hadith 2:325

_Narrated Kuraib:_

I was sent to Aisha by Ibn Abbas, Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and 'Abdur-Rahman bin Azhar . They told me to greet her on their behalf and to ask her about the offering of the two Rakat after the 'Asr prayer and to say to her, “We were informed that you offer those two Rakat and we were told that the Prophet had forbidden offering them.” Ibn Abbas said, “I along with 'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to beat the people whenever they offered them.” I went to Aisha and told her that message. 'Aisha said, “Go and ask Um Salama about them.” So I returned and informed them about her statement. They then told me to go to Um Salama with the same question with which t sent me to 'Aisha. Um Salama replied, “I heard the Prophet forbidding them. Later I saw him offering them immediately after he prayed the 'Asr prayer. He then entered my house at a time when some of the Ansari women from the tribe of Bani Haram were sitting with me, so I sent my slave girl to him having said to her, 'Stand beside him and tell him that Um Salama says to you, ”O Allah's Apostle! I have heard you forbidding the offering of these (two Rakat after the 'Asr prayer) but I have seen you offering them.“ If he waves his hand then wait for him.' The slave girl did that. The Prophet beckoned her with his hand and she waited for him. When he had finished the prayer he said, ”O daughter of Bani Umaiya! You have asked me about the two Rakat after the 'Asr prayer. The people of the tribe of 'Abdul-Qais came to me and made me busy and I could not offer the two Rakat after the Zuhr prayer. These (two Rakat that I have just prayed) are for those (missed) ones.


## Hadith 2:326

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi :_

The news about the differences amongst the people of Bani'Amr bin 'Auf reached Allah's Apostle and so he went to them along with some of his companions to affect a reconciliation between them. Allah's Apostle was delayed there, and the time of the prayer was due. Bilal went to Abu Bakr and said to him, “Allah's Apostle has been delayed (there) and the time of prayer is due. So will you lead the people in prayer?” Abu Bakr said, “Yes, if you wish.” Bilal pronounced the Iqama and Abu Bakr, went forward and said Takbir for the people. In the mean-time Allah's Apostle came crossing the rows (of the praying people) and stood in the (first) row and the people started clapping. Abu Bakr, would never glance side-ways in his prayer but when the people clapped much he looked back and (saw) Allah's Apostle . Allah's Apostle beckoned him to carry on the prayer. Abu Bakr raised his hands and thanked Allah, and retreated till he reached the (first) row. Allah's Apostle went forward and led the people in the prayer. When he completed the prayer he faced the people and said, “O people! Why did you start clapping when something unusual happened to you in the prayer? Clapping is only for women. So whoever amongst you comes across something in the prayer should say, 'Subhan-Allah' for there is none who will not turn round on hearing him saying Subhan-Allah. O Ab-u Bakr! What prevented you from leading the people in the prayer when I beckoned you to do so?” Abu Bakr replied, “How dare the son of Abu Quhafa lead the prayer in the presence of Allah's Apostle ?”


## Hadith 2:327

_Narrated Asma':_

I went to 'Aisha and she was standing praying and the people, too, were standing (praying). So I said, “What is the matter with the people?” She beckoned with her head towards the sky.

I said, “(Is there) a sign?” She nodded intending to say, “Yes.”


## Hadith 2:328

_Narrated 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet:_

Allah's Apostle during his illness prayed in his house sitting, whereas some people followed him standing, but the Prophet beckoned them to sit down. On completion of the prayer he said, “The Imam is to be followed. So, bow when he bows, and raise your head when he raises his head.” (See Hadith No. 657 Vol 1 for taking the verdict).


## Hadith 2:329

_Narrated Abu Dhar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Someone came to me from my Lord and gave me the news (or good tidings) that if any of my followers dies worshipping none (in any way) along with Allah, he will enter Paradise.” I asked, “Even if he committed illegal sexual intercourse (adultery) and theft?” He replied, “Even if he committed illegal sexual intercourse (adultery) and theft.”


## Hadith 2:330

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Anyone who dies worshipping others along with Allah will definitely enter the Fire.” I said, “Anyone who dies worshipping none along with Allah will definitely enter Paradise.”


## Hadith 2:331

_Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib:_

Allah's Apostle ordered us to do seven things and forbade us to do other seven. He ordered us:

to follow the funeral procession. to visit the sick, to accept invitations, to help the oppressed, to fulfill the oaths, to return the greeting and to reply to the sneezer: (saying, “May Allah be merciful on you,” provided the sneezer says, “All the praises are for Allah,”). He forbade us to use silver utensils and dishes and to wear golden rings, silk (clothes), Dibaj (pure silk cloth), Qissi and Istabraq (two kinds of silk cloths).


## Hadith 2:332

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "The rights of a Muslim on the Muslims are to follow the funeral processions, to accept invitation and to reply the sneezer. (see Hadith No 331)


## Hadith 2:333

_Narrated 'Aisha :_

Abu Bakr came riding his horse from his dwelling place in As-Sunh. He got down from it, entered the Mosque and did not speak with anybody till he came to me and went direct to the Prophet, who was covered with a marked blanket. Abu Bakr uncovered his face. He knelt down and kissed him and then started weeping and said, “My father and my mother be sacrificed for you, O Allah's Prophet! Allah will not combine two deaths on you. You have died the death which was written for you.”

was addressing the people, and Abu Bakr told him to sit down but 'Umar refused. Abu Bakr again told him to sit down but 'Umar again refused. Then Abu Bakr recited the Tashah-hud (i.e. none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is Allah's Apostle) and the people attended to Abu Bakr and left 'Umar. Abu Bakr said, “Amma ba'du, whoever amongst you worshipped Muhammad, then Muhammad is dead, but whoever worshipped Allah, Allah is alive and will never die. Allah said: 'Muhammad is no more than an Apostle and indeed (many) Apostles have passed away before him ..(up to the) grateful.' ” (3.144) (The narrator added, “By Allah, it was as if the people never knew that Allah had revealed this verse before till Abu Bakr recited it and then whoever heard it, started reciting it ”)


## Hadith 2:334

_Narrated Kharija bin Zaid bin Thabit:_

Um Al-'Ala', an Ansari woman who gave the pledge of allegiance to the Prophet said to me, “The emigrants were distributed amongst us by drawing lots and we got in our share 'Uthman bin Maz'un. We made him stay with us in our house. Then he suffered from a disease which proved fatal when he died and was given a bath and was shrouded in his clothes, Allah's Apostle came I said, 'May Allah be merciful to you, O Abu As-Sa'ib! I testify that Allah has honored you'. The Prophet said, 'How do you know that Allah has honored him?' I replied, 'O Allah's Apostle! Let my father be sacrificed for you! On whom else shall Allah bestow His honor?' The Prophet said, 'No doubt, death came to him. By Allah, I too wish him good, but by Allah, I do not know what Allah will do with me though I am Al lah's Apostle. ' By Allah, I never attested the piety of anyone after that.”


## Hadith 2:336

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

When my father was martyred, I lifted the sheet from his face and wept and the people forbade me to do so but the Prophet did not forbid me. Then my aunt Fatima began weeping and the Prophet said, “It is all the same whether you weep or not. The angels were shading him continuously with their wings till you shifted him (from the field). ”


## Hadith 2:337

_Narrated Abu Huraira,_

Allah's Apostle informed (the people) about the death of An-Najashi on the very day he died. He went towards the Musalla (praying place) and the people stood behind him in rows. He said four Takbirs (i.e. offered the Funeral prayer).


## Hadith 2:338

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Zaid took over the flag and was martyred. Then it was taken by Jafar who was martyred as well. Then 'Abdullah bin Rawaha took the flag but he too was martyred and at that time the eyes of Allah's Apostle were full of tears. Then Khalid bin Al-Walid took the flag without being nominated as a chief (before hand) and was blessed with victory.”


## Hadith 2:339

_Narrated Ibn Abbas._

A person died and Allah's Apostle used to visit him. He died at night and (the people) buried him at night. In the morning they informed the Prophet (about his death). He said, “What prevented you from informing me?” They replied, “It was night and it was a dark night and so we disliked to trouble you.” The Prophet went to his grave and offered the (funeral) prayer.


## Hadith 2:340

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “A Muslim whose three children die before the age of puberty will be granted Paradise by Allah due to his mercy for them.”


## Hadith 2:341

_Narrated Abu Sa'id:_

The women requested the Prophet, “Please fix a day for us.” So the Prophet preached to them and said, “A woman whose three children died would be screened from the Hell Fire by them,” Hearing that, a woman asked, “If two died?” The Prophet replied, “Even two (would screen her from the (Hell) Fire. ” And Abu Huraira added, “Those children should be below the age of puberty. ”


## Hadith 2:342

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “No Muslim whose three children died will go to the Fire except for Allah's oath (i.e. everyone has to pass over the bridge above the lake of fire).”


## Hadith 2:343

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet passed by a woman who was sitting and weeping beside a grave and said to her, “Fear Allah and be patient.”


## Hadith 2:344

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya al-Ansariya:_

Allah's Apostle came to us when his daughter died and said, “Wash her thrice or five times or more, if you see it necessary, with water and Sidr and then apply camphor or some camphor at the end; and when you finish, notify me.” So when we finished it, we informed him and he gave us his waist-sheet and told us to shroud the dead body in it.


## Hadith 2:345

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya_

Allah's Apostle came to us and we were giving a bath to his (dead) daughter and said, “Wash her three, five or more times with water and Sidr and sprinkle camphor on her at the end; and when you finish, notify me.” So when we finished, we informed him and he gave us his waist-sheet and told us to shroud her in it. Aiyub said that Hafsa narrated to him a narration similar to that of Muhammad in which it was said that the bath was to be given for an odd number of times, and the numbers 3, 5 or 7 were mentioned. It was also said that they were to start with the right side and with the parts which were washed in ablution, and that Um 'Atiyya also mentioned, “We combed her hair and divided them in three braids.”


## Hadith 2:346

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya:_

Allah's Apostle , concerning his (dead) daughter's bath, said, “Start with the right side, and the parts which are washed in ablution.”


## Hadith 2:347

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya :_

When we washed the deceased daughter of the Prophet, he said to us, while we were washing her, “Start the bath from the right side and from the parts which are washed in ablution.”


## Hadith 2:348

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya:_

The daughter of the Prophet expired, and he said to us, “Wash her three or five times, or more if you see it necessary, and when you finish, notify me.” So, (when we finished) we informed him and he unfastened his waist-sheet and told us to shroud her in it.


## Hadith 2:349

_Narrated Muhammad:_

Um 'Atiyya said, “One of the daughters of the Prophet died and he came out and said, 'Wash her three or five times or more, if you think it necessary, with water and Sidr, and last of all put camphor (or some camphor) and when you finish, inform me.' ” Um Atiyya added, “When we finished we informed him and he gave us his waist-sheet and said, 'Shroud her in it.' ” And Um 'Atiyya (in another narration) added, “The Prophet said, 'Wash her three, five or seven times or more, if you think it necessary.' ” Hafsa said that Um 'Atiyya had also said, “We entwined her hair into three braids.”


## Hadith 2:350

_Narrated Hafsa bint Sirin:_

Um 'Atiyya said that they had entwined the hair of the daughter of Allah's Apostle in three braids. They first undid her hair, washed and then entwined it in three braids."


## Hadith 2:351

_Narrated Ibn Sirin:_

Um 'Atiyya (an Ansari woman who gave the pledge of allegiance to the Prophet ) came to Basra to visit her son, but she could not find him. She narrated to us, “The Prophet came to us while we were giving bath to his (dead) daughter, he said: 'Wash her three times, five times or more, if you think it necessary, with water and Sidr, and last of all put camphor, and when you finish, notify me.' ” Um 'Atiyya added, “After finishing, we informed him and he gave us his waist sheet and told us to shroud her in it and did not say more than that.”


## Hadith 2:352

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya:_

We entwined the hair of the dead daughter of the Prophet into three braids. Waki said that Sufyan said, “One braid was entwined in front and the other two were entwined on the sides of the head.”


## Hadith 2:353

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya:_

One of the daughters of the Prophet expired and he came to us and said, “Wash her with Sidr (water) for odd number of times, i.e. three, five or more, if you think it necessary, and in the last, put camphor or (some camphor on her), and when you finish, notify me.” So when we finished we informed him. He gave his waist-sheet to us (to shroud her). We entwined the hair (of the deceased girl) in three braids and made them fall at her back.


## Hadith 2:354

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle was shrouded in three Yemenite white Suhuliya (pieces of cloth) of cotton, and in them there was neither a shirt nor a turban."


## Hadith 2:355

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

While a man was riding (his Mount) in 'Arafat, he fell down from it (his Mount) and broke his neck (and died). The Prophet said, “Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud him in two pieces of cloth, and neither perfume him, nor cover his head, for he will be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection saying, 'Labbaik,' (i.e. like a pilgrim).”


## Hadith 2:356

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

While a man was at 'Arafat (for Hajj) with Allah's Apostle the fell down from his Mount and broke his neck (and died). So Allah's Apostle said, “Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud him in two pieces of cloth and neither perfume him nor cover his head, for Allah will resurrect him on the Day of Resurrection and he will be saying 'Labbaik.”


## Hadith 2:357

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

A man was killed by his camel while we were with the Prophet and he was a Muhrim. So the Prophet said, “Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud him in two pieces of cloth and neither perfume him nor cover his head, for Allah will resurrect him on the Day of Resurrection and he will be saying 'Labbaik' . ”


## Hadith 2:358

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

A man fell from his Mount and died while he was with the Prophet at 'Arafat. The Prophet said, “Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud him in two pieces of cloth and neither perfume him nor cover his head, for he will be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection saying, 'Labbaik'.”


## Hadith 2:359

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

When 'Abdullah bin Ubai (the chief of hypocrites) died, his son came to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Please give me your shirt to shroud him in it, offer his funeral prayer and ask for Allah's forgiveness for him.” So Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) gave his shirt to him and said, “Inform me (When the funeral is ready) so that I may offer the funeral prayer.” So, he informed him and when the Prophet intended to offer the funeral prayer, 'Umar took hold of his hand and said, “Has Allah not forbidden you to offer the funeral prayer for the hypocrites? The Prophet said, ”I have been given the choice for Allah says: '(It does not avail) Whether you (O Muhammad) ask forgiveness for them (hypocrites), or do not ask for forgiveness for them. Even though you ask for their forgiveness seventy times, Allah will not forgive them. (9.80)“ So the Prophet offered the funeral prayer and on that the revelation came: ”And never (O Muhammad) pray (funeral prayer) for any of them (i.e. hypocrites) that dies." (9. 84)


## Hadith 2:360

_Narrated Jabir:_

The Prophet came to (the grave of) 'Abdullah bin Ubai after his body was buried. The body was brought out and then the Prophet put his saliva over the body and clothed it in his shirt.


## Hadith 2:361

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet was shrouded in three pieces of cloth which were made of Suhul (a type of cotton), and neither a shirt nor a turban were used.


## Hadith 2:362

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle was shrouded in three pieces of cloth and neither a shirt nor a turban were used.


## Hadith 2:363

_Narrated Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle was shrouded in three pieces of cloth which were made of white Suhul and neither a shirt nor a turban were used.


## Hadith 2:364

_Narrated Sad from his father:_

Once the meal of 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf was brought in front of him, and he said, “Mustab bin 'Umar was martyred and he was better than I, and he had nothing except his Burd (a black square narrow dress) to be shrouded in. Hamza or another person was martyred and he was also better than I and he had nothing to be shrouded in except his Burd. No doubt, I fear that the rewards of my deeds might have been given early in this world.” Then he started weeping.


## Hadith 2:365

_Narrated Ibrahim:_

Once a meal was brought to 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and he was fasting. He said, “Mustab bin 'Umar was martyred and he was better than I and was shrouded in his Burd and when his head was covered with it, his legs became bare, and when his legs were covered his head got uncovered. Hamza was martyred and was better than I. Now the worldly wealth have been bestowed upon us (or said a similar thing). No doubt, I fear that the rewards of my deeds might have been given earlier in this world.” Then he started weeping and left his food.


## Hadith 2:366

_Narrated Khabbab:_

We emigrated with the Prophet (p.b.u.h) in Allah's cause, and so our reward was then surely incumbent on Allah. Some of us died and they did not take anything from their rewards in this world, and amongst them was Mustab bin 'Umar; and the others were those who got their rewards. Mustab bin 'Umar was martyred on the day of the Battle of Uhud and we could get nothing except his Burd to shroud him in. And when we covered his head his feet became bare and vice versa. So the Prophet ordered us to cover his head only and to put idhkhir (a kind of shrub) over his feet.


## Hadith 2:367

_Narrated Sahl:_

A woman brought a woven Burda (sheet) having edging (border) to the Prophet, Then Sahl asked them whether they knew what is Burda, they said that Burda is a cloak and Sahl confirmed their reply. Then the woman said, “I have woven it with my own hands and I have brought it so that you may wear it.” The Prophet accepted it, and at that time he was in need of it. So he came out wearing it as his waist-sheet. A man praised it and said, “Will you give it to me? How nice it is!” The other people said, “You have not done the right thing as the Prophet is in need of it and you have asked for it when you know that he never turns down anybody's request.” The man replied, “By Allah, I have not asked for it to wear it but to make it my shroud.” Later it was his shroud.


## Hadith 2:368

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya:_

We were forbidden to accompany funeral processions but not strictly.


## Hadith 2:369

_Narrated Muhammad bin Sirin:_

One of the sons of Um 'Atiyya died, and when it was the third day she asked for a yellow perfume and put it over her body, and said, “We were forbidden to mourn for more than three days except for our husbands.”


## Hadith 2:370

_Narrated Zainab bint Abi Salama:_

When the news of the death of Abu Sufyan reached from Sham, Um Habiba on the third day, asked for a yellow perfume and scented her cheeks and forearms and said, “No doubt, I would not have been in need of this, had I not heard the Prophet saying: ”It is not legal for a woman who believes in Allah and the Last Day to mourn for more than three days for any dead person except her husband, for whom she should mourn for four months and ten days."


## Hadith 2:371

_Narrated Zainab bint Abi Salama :_

I went to Um Habiba, the wife of Prophet, who said, “I heard the Prophets saying, 'It is not legal for a woman who believes in Allah and the Last Day to mourn for any dead person for more than three days except for her husband, (for whom she should mourn) for four months and ten days'.” Later I went to Zainab bint Jahsh when her brother died; she asked for some scent, and after using it she said, “I am not in need of scent but I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'It is not legal for a woman who believes in Allah and the Last Day to mourn for more than three days for any dead person except her husband, (for whom she should mourn) for four months and ten days.' ”


## Hadith 2:372

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet passed by a woman who was weeping beside a grave. He told her to fear Allah and be patient. She said to him, “Go away, for you have not been afflicted with a calamity like mine.” And she did not recognize him. Then she was informed that he was the Prophet . so she went to the house of the Prophet and there she did not find any guard. Then she said to him, “I did not recognize you.” He said, “Verily, the patience is at the first stroke of a calamity.”


## Hadith 2:373

_Narrated Usama bin Zaid:_

The daughter of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) sent (a messenger) to the Prophet requesting him to come as her child was dying (or was gasping), but the Prophet returned the messenger and told him to convey his greeting to her and say: “Whatever Allah takes is for Him and whatever He gives, is for Him, and everything with Him has a limited fixed term (in this world) and so she should be patient and hope for Allah's reward.” She again sent for him, swearing that he should come. The Prophet got up, and so did Sad bin 'Ubada, Muadh bin Jabal, Ubai bin Ka'b, Zaid bin Thabit and some other men. The child was brought to Allah's Apostle while his breath was disturbed in his chest (the sub-narrator thinks that Usama added: ) as if it was a leather water-skin. On that the eyes of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) started shedding tears. Sad said, “O Allah's Apostle! What is this?” He replied, "It is mercy which Allah has lodged in the hearts of His slaves, and Allah is merciful only to those of His slaves who are merciful (to others).


## Hadith 2:374

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

We were (in the funeral procession) of one of the daughters of the Prophet and he was sitting by the side of the grave. I saw his eyes shedding tears. He said, “Is there anyone among you who did not have sexual relations with his wife last night?” Abu Talha replied in the affirmative. And so the Prophet told him to get down in the grave. And so he got down in her grave.


## Hadith 2:375

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Ubaidullah bin Abi Mulaika:_

One of the daughters of 'Uthman died at Mecca. We went to attend her funeral procession. Ibn 'Umar and Ibn Abbas were also present. I sat in between them (or said, I sat beside one of them. Then a man came and sat beside me.) 'Abdullah bin 'Umar said to 'Amr bin 'Uthman, “Will you not prohibit crying as Allah's Apostle has said, 'The dead person is tortured by the crying of his relatives.?” Ibn Abbas said, “Umar used to say so.” Then he added narrating, “I accompanied Umar on a journey from Mecca till we reached Al-Baida. There he saw some travelers in the shade of a Samura (A kind of forest tree). He said (to me), ”Go and see who those travelers are.“ So I went and saw that one of them was Suhaib. I told this to 'Umar who then asked me to call him. So I went back to Suhaib and said to him, ”Depart and follow the chief of the faithful believers.“ Later, when 'Umar was stabbed, Suhaib came in weeping and saying, ”O my brother, O my friend!“ (on this 'Umar said to him, ”O Suhaib! Are you weeping for me while the Prophet said, “The dead person is punished by some of the weeping of his relatives?” Ibn Abbas added, “When 'Umar died I told all this to Aisha and she said, 'May Allah be merciful to Umar. By Allah, Allah's Apostle did not say that a believer is punished by the weeping of his relatives. But he said, Allah increases the punishment of a non-believer because of the weeping of his relatives.” Aisha further added, “The Quran is sufficient for you (to clear up this point) as Allah has stated: 'No burdened soul will bear another's burden.' ” (35.18). Ibn Abbas then said, “Only Allah makes one laugh or cry.” Ibn Umar did not say anything after that.


## Hadith 2:376

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Once Allah's Apostle passed by (the grave of) a Jewess whose relatives were weeping over her. He said, “They are weeping over her and she is being tortured in her grave.”


## Hadith 2:377

_Narrated Abu Burda:_

That his father said, “When Umar was stabbed, Suhaib started crying: O my brother! 'Umar said, 'Don't you know that the Prophet said: The deceased is tortured for the weeping of the living'?”


## Hadith 2:378

_Narrated Al-Mughira:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “Ascribing false things to me is not like ascribing false things to anyone else. Whosoever tells a lie against me intentionally then surely let him occupy his seat in Hell-Fire.” I heard the Prophet saying, “The deceased who is wailed over is tortured for that wailing.”


## Hadith 2:379

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar from his father:_

The Prophet said, “The deceased is tortured in his grave for the wailing done over him.”


## Hadith 2:380

_Narrated Shu'ba:_

The deceased is tortured for the wailing of the living ones over him .


## Hadith 2:381

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

On the day of the Battle of Uhud, my father was brought and he had been mayhemed and was placed in front of Allah's Apostle and a sheet was over him. I went intending to uncover my father but my people forbade me; again I wanted to uncover him but my people forbade me. Allah's Apostle gave his order and he was shifted away. At that time he heard the voice of a crying woman and asked, “Who is this?” They said, “It is the daughter or the sister of Amr.” He said, “Why does she weep? (or let her stop weeping), for the angels had been shading him with their wings till he (i.e. the body of the martyr) was shifted away.”


## Hadith 2:382

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

the Prophet said, “He who slaps his cheeks, tears his clothes and follows the ways and traditions of the Days of Ignorance is not one of us.”


## Hadith 2:383

_Narrated 'Amir bin Sad bin Abi Waqqas:_

That his father said, “In the year of the last Hajj of the Prophet I became seriously ill and the Prophet used to visit me inquiring about my health. I told him, 'I am reduced to this state because of illness and I am wealthy and have no inheritors except a daughter, (In this narration the name of 'Amir bin Sad is mentioned and in fact it is a mistake; the narrator is 'Aisha bint Sad bin Abi Waqqas). Should I give two-thirds of my property in charity?' He said, 'No.' I asked, 'Half?' He said, 'No.' then he added, 'One-third, and even one-third is much. You'd better leave your inheritors wealthy rather than leaving them poor, begging others. You will get a reward for whatever you spend for Allah's sake, even for what you put in your wife's mouth.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Will I be left alone after my companions have gone?' He said, 'If you are left behind, whatever good deeds you will do will up-grade you and raise you high. And perhaps you will have a long life so that some people will be benefited by you while others will be harmed by you. O Allah! Complete the emigration of my companions and do not turn them renegades.' But Allah's Apostle felt sorry for poor Sad bin Khaula as he died in Mecca.” (but Sad bin Abi Waqqas lived long after the Prophet (p.b.u.h).)


## Hadith 2:384

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “He who slaps the cheeks, tears the clothes and follows the tradition of the Days of Ignorance is not from us.”


## Hadith 2:385

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “He who slaps the cheeks, tears the clothes and follows the traditions of the Days of Ignorance is not from us.”


## Hadith 2:386

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When the Prophet got the news of the death of Ibn Haritha, Ja'far and Ibn Rawaha he sat down and looked sad and I was looking at him through the chink of the door. A man came and told him about the crying of the women of Ja'far. The Prophet ordered him to forbid them. The man went and came back saying that he had told them but they did not listen to him. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “Forbid them.” So again he went and came back for the third time and said, “O Allah's Apostle! By Allah, they did not listen to us at all.” ('Aisha added): Allah's Apostle ordered him to go and put dust in their mouths. I said, (to that man) “May Allah stick your nose in the dust (i.e. humiliate you)! You could neither (persuade the women to) fulfill the order of Allah's Apostle nor did you relieve Allah's Apostle from fatigue. ”


## Hadith 2:387

_Narrated Anas:_

When the reciters of Quran were martyred, Allah's Apostle recited Qunut for one month and I never saw him (i.e. Allah's Apostle) so sad as he was on that day.


## Hadith 2:388

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

One of the sons of Abu Talha became sick and died and Abu Talha at that time was not at home. When his wife saw that he was dead, she prepared him (washed and shrouded him) and placed him somewhere in the house. When Abu Talha came, he asked, “How is the boy?” She said, “The child is quiet and I hope he is in peace.” Abu Talha thought that she had spoken the truth. Abu Talha passed the night and in the morning took a bath and when he intended to go out, she told him that his son had died, Abu Talha offered the (morning) prayer with the Prophet and informed the Prophet of what happened to them. Allah's Apostle said, “May Allah bless you concerning your night. (That is, may Allah bless you with good offspring).” Sufyan said, “One of the Ansar said, 'They (i.e. Abu Talha and his wife) had nine sons and all of them became reciters of the Quran (by heart).' ”


## Hadith 2:389

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “The real patience is at the first stroke of a calamity.”


## Hadith 2:390

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

We went with Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) to the blacksmith Abu Saif, and he was the husband of the wet-nurse of Ibrahim (the son of the Prophet). Allah's Apostle took Ibrahim and kissed him and smelled him and later we entered Abu Saif's house and at that time Ibrahim was in his last breaths, and the eyes of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) started shedding tears. 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf said, “O Allah's Apostle, even you are weeping!” He said, “O Ibn 'Auf, this is mercy.” Then he wept more and said, “The eyes are shedding tears and the heart is grieved, and we will not say except what pleases our Lord, O Ibrahim ! Indeed we are grieved by your separation.”


## Hadith 2:391

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :_

Sad bin 'Ubada became sick and the Prophet along with 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf, Sad bin Abi Waqqas and 'Abdullah bin Masud visited him to enquire about his health. When he came to him, he found him surrounded by his household and he asked, “Has he died?” They said, “No, O Allah's Apostle.” The Prophet wept and when the people saw the weeping of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) they all wept. He said, “Will you listen? Allah does not punish for shedding tears, nor for the grief of the heart but he punishes or bestows His Mercy because of this.” He pointed to his tongue and added, “The deceased is punished for the wailing of his relatives over him.” 'Umar used to beat with a stick and throw stones and put dust over the faces (of those who used to wail over the dead).


## Hadith 2:392

_Narrated Aisha:_

When the news of the martyrdom of Zaid bin Haritha, Ja'far and 'Abdullah bin Rawaha came, the Prophet sat down looking sad, and I was looking through the chink of the door. A man came and said, “O Allah's Apostle! The women of Ja'far,” and then he mentioned their crying . The Prophet (p.b.u.h) ordered him to stop them from crying. The man went and came back and said, “I tried to stop them but they disobeyed.” The Prophet (p.b.u.h) ordered him for the second time to forbid them. He went again and came back and said, “They did not listen to me, (or “us”: the sub-narrator Muhammad bin Haushab is in doubt as to which is right). ” ('Aisha added: The Prophet said, “Put dust in their mouths.” I said (to that man), “May Allah stick your nose in the dust (i.e. humiliate you).” By Allah, you could not (stop the women from crying) to fulfill the order, besides you did not relieve Allah's Apostle from fatigue."


## Hadith 2:393

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya:_

At the time of giving the pledge of allegiance to the Prophet one of the conditions was that we would not wail, but it was not fulfilled except by five women and they are Um Sulaim, Um Al-'Ala', the daughter of Abi Sabra (the wife of Muadh), and two other women; or the daughter of Abi Sabra and the wife of Muadh and another woman.


## Hadith 2:394

_Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a:,_

The Prophet said, “Whenever you see a funeral procession, stand up till the procession goes ahead of you.” Al-Humaidi added, “Till the coffin leaves you behind or is put down.”


## Hadith 2:395

_Narrated 'Amir bin Rabi'a:_

The Prophet said, “If any one of you see a funeral procession and he is not going along with it, then he should stand and remain standing till he gets behind it, or it leaves him behind, or the coffin is put down before it goes ahead of him . ”


## Hadith 2:396

_Narrated Said Al-Maqburi:_

That his father said, “While we were accompanying a funeral procession, Abu Huraira got hold of the hand of Marwan and they sat down before the coffin was put down. Then Abu Said came and took hold of Marwan's hand and said, ”Get up. By Allah, no doubt this (i.e. Abu Huraira) knows that the Prophet forbade us to do that.“ Abu Huraira said, ”He (Abu Said) has spoken the truth."


## Hadith 2:397

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri_

The Prophet said, “When you see a funeral procession, you should stand up, and whoever accompanies it should not sit till the coffin is put down.”


## Hadith 2:398

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

A funeral procession passed in front of us and the Prophet stood up and we too stood up. We said, 'O Allah's Apostle! This is the funeral procession of a Jew.“ He said, ”Whenever you see a funeral procession, you should stand up."


## Hadith 2:399

_Narrated 'Abdur Rahman bin Abi Laila:_

Sahl bin Hunaif and Qais bin Sad were sitting in the city of Al-Qadisiya. A funeral procession passed in front of them and they stood up. They were told that funeral procession was of one of the inhabitants of the land i.e. of a non-believer, under the protection of Muslims. They said, “A funeral procession passed in front of the Prophet and he stood up. When he was told that it was the coffin of a Jew, he said, ”Is it not a living being (soul)?"


## Hadith 2:400

_Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri :_

Allah's Apostle said, When the funeral is ready and the men carry it on their shoulders, if the deceased was righteous it will say, 'Present me (hurriedly),' and if he was not righteous, it will say, 'Woe to it (me)! Where are they taking it (me)?' Its voice is heard by everything except man and if he heard it he would fall unconscious."

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_300">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:201 to 2:300</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_500">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:401 to 2:500</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
