---
title: "Hadith 2:401 to 2:500"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_400">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:301 to 2:400</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_600">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:501 to 2:600</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 2:401

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Hurry up with the dead body for if it was righteous, you are forwarding it to welfare; and if it was otherwise, then you are putting off an evil thing down your necks.”


## Hadith 2:402

_Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri_

The Prophet said, “When a funeral is ready and the men carry the deceased on their necks (shoulders), if it was pious then it will say, ‘Present me quickly’, and if it was not pious, then it will say, ‘Woe to it (me), where are they taking it (me)?’ And its voice is heard by everything except mankind and if he heard it he would fall unconscious.”


## Hadith 2:403

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle offered the funeral prayer for An-Najashi and I was in the second or third row.


## Hadith 2:404

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) informed his companions about the death of AnNajashi and then he went ahead (to lead the prayer) and the people lined up behind him in rows and he said four Takbir.


## Hadith 2:405

_Narrated Ash-Shaibani:_

Ash Sha'bi said, “I was informed by a man who had seen the Prophet going to a grave that was separate from the other graves and he aligned the people in rows and said four Takbir.” I said, “O Abu 'Amr! who narrated (that) to you”? He said, “Ibn Abbas. ”


## Hadith 2:406

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

The Prophet said, “Today a pious man from Ethiopia (i.e. An Najashi) has expired, come on to offer the funeral prayer.” (Jabir said): We lined up in rows and after that the Prophet led the prayer and we were in rows. Jabir added, I was in the second row."


## Hadith 2:407

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle passed by a grave of a deceased who had been buried at night. He said, “When was this (deceased) buried?” The people said, “Yesterday.” He said, “Why did you not inform me?” They said, “We buried him when it was dark and so we disliked to wake you up.” He stood up and we lined up behind him. (Ibn Abbas said): I was one of them, and the Prophet offered the funeral prayer.


## Hadith 2:408

_Narrated Ash-Shaibani:_

Ash-Sha'bi said, “Somebody who passed along with your Prophet (p.b.u.h) by a grave that was separate from the other graves informed me (saying), ”The Prophet

led us (in the prayer) and we aligned behind him.“ We said, ”O Abu 'Amr! Who told you this narration?“ He replied, ”Ibn Abbas."


## Hadith 2:409

_Narrated Nafi:_

Ibn Umar was told that Abu Huraira said, “Whoever accompanies the funeral procession will have a reward equal to one Qirat.” Ibn 'Umar said, “Abu Huraira talks of a too enormous reward.” Aisha attested Abu Huraira's narration and said, “I heard Allah's Apostle saying like that.” Ibn Umar said, “We have lost numerous Qirats.”


## Hadith 2:410

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

that Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, “Whoever attends the funeral procession till he offers the funeral prayer for it, will get a reward equal to one Qirat, and whoever accompanies it till burial, will get a reward equal to two Qirats.” It was asked, “What are two Qirats?” He replied, “Like two huge mountains.”


## Hadith 2:411

_Narrated 'Amir:_

Ibn Abbas (who was at that time a boy) said, “Allah's Apostle came to a grave and the people said, 'He or she was buried yesterday.' ” Ibn Abbas added, “We aligned behind the Prophet and he led the funeral prayer of the deceased.”


## Hadith 2:412

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle informed about the news of the death of An-Najash (King of Ethiopia) on the day he expired. He said, "Ask Allah's them align in rows at the Musalla and said four Takbir.


## Hadith 2:413

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :_

The Jew brought to the Prophet a man and a woman from amongst them who have committed (adultery) illegal sexual intercourse. He ordered both of them to be stoned (to death), near the place of offering the funeral prayers beside the mosque."


## Hadith 2:414

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

Aisha said, “The Prophet in his fatal illness said, 'Allah cursed the Jews and the Christians because they took the graves of their Prophets as places for praying.”' Aisha added, "Had it not been for that the grave of the Prophet (p.b.u.h)

would have been made prominent but I am afraid it might be taken (as a) place for praying.


## Hadith 2:415

_Narrated Samura bin Jundab:_

I offered the funeral prayer behind the Prophet for a woman who had died during child-birth and he stood up by the middle of the coffin.


## Hadith 2:416

_Narrated Samura bin Jundab_

I offered the funeral prayer behind the Prophet for a woman who had died during child-birth and he stood up by the middle of the coffin.


## Hadith 2:417

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle informed about the news of the death of An-Najash on the day he died. He went out with us to the Musalla and we aligned in rows and he said four Takbirs for An-Najashi's funeral prayer.


## Hadith 2:418

_Narrated Jabir:_

The Prophet offered the funeral prayer of As-Hama An-Najash and said four Takbir.


## Hadith 2:419

_Narrated Talha bin 'Abdullah bin 'Auf:_

I offered the funeral prayer behind Ibn Abbas and he recited Al-Fatiha and said, "You should know that it (i.e. recitation of Al-Fatiha) is the tradition of the Prophet Muhammad.


## Hadith 2:420

_Narrated Sulaiman Ash-Shaibani:_

I heard Ash-Sha'bi saying, “I was told by a man who had passed with the Prophet (p.b.u.h) by a grave that was separate from the other graves that he (the Prophet ) led them in the prayer and they prayed behind him.” I said, “O Abu 'Amr! Who narrated that to you?” He replied, “Ibn Abbas.”


## Hadith 2:421

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A black person, a male or a female used to clean the Mosque and then died. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) did not know about it . One day the Prophet remembered him and said, “What happened to that person?” The people replied, “O Allah's Apostle! He died.” He said, “Why did you not inform me?” They said, “His story was so and so (i.e. regarded him as insignificant).” He said, “Show me his grave.” He then went to his grave and offered the funeral prayer.


## Hadith 2:422

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “When a human being is laid in his grave and his companions return and he even hears their foot steps, two angels come to him and make him sit and ask him: What did you use to say about this man, Muhammad ? He will say: I testify that he is Allah's slave and His Apostle. Then it will be said to him, 'Look at your place in the Hell-Fire. Allah has given you a place in Paradise instead of it.' ” The Prophet added, “The dead person will see both his places. But a non-believer or a hypocrite will say to the angels, 'I do not know, but I used to say what the people used to say! It will be said to him, 'Neither did you know nor did you take the guidance (by reciting the Quran).' Then he will be hit with an iron hammer between his two ears, and he will cry and that cry will be heard by whatever approaches him except human beings and jinns.”


## Hadith 2:423

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The angel of death was sent to Moses and when he went to him, Moses slapped him severely, spoiling one of his eyes. The angel went back to his Lord, and said, “You sent me to a slave who does not want to die.” Allah restored his eye and said, “Go back and tell him (i.e. Moses) to place his hand over the back of an ox, for he will be allowed to live for a number of years equal to the number of hairs coming under his hand.” (So the angel came to him and told him the same). Then Moses asked, “O my Lord! What will be then?” He said, “Death will be then.” He said, “(Let it be) now.” He asked Allah that He bring him near the Sacred Land at a distance of a stone's throw. Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, “Were I there I would show you the grave of Moses by the way near the red sand hill.”


## Hadith 2:424

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) offered the funeral prayer of a man one night after he was buried, he and his companions stood up (for the Prayer). He had asked them about him before standing, saying, “Who is this?” They said, “He is so and so and was buried last night.” So all of them offered the funeral prayer.


## Hadith 2:425

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When the Prophet became ill, some of his wives talked about a church which they had seen in Ethiopia and it was called Mariya. Um Salma and Um Habiba had been to Ethiopia, and both of them narrated its (the Church's) beauty and the pictures it contained. The Prophet raised his head and said, “Those are the people who, whenever a pious man dies amongst them, make a place of worship at his grave and then they make those pictures in it. Those are the worst creatures in the Sight of Allah.”


## Hadith 2:426

_Narrated Anas:_

We were in the funeral procession of the daughter of Allah's Apostle and Allah's Apostle was sitting near the grave and I saw his eyes full of tears. He said, “Is there anyone amongst you who did not have sexual relations with his wife last night?” Abu Talha replied in the affirmative. And so Allah's Apostle told him to get down in her grave and he got down in her grave and buried her.


## Hadith 2:427

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:_

The Prophet collected every two martyrs of Uhud in one piece of cloth, then he would ask, “Which of them had (knew) more of the Quran?” When one of them was pointed out for him, he would put that one first in the grave and say, “I will be a witness on these on the Day of Resurrection.” He ordered them to be buried with their blood on their bodies and they were neither washed nor was a funeral prayer offered for them.


## Hadith 2:428

_Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:_

One day the Prophet went out and offered the funeral prayers of the martyrs of Uhud and then went up the pulpit and said, “I will pave the way for you as your predecessor and will be a witness on you. By Allah! I see my Fount (Kauthar) just now and I have been given the keys of all the treasures of the earth (or the keys of the earth). By Allah! I am not afraid that you will worship others along with Allah after my death, but I am afraid that you will fight with one another for the worldly things.”


## Hadith 2:429

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

The Prophet buried every two martyrs in of Uhud in one grave.


## Hadith 2:430

_Narrated Jabir:_

The Prophet said, “Bury them (i.e. martyrs) with their blood.” (that was) On the day of the Battle of Uhud. He did not get them washed.


## Hadith 2:431

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

Allah's Apostle shrouded every two martyrs of Uhud in one piece of cloth and then he would ask, “Which of them knew more Quran?” When one of them was pointed out he would put him first in the grave. He said, “I am a witness on these.” Then he ordered them to be buried with blood on their bodies. Neither did he offer their funeral prayer nor did he get them washed. (Jabir bin Abdullah added): Allah's Apostle used to ask about the martyrs of Uhud as to which of them knew more of the Quran." And when one of them was pointed out as having more of it he would put him first in the grave and then his companions. (Jabir added): My father and my uncle were shrouded in one sheet.


## Hadith 2:432

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “Allah has made Mecca a sanctuary (sacred place) and it was a sanctuary before me and will be so after me. It was made legal for me (to fight in it) for a few hours of the day. None is allowed to uproot its thorny shrubs or to cut its trees or to chase its game or to pick up its fallen things except by a person who announces it publicly.” On that Al-Abbas said (to the Prophet), “Except Al-Idhkhir for our goldsmiths and for our graves.” And so the Prophet added, “Except Al-Idhkhir. ” And Abu Huraira narrated that the Prophet said, “Except Al-Idhkhir for our graves and houses.” And Ibn Abbas said, “For their goldsmiths and houses.”


## Hadith 2:433

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle came to Abdullah bin Ubai (a hypocrite) after his death and he has been laid in his pit (grave). He ordered (that he be taken out of the grave) and he was taken out. Then he placed him on his knees and threw some of his saliva on him and clothed him in his (the Prophet's) own shirt. Allah knows better (why he did so). 'Abdullah bin Ubai had given his shirt to Al-Abbas to wear. Abu Harun said, “Allah's Apostle at that time had two shirts and the son of 'Abdullah bin Ubai said to him, 'O Allah's Apostle! Clothe my father in your shirt which has been in contact with your skin.' ' Sufyan added, ”Thus people think that the Prophet clothed 'Abdullah bin Tubal in his shirt in lieu of what he (Abdullah) had done (for Al Abbas, the Prophet's uncle.)"


## Hadith 2:434

_Narrated Jabir:_

When the time of the Battle of Uhud approached, my father called me at night and said, “I think that I will be the first amongst the companions of the Prophet to be martyred. I do not leave anyone after me dearer to me than you, except Allah's Apostle's soul and I owe some debt and you should repay it and treat your sisters favorably (nicely and politely).” So in the morning he was the first to be martyred and was buried along with another (martyr). I did not like to leave him with the other (martyr) so I took him out of the grave after six months of his burial and he was in the same condition as he was on the day of burial, except a slight change near his ear.


## Hadith 2:435

_Narrated Jabir:_

A man was buried along with my father and I did not like it till I took him (i.e. my father) out and buried him in a separate grave.


## Hadith 2:436

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet collected every two martyrs of Uhud (in one grave) and then he would ask, “Which of them knew the Quran more?” And if one of them was pointed out for him as having more knowledge, he would put him first in the Lahd. The Prophet said, “I will be a witness on these on the Day of Resurrection.” Then he ordered them to be buried with their blood on their bodies and he did not have them washed.


## Hadith 2:437

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

'Umar set out along with the Prophet (p.b.u.h) with a group of people to Ibn Saiyad till they saw him playing with the boys near the hillocks of Bani Mughala. Ibn Saiyad at that time was nearing his puberty and did not notice (us) until the Prophet stroked him with his hand and said to him, “Do you testify that I am Allah's Apostle?” Ibn Saiyad looked at him and said, “I testify that you are the Messenger of illiterates.” Then Ibn Saiyad asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h), “Do you testify that I am Allah's Apostle?” The Prophet (p.b.u.h) refuted it and said, “I believe in Allah and His Apostles.” Then he said (to Ibn Saiyad), “What do you think?” Ibn Saiyad answered, “True people and liars visit me.” The Prophet said, “You have been confused as to this matter.” Then the Prophet said to him, “I have kept something (in my mind) for you, (can you tell me that?)” Ibn Saiyad said, “It is Al-Dukh (the smoke).” (2) The Prophet said, “Let you be in ignominy. You cannot cross your limits.” On that 'Umar, said, “O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop his head off.” The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “If he is he (i.e. Dajjal), then you cannot over-power him, and if he is not, then there is no use of murdering him.” (Ibn 'Umar added): Later on Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) once again went along with Ubai bin Ka'b to the date-palm trees (garden) where Ibn Saiyad was staying. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) wanted to hear something from Ibn Saiyad before Ibn Saiyad could see him, and the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saw him lying covered with a sheet and from where his murmurs were heard. Ibn Saiyad's mother saw Allah's Apostle while he was hiding himself behind the trunks of the date-palm trees. She addressed Ibn Saiyad, “O Saf ! (and this was the name of Ibn Saiyad) Here is Muhammad.” And with that Ibn Saiyad got up. The Prophet said, "Had this woman left him (Had she not disturbed him), then Ibn Saiyad would have revealed the reality of his case.


## Hadith 2:438

_Narrated Anas:_

A young Jewish boy used to serve the Prophet and he became sick. So the Prophet went to visit him. He sat near his head and asked him to embrace Islam. The boy looked at his father, who was sitting there; the latter told him to obey Abu-l-Qasim and the boy embraced Islam. The Prophet came out saying: “Praises be to Allah Who saved the boy from the Hell-fire.”


## Hadith 2:439

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

My mother and I were among the weak and oppressed. I from among the children, and my mother from among the women.


## Hadith 2:440

_Narrated Ibn Shihab:_

The funeral prayer should be offered for every child even if he were the son of a prostitute as he was born with a true faith of Islam (i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone). If his parents are Muslims, particularly the father, even if his mother were a non-Muslim, and if he after the delivery cries (even once) before his death (i.e. born alive) then the funeral prayer must be offered. And if the child does not cry after his delivery (i.e. born dead) then his funeral prayer should not be offered, and he will be considered as a miscarriage. Abu Huraira, narrated that the Prophet said, “Every child is born with a true faith (i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone) but his parents convert him to Judaism or to Christianity or to Magainism, as an animal delivers a perfect baby animal. Do you find it mutilated?” Then Abu Huraira recited the holy verses: 'The pure Allah's Islamic nature (true faith i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone), with which He has created human beings.' " (30.30).


## Hadith 2:441

_Narrated Abu Huraira :_

Allah's Apostle said, “Every child is born with a true faith of Islam (i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone) but his parents convert him to Judaism, Christianity or Magainism, as an animal delivers a perfect baby animal. Do you find it mutilated?” Then Abu Huraira recited the holy verses: “The pure Allah's Islamic nature (true faith of Islam) (i.e. worshipping none but Allah) with which He has created human beings. No change let there be in the religion of Allah (i.e. joining none in worship with Allah). That is the straight religion (Islam) but most of men know, not.” (30.30)


## Hadith 2:442

_Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab from his father:_

When the time of the death of Abu Talib approached, Allah's Apostle went to him and found Abu Jahl bin Hisham and 'Abdullah bin Abi Umaiya bin Al-Mughira by his side. Allah's Apostle said to Abu Talib, “O uncle! Say: None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, a sentence with which I shall be a witness (i.e. argue) for you before Allah. Abu Jahl and 'Abdullah bin Abi Umaiya said, ”O Abu Talib! Are you going to denounce the religion of Abdul Muttalib?“ Allah's Apostle kept on inviting Abu Talib to say it (i.e. 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah') while they (Abu Jahl and Abdullah) kept on repeating their statement till Abu Talib said as his last statement that he was on the religion of Abdul Muttalib and refused to say, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah.' (Then Allah's Apostle said, ”I will keep on asking Allah's forgiveness for you unless I am forbidden (by Allah) to do so." So Allah revealed (the verse) concerning him (i.e. It is not fitting for the Prophet and those who believe that they should invoke (Allah) for forgiveness for pagans even though they be of kin, after it has become clear to them that they are companions of the fire (9.113).


## Hadith 2:443

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet once passed by two graves, and those two persons (in the graves) were being tortured. He said, “They are being tortured not for a great thing (to avoid). One of them never saved himself from being soiled with his urine, while the other was going about with calumnies (to make enmity between friends). He then took a green leaf of a date-palm tree split it into two pieces and fixed one on each grave. The people said, ”O Allah's Apostle! Why have you done so?“ He replied, ”I hope that their punishment may be lessened till they (the leaf) become dry."


## Hadith 2:444

_Narrated 'Ali:_

“ We were accompanying a funeral procession in Baqi-I-Gharqad. The Prophet came to us and sat and we sat around him. He had a small stick in his hand then he bent his head and started scraping the ground with it. He then said, ”There is none among you, and not a created soul, but has place either in Paradise or in Hell assigned for him and it is also determined for him whether he will be among the blessed or wretched.“ A man said, ”O Allah's Apostle! Should we not depend on what has been written for us and leave the deeds as whoever amongst us is blessed will do the deeds of a blessed person and whoever amongst us will be wretched, will do the deeds of a wretched person?“ The Prophet said, ”The good deeds are made easy for the blessed, and bad deeds are made easy for the wretched.“ Then he recited the Verses:— ”As for him who gives (in charity) and is Allah-fearing And believes in the Best reward from Allah. " (92.5-6)


## Hadith 2:445

_Narrated Thabit bin Ad-Dahhak:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “Whoever intentionally swears falsely by a religion other than Islam, then he is what he has said, (e.g. if he says, ‘If such thing is not true then I am a Jew,’ he is really a Jew). And whoever commits suicide with piece of iron will be punished Prophet said, ”A man was inflicted with wounds and he committed suicide, and so Allah said: My slave has caused death on himself hurriedly, so I forbid Paradise for him."


## Hadith 2:446

_Narrated Abu Huraira-:_

The Prophet said, “He who commits suicide by throttling shall keep on throttling himself in the Hell Fire (forever) and he who commits suicide by stabbing himself shall keep on stabbing himself in the Hell-Fire.”


## Hadith 2:447

_Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab :_

When 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul died, Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was called upon to offer his funeral prayer. When Allah's Apostle stood up to offer the prayer, I got up quickly and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Are you going to pray for Ibn Ubai and he said so and so on such and such occasions?” And started mentioning all that he had said. Allah's Apostle smiled and said, “O 'Umar! Go away from me.” When I talked too much he said, “I have been given the choice and so I have chosen (to offer the prayer). Had I known that he would be forgiven by asking for Allah's forgiveness for more than seventy times, surely I would have done so.” ('Umar added): Allah's Apostle offered his funeral prayer and returned and after a short while the two verses of Surat Bara' were revealed: i.e. “And never (O Muhammad) pray for any of them who dies . . . (to the end of the verse) rebellion (9.84)” — ('Umar added), “Later I astonished at my daring before Allah's Apostle on that day. And Allah and His Apostle know better.”


## Hadith 2:448

_Narrated Anas bin Malik, :_

A funeral procession passed and the people praised the deceased. The Prophet said, “It has been affirmed to him.” Then another funeral procession passed and the people spoke badly of the deceased. The Prophet said, “It has been affirmed to him”. 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asked (Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) ), “What has been affirmed?” He replied, “You praised this, so Paradise has been affirmed to him; and you spoke badly of this, so Hell has been affirmed to him. You people are Allah's witnesses on earth.”


## Hadith 2:449

_Narrated Abu Al-Aswad:_

I came to Medina when an epidemic had broken out. While I was sitting with 'Umar bin Al-Khattab a funeral procession passed by and the people praised the deceased. 'Umar said, “It has been affirmed to him.” And another funeral procession passed by and the people praised the deceased. 'Umar said, “It has been affirmed to him.” A third (funeral procession) passed by and the people spoke badly of the deceased. He said, “It has been affirmed to him.” I (Abu Al-Aswad) asked, “O chief of the believers! What has been affirmed?” He replied, “I said the same as the Prophet had said, that is: if four persons testify the piety of a Muslim, Allah will grant him Paradise.” We asked, “If three persons testify his piety?” He (the Prophet) replied, “Even three.” Then we asked, “If two?” He replied, “Even two.” We did not ask him regarding one witness.


## Hadith 2:450

_Narrated Al-Bara' bin 'Azib :_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "When a faithful believer is made to sit in his grave, then (the angels) come to him and he testifies that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is Allah's Apostle. And that corresponds to Allah's statement: Allah will keep firm those who believe with the word that stands firm . . . (14.27).


## Hadith 2:451

_Narrated Shu'ba:_

Same as above and added, “Allah will keep firm those who believe . . . (14.27) was revealed concerning the punishment of the grave.”


## Hadith 2:452

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet looked at the people of the well (the well in which the bodies of the pagans killed in the Battle of Badr were thrown) and said, “Have you found true what your Lord promised you?” Somebody said to him, “You are addressing dead people.” He replied, “You do not hear better than they but they cannot reply.”


## Hadith 2:453

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “They now realize that what I used to tell them was the truth. ”And Allah said, 'Verily! You cannot make the dead to hear (i.e. benefit them, and similarly the disbelievers) nor can you make the deaf hear. (27.80).


## Hadith 2:454

_Narrated Masruq:_

'Aisha said that a Jewess came to her and mentioned the punishment in the grave, saying to her, “May Allah protect you from the punishment of the grave.” 'Aisha then asked Allah's Apostle about the punishment of the grave. He said, “Yes, (there is) punishment in the grave.” 'Aisha added, “After that I never saw Allah's Apostle but seeking refuge with Allah from the punishment in the grave in every prayer he prayed.”


## Hadith 2:455

_Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr :_

Allah's Apostle once stood up delivering a sermon and mentioned the trial which people will face in the grave. When he mentioned that, the Muslims started shouting loudly.


## Hadith 2:456

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When (Allah's) slave is put in his grave and his companions return and he even hears their footsteps, two angels come to him and make him sit and ask, ‘What did you use to say about this man (i.e. Muhammad)?’ The faithful Believer will say, 'I testify that he is Allah's slave and His Apostle.' Then they will say to him, 'Look at your place in the Hell Fire; Allah has given you a place in Paradise instead of it.' So he will see both his places.” (Qatada said, “We were informed that his grave would be made spacious.” Then Qatada went back to the narration of Anas who said;) Whereas a hypocrite or a non-believer will be asked, “What did you use to say about this man.” He will reply, “I do not know; but I used to say what the people used to say.” So they will say to him, “Neither did you know nor did you take the guidance (by reciting the Quran).” Then he will be hit with iron hammers once, that he will send such a cry as everything near to him will hear, except Jinns and human beings. (See Hadith No. 422).


## Hadith 2:457

_Narrated Abi Aiyub:_

Once the Prophet went out after sunset and heard a dreadful voice, and said, “The Jews are being punished in their graves.”


## Hadith 2:458

_Narrated Musa bin 'Uqba:_

(From the daughter of Khalid bin Sa id bin Al-'Asi) who said that she had heard the Prophet seeking refuge with Allah from the punishment in the grave.


## Hadith 2:459

_Narrated Abu Huraira :_

Allah's Apostle used to invoke (Allah): “Allahumma ini a'udhu bika min 'adhabi-l-Qabr, wa min 'adhabi-nnar, wa min fitnati-l-mahya wa-lmamat, wa min fitnati-l-masih ad-dajjal. (O Allah! I seek refuge with you from the punishment in the grave and from the punishment in the Hell fire and from the afflictions of life and death, and the afflictions of Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal.”


## Hadith 2:460

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet once passed by two graves and said, “They (the deceased persons in those graves) are being tortured not for a great thing to avoid.” And then added, “Yes, (they are being punished for a big sin), for one of them used to go about with calumnies while the other never saved himself from being soiled with his urine.” (Ibn Abbas added): Then he took a green leaf of a date-palm) and split it into two pieces and fixed one piece on each grave and said, “May their punishment be abated till these (two pieces) get dry.”


## Hadith 2:461

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :_

Allah's Apostle said, “When anyone of you dies, he is shown his place both in the morning and in the evening. If he is one of the people of Paradise; he is shown his place in it, and if he is from the people of the Hell-Fire; he is shown his place there-in. Then it is said to him, 'This is your place till Allah resurrect you on the Day of Resurrection.”


## Hadith 2:462

_Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri :_

Allah's Apostle said, “When the funeral is ready (for its burial) and the people lift it on their shoulders, then if the deceased is a righteous person he says, 'Take me ahead,' and if he is not a righteous one then he says, 'Woe to it (me)! Where are you taking it (me)?' And his voice is audible to everything except human beings; and if they heard it they would fall down unconscious . ”


## Hadith 2:463

_Narrated Anas bin Malik_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, “Any Muslim whose three children died before the age of puberty will be granted Paradise by Allah because of His mercy to them.”


## Hadith 2:464

_Narrated Al-Bara':_

When Ibrahlm (the son of Prophet) expired, Allah's Apostle said, “There is a wet-nurse for him in Paradise.”


## Hadith 2:465

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was asked about the children of (Mushrikeen) pagans. The Prophet replied, “Since Allah created them, He knows what sort of deeds they would have done.”


## Hadith 2:466

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet was asked about the offspring of pagans (Mushrakeen); so he said, “Allah knows what sort of deeds they would have done.”


## Hadith 2:467

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Every child is born with a true faith of Islam (i.e. to worship none but Allah Alone) and his parents convert him to Judaism or Christianity or Magianism, as an animal delivers a perfect baby animal. Do you find it mutilated?”


## Hadith 2:468

_Narrated Samura bin Jundab:_

Whenever the Prophet finished the (morning) prayer, he would face us and ask, “Who amongst you had a dream last night?” So if anyone had seen a dream he would narrate it. The Prophet would say: “Ma sha'a-llah” (An Arabic maxim meaning literally, 'What Allah wished,' and it indicates a good omen.) One day, he asked us whether anyone of us had seen a dream. We replied in the negative. The Prophet said, "But I had seen (a dream) last night that two men came to me, caught hold of my hands, and took me to the Sacred Land (Jerusalem). There, I saw a person sitting and another standing with an iron hook in his hand pushing it inside the mouth of the former till it reached the jaw-bone, and then tore off one side of his cheek, and then did the same with the other side; in the mean-time the first side of his cheek became normal again and then he repeated the same operation again. I said, 'What is this?' They told me to proceed on and we went on till we came to a man Lying flat on his back, and another man standing at his head carrying a stone or a piece of rock, and crushing the head of the Lying man, with that stone. Whenever he struck him, the stone rolled away.

The man went to pick it up and by the time he returned to him, the crushed head had returned to its normal state and the man came back and struck him again (and so on). I said, ‘Who is this?’ They told me to proceed on; so we proceeded on and passed by a hole like an oven; with a narrow top and wide bottom, and the fire was kindling underneath that hole. Whenever the fire-flame went up, the people were lifted up to such an extent that they about to get out of it, and whenever the fire got quieter, the people went down into it, and there were naked men and women in it. I said, ‘Who is this?’ They told me to proceed on. So we proceeded on till we reached a river of blood and a man was in it, and another man was standing at its bank with stones in front of him, facing the man standing in the river. Whenever the man in the river wanted to come out, the other one threw a stone in his mouth and caused him to retreat to his original position; and so whenever he wanted to come out the other would throw a stone in his mouth, and he would retreat to his original position. I asked, ‘What is this?’ They told me to proceed on and we did so till we reached a well-flourished green garden having a huge tree and near its root was sitting an old man with some children. (I saw) Another man near the tree with fire in front of him and he was kindling it up. Then they (i.e. my two companions) made me climb up the tree and made me enter a house, better than which I have ever seen. In it were some old men and young men, women and children.

Then they took me out of this house and made me climb up the tree and made me enter another house that was better and superior (to the first) containing old and young people. I said to them (i.e. my two companions), ‘You have made me ramble all the night. Tell me all about that I have seen.’ They said, 'Yes. As for the one whose cheek you saw being torn away, he was a liar and he used to tell lies, and the people would report those lies on his authority till they spread all over the world. So, he will be punished like that till the Day of Resurrection.

The one whose head you saw being crushed is the one whom Allah had given the knowledge of Quran (i.e. knowing it by heart) but he used to sleep at night (i.e. he did not recite it then) and did not use to act upon it (i.e. upon its orders etc.) by day; and so this punishment will go on till the Day of Resurrection. And those you saw in the hole (like oven) were adulterers (those men and women who commit illegal sexual intercourse). And those you saw in the river of blood were those dealing in Riba (usury). And the old man who was sitting at the base of the tree was Abraham and the little children around him were the offspring of the people. And the one who was kindling the fire was Malik, the gate-keeper of the Hell-fire. And the first house in which you have gone was the house of the common believers, and the second house was of the martyrs. I am Gabriel and this is Michael. Raise your head.' I raised my head and saw a thing like a cloud over me. They said, 'That is your place.' I said, 'Let me enter my place.' They said, 'You still have some life which you have not yet completed, and when you complete (that remaining portion of your life) you will then enter your place.' "


## Hadith 2:469

_Narrated Hisham's father:_

Aisha said, “I went to Abu Bakr (during his fatal illness) and he asked me, 'In how many garments was the Prophet shrouded?' She replied, 'In three Sahuliya pieces of white cloth of cotton, and there was neither a shirt nor a turban among them.' Abu Bakr further asked her, ‘On which day did the Prophet die?’ She replied, ‘He died on Monday.’ He asked, ‘What is today?’ She replied, ‘Today is Monday.’ He added, ‘I hope I shall die sometime between this morning and tonight.’ Then he looked at a garment that he was wearing during his illness and it had some stains of saffron. Then he said, ‘Wash this garment of mine and add two more garments and shroud me in them.’ I said, ‘This is worn out.’ He said, ‘A living person has more right to wear new clothes than a dead one; the shroud is only for the body's pus.’ He did not die till it was the night of Tuesday and was buried before the morning.”


## Hadith 2:470

_Narrated Aisha:_

A man said to the Prophet (p.b.u.h), “My mother died suddenly and I thought that if she had lived she would have given alms. So, if I give alms now on her behalf, will she get the reward?” The Prophet replied in the affirmative.


## Hadith 2:471

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

During his sickness, Allah's Apostle was asking repeatedly, “Where am I today? Where will I be tomorrow?” And I was waiting for the day of my turn (impatiently). Then, when my turn came, Allah took his soul away (in my lap) between my chest and arms and he was buried in my house.


## Hadith 2:472

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle in his fatal illness said, “Allah cursed the Jews and the Christians, for they built the places of worship at the graves of their prophets.” And if that had not been the case, then the Prophet's grave would have been made prominent before the people. So (the Prophet ) was afraid, or the people were afraid that his grave might be taken as a place for worship.


## Hadith 2:473

_Narrated Abu Bakr bin 'Aiyash :_

Sufyan At-Tammar told me that he had seen the grave of the Prophet elevated and convex.


## Hadith 2:474

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

When the wall fell on them (i.e. graves) during the caliphate of Al-Walid bin 'Abdul Malik, the people started repairing it, and a foot appeared to them. The people got scared and thought that it was the foot of the Prophet. No-one could be found who could tell them about it till I ('Urwa) said to them, “By Allah, this is not the foot of the Prophet but it is the foot of Umar.” Aisha narrated that she made a will to 'Abdullah bin Zubair, “Do not bury me with them (the Prophet and his two companions) but bury me with my companions (wives of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) in Al-Baqi as I would not like to be looked upon as better than I really am (by being buried near the Prophet).”


## Hadith 2:475

_Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun Al-Audi:_

I saw 'Umar bin Al-Khattab (when he was stabbed) saying, “O 'Abdullah bin 'Umar! Go to the mother of the believers Aisha and say, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab sends his greetings to you,' and request her to allow me to be buried with my companions.” (So, Ibn 'Umar conveyed the message to 'Aisha.) She said, “I had the idea of having this place for myself but today I prefer him ('Umar) to myself (and allow him to be buried there).” When 'Abdullah bin 'Umar returned, 'Umar asked him, “What (news) do you have?” He replied, “O chief of the believers! She has allowed you (to be buried there).” On that 'Umar said, “Nothing was more important to me than to be buried in that (sacred) place. So, when I expire, carry me there and pay my greetings to her ('Aisha ) and say, 'Umar bin Al-Khattab asks permission; and if she gives permission, then bury me (there) and if she does not, then take me to the grave-yard of the Muslims. I do not think any person has more right for the caliphate than those with whom Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) was always pleased till his death. And whoever is chosen by the people after me will be the caliph, and you people must listen to him and obey him,” and then he mentioned the name of 'Uthman, 'Ali, Talha, Az-Zubair, 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and Sad bin Abi Waqqas.

By this time a young man from Ansar came and said, “O chief of the believers! Be happy with Allah's glad tidings. The grade which you have in Islam is known to you, then you became the caliph and you ruled with justice and then you have been awarded martyrdom after all this.” 'Umar replied, “O son of my brother! Would that all that privileges will counterbalance (my short comings), so that I neither lose nor gain anything. I recommend my successor to be good to the early emigrants and realize their rights and to protect their honor and sacred things. And I also recommend him to be good to the Ansar who before them, had homes (in Medina) and had adopted the Faith. He should accept the good of the righteous among them and should excuse their wrongdoers. I recommend him to abide by the rules and regulations concerning the Dhimmis (protectees) of Allah and His Apostle, to fulfill their contracts completely and fight for them and not to tax (overburden) them beyond their capabilities.”


## Hadith 2:476

_Narrated 'Aisha :_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “Don't abuse the dead, because they have reached the result of what they forwarded.”


## Hadith 2:477

_Narrated Ibn Abbas.:_

Abu Lahab, may Allah curse him, once said to the Prophet (p.b.u.h), “Perish you all the day.”

Then the Divine Inspiration came: “Perish the hands of Abi Lahab! And perish he!” (111.1).


## Hadith 2:478

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Thy Prophet sent Muadh to Yemen and said, “Invite the people to testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and I am Allah's Apostle, and if they obey you to do so, then teach them that Allah has enjoined on them five prayers in every day and night (in twenty-four hours), and if they obey you to do so, then teach them that Allah has made it obligatory for them to pay the Zakat from their property and it is to be taken from the wealthy among them and given to the poor.”


## Hadith 2:479

_Narrated Abu Aiyub:_

A man said to the Prophet “Tell me of such a deed as will make me enter Paradise.” The people said, “What is the matter with him? What is the matter with him?” The Prophet said, “He has something to ask. (What he needs greatly) The Prophet said: (In order to enter Paradise) you should worship Allah and do not ascribe any partners to Him, offer prayer perfectly, pay the Zakat and keep good relations with your Kith and kin.” (See Hadith No. 12, Vol 8).


## Hadith 2:480

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A Bedouin came to the Prophet and said, “Tell me of such a deed as will make me enter Paradise, if I do it.” The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “Worship Allah, and worship none along with Him, offer the (five) prescribed compulsory prayers perfectly, pay the compulsory Zakat, and fast the month of Ramadan.” The Bedouin said, “By Him, in Whose Hands my life is, I will not do more than this.” When he (the Bedouin) left, the Prophet said, “Whoever likes to see a man of Paradise, then he may look at this man.”


## Hadith 2:481

_Narrated Abu Zur'a:_

from the Prophet the same as above.


## Hadith 2:482

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

A delegation of the tribe of 'Abdul Qais came to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle! We are from the tribe of Rabi'a, and the infidels of the tribe of Mudar stands between us and you; so we cannot come to you except during the Sacred Months. Please order us to do something (religious deeds) which we may carry out and also invite to it our people whom we have left behind.” The Prophet said, “I order you to do four things and forbid you four others: (I order you) to have faith in Allah, and confess that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah, (and the Prophet gestured with his hand like this (i.e. one knot) and to offer prayers perfectly and to pay the Zakat, and to pay one-fifth of the booty in Allah's Cause. And I forbid you to use Dubba', Hantam, Naqir and Muzaffat (all these are the names of utensils used for preparing alcoholic drinks).”


## Hadith 2:483

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

When Allah's Apostle died and Abu Bakr became the caliph some Arabs renegade (reverted to disbelief) (Abu Bakr decided to declare war against them), 'Umar, said to Abu Bakr, “How can you fight with these people although Allah's Apostle said, 'I have been ordered (by Allah) to fight the people till they say: ”None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and whoever said it then he will save his life and property from me except on trespassing the law (rights and conditions for which he will be punished justly), and his accounts will be with Allah.' “ Abu Bakr said, ”By Allah! I will fight those who differentiate between the prayer and the Zakat as Zakat is the compulsory right to be taken from the property (according to Allah's orders) By Allah! If they refuse to pay me even a she-kid which they used to pay at the time of Allah's Apostle . I would fight with them for withholding it“ Then 'Umar said, ”By Allah, it was nothing, but Allah opened Abu Bakr's chest towards the decision (to fight) and I came to know that his decision was right."


## Hadith 2:484

_Narrated Jarir bin 'Abdullah ,_

I gave the pledge of allegiance to the Prophet for offering prayer perfectly giving Zakat and giving good advice to every Muslim.


## Hadith 2:485

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “(On the Day of Resurrection) camels will come to their owner in the best state of health they have ever had (in the world), and if he had not paid their Zakat (in the world) then they would tread him with their feet; and similarly, sheep will come to their owner in the best state of health they have ever had in the world, and if he had not paid their Zakat, then they would tread him with their hooves and would butt him with their horns.” The Prophet added, “One of their rights is that they should be milked while water is kept in front of them.” The Prophet added, “I do not want anyone of you to come to me on the Day of Resurrection, carrying over his neck a sheep that will be bleating. Such a person will (then) say, 'O Muhammad! (please intercede for me,) I will say to him. 'I can't help you, for I conveyed Allah's Message to you.' Similarly, I do not want anyone of you to come to me carrying over his neck a camel that will be grunting. Such a person (then) will say ”O Muhammad! (please intercede for me).“ I will say to him, ”I can't help you for I conveyed Allah's message to you."


## Hadith 2:486

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever is made wealthy by Allah and does not pay the Zakat of his wealth, then on the Day of Resurrection his wealth will be made like a bald-headed poisonous male snake with two black spots over the eyes. The snake will encircle his neck and bite his cheeks and say, 'I am your wealth, I am your treasure.' ” Then the Prophet recited the holy verses:— 'Let not those who withhold . . .' (to the end of the verse). (3.180).


## Hadith 2:487

_Narrated Abu Said:_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, “No Zakat is due on property mounting to less than five Uqiyas (of silver), and no Zakat is due on less than five camels, and there is no Zakat on less than five Wasqs.” (A Wasqs equals 60 Sa's) & (1 Sa=3 K gms App.)


## Hadith 2:488

_Narrated Zaid bin Wahab:_

I passed by a place called Ar-Rabadha and by chance I met Abu Dhar and asked him, “What has brought you to this place?” He said, “I was in Sham and differed with Muawiya on the meaning of (the following verses of the Quran): 'They who hoard up gold and silver and spend them not in the way of Allah.' (9.34). Muawiya said, 'This verse is revealed regarding the people of the scriptures.” I said, It was revealed regarding us and also the people of the scriptures.“ So we had a quarrel and Mu'awiya sent a complaint against me to 'Uthman. 'Uthman wrote to me to come to Medina, and I came to Medina. Many people came to me as if they had not seen me before. So I told this to 'Uthman who said to me, ”You may depart and live nearby if you wish." That was the reason for my being here for even if an Ethiopian had been nominated as my ruler, I would have obeyed him .


## Hadith 2:489

_Narrated Al-Ahnaf bin Qais:_

While I was sitting with some people from Quraish, a man with very rough hair, clothes, and appearance came and stood in front of us, greeted us and said, “Inform those who hoard wealth, that a stone will be heated in the Hell-fire and will be put on the nipples of their breasts till it comes out from the bones of their shoulders and then put on the bones of their shoulders till it comes through the nipples of their breasts the stone will be moving and hitting.” After saying that, the person retreated and sat by the side of the pillar, I followed him and sat beside him, and I did not know who he was. I said to him, “I think the people disliked what you had said.” He said, “These people do not understand anything, although my friend told me.” I asked, “Who is your friend?” He said, “The Prophet said (to me), ‘O Abu Dhar! Do you see the mountain of Uhud?’ And on that I (Abu Dhar) started looking towards the sun to judge how much remained of the day as I thought that Allah's Apostle wanted to send me to do something for him and I said, 'Yes!' He said, 'I do not love to have gold equal to the mountain of Uhud unless I spend it all (in Allah's cause) except three Dinars (pounds). These people do not understand and collect worldly wealth. No, by Allah, Neither I ask them for worldly benefits nor am I in need of their religious advice till I meet Allah, The Honorable, The Majestic.” '


## Hadith 2:490

_Narrated Ibn Masud:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “There is no envy except in two: a person whom Allah has given wealth and he spends it in the right way, and a person whom Allah has given wisdom (i.e. religious knowledge) and he gives his decisions accordingly and teaches it to the others.”


## Hadith 2:491

_Narrated Abu Huraira_

Allah's Apostle said, "If one give in charity what equals one date-fruit fro the honestly-earned money and Allah accepts only the honestly earned money —Allah takes it in His right (hand) ar then enlarges its reward for that person (who has given it), as anyone of you brings up his baby horse, so much s that it becomes as big as a mountain


## Hadith 2:492

_Narrated Haritha bin Wahab :_

I heard the Prophet saying, “O people! Give in charity as a time will come upon you when a person will wander about with his object of charity and will not find anybody to accept it, and one (who will be requested to take it) will say, ”If you had brought it yesterday, would have taken it, but to-day I am not in need of it."


## Hadith 2:493

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The Hour (Day of Judgment) will not be established till your wealth increases so much so that one will be worried, for no one will accept his Zakat and the person to whom he will give it will reply, 'I am not in need of it.' ”


## Hadith 2:494

_Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:_

While I was sitting with Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) two person came to him; one of them complained about his poverty and the other complained about the prevalence of robberies. Allah's Apostle said, "As regards stealing and robberies, there will shortly come a time when a caravan will go to Mecca (from Medina) without any guard. And regarding poverty, The Hour (Day of Judgment) will not be established till one of you wanders about with his object of charity and will not find anybody to accept it And (no doubt) each one of you will stand in front of Allah and there will be neither a curtain nor an interpreter between him and Allah, and Allah will ask him, 'Did not I give you wealth?' He will reply in the affirmative. Allah will further ask, 'Didn't send a messenger to you?' And again that person will reply in the affirmative Then he will look to his right and he will see nothing but Hell-fire, and then he will look to his left and will see nothing but Hell-fire. And so, any (each one) of you should save himself from the fire even by giving half of a date-fruit (in charity). And if you do not find a hall date-fruit, then (you can do it through saying) a good pleasant word (to your brethren). (See Hadith No. 793 Vol. 4).


## Hadith 2:495

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

Thy Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “A time will come upon the people when a person will wander about with gold as Zakat and will not find anybody to accept it, and one man will be seen followed by forty women to be their guardian because of scarcity of men and great number of women. ”


## Hadith 2:496

_Narrated Abu Masud:_

When the verses of charity were revealed, we used to work as porters. A man came and distributed objects of charity in abundance. And they (the people) said, “He is showing off.” And another man came and gave a sa (a small measure of food grains); they said, “Allah is not in need of this small amount of charity.” And then the Divine Inspiration came: “Those who criticize such of the believers who give in charity voluntarily and those who could not find to give in charity except what is available to them.” (9.79).


## Hadith 2:497

_Narrated Abu Masud Al-Ansar:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) ordered us to give in charity, we used to go to the market and work as porters and get a Mudd (a special measure of grain) and then give it in charity. (Those were the days of poverty) and to-day some of us have one hundred thousand.


## Hadith 2:498

_Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim heard the Prophet saying:_

“Save yourself from Hell-fire even by giving half a date-fruit in charity.”


## Hadith 2:499

_Narrated Aisha:_

A lady along with her two daughters came to me asking (for some alms), but she found nothing with me except one date which I gave to her and she divided it between her two daughters, and did not eat anything herself, and then she got up and went away. Then the Prophet came in and I informed him about this story. He said, “Whoever is put to trial by these daughters and he treats them generously (with benevolence) then these daughters will act as a shield for him from Hell-Fire.” (See Hadith No. 24, Vol. 8).


## Hadith 2:500

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A man came to the Prophet and asked, “O Allah's Apostle! Which charity is the most superior in reward?” He replied, “The charity which you practice while you are healthy, niggardly and afraid of poverty and wish to become wealthy. Do not delay it to the time of approaching death and then say, 'Give so much to such and such, and so much to such and such.' And it has already belonged to such and such (as it is too late).”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_400">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:301 to 2:400</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_600">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:501 to 2:600</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
