---
title: "Hadith 2:501 to 2:600"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_500">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:401 to 2:500</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_700">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:601 to 2:700</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 2:501

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Some of the wives of the Prophet asked him, “Who amongst us will be the first to follow you (i.e. die after you)?” He said, “Whoever has the longest hand.” So they started measuring their hands with a stick and Sauda's hand turned out to be the longest. (When Zainab bint Jahsh died first of all in the caliphate of 'Umar), we came to know that the long hand was a symbol of practicing charity, so she was the first to follow the Prophet and she used to love to practice charity. (Sauda died later in the caliphate of Muawiya).


## Hadith 2:502

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, “A man said that he would give something in charity. He went out with his object of charity and unknowingly gave it to a thief. Next morning the people said that he had given his object of charity to a thief. (On hearing that) he said, ”O Allah! All the praises are for you. I will give alms again.“ And so he again went out with his alms and (unknowingly) gave it to an adulteress. Next morning the people said that he had given his alms to an adulteress last night. The man said, ”O Allah! All the praises are for you. (I gave my alms) to an adulteress. I will give alms again.“ So he went out with his alms again and (unknowingly) gave it to a rich person. (The people) next morning said that he had given his alms to a wealthy person. He said, ”O Allah! All the praises are for you. (I had given alms) to a thief, to an adulteress and to a wealthy man.“ Then someone came and said to him, ”The alms which you gave to the thief, might make him abstain from stealing, and that given to the adulteress might make her abstain from illegal sexual intercourse (adultery), and that given to the wealthy man might make him take a lesson from it and spend his wealth which Allah has given him, in Allah's cause."


## Hadith 2:503

_Narrated Ma'n bin Yazid:_

My grandfather, my father and I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle. The Prophet got me engaged and then got me married. One day I went to the Prophet with a complaint. My father Yazid had taken some gold coins for charity and kept them with a man in the mosque (to give them to the poor) But I went and took them and brought them to him (my father). My father said, “By Allah! I did not intend to give them to you. ” I took (the case) to Allah's Apostle . On that Allah's Apostle said, “O Yazid! You will be rewarded for what you intended. O Man! Whatever you have taken is yours.”


## Hadith 2:504

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, "Seven people will be shaded by Allah under His shade on the day when there will be no shade except His. They are:

(1) a just ruler;

(2) a young man who has been brought up in the worship of Allah, (i.e. worship Allah (Alone) sincerely from his childhood),

(3) a man whose heart is attached to the mosque (who offers the five compulsory congregational prayers in the mosque);

(4) two persons who love each other only for Allah's sake and they meet and part in Allah's cause only;

(5) a man who refuses the call of a charming woman of noble birth for an illegal sexual intercourse with her and says: I am afraid of Allah;

(6) a person who practices charity so secretly that his left hand does not know what his right hand has given (i.e. nobody knows how much he has given in charity).

(7) a person who remembers Allah in seclusion and his eyes get flooded with tears."


## Hadith 2:505

_Narrated Haritha bin Wahab Al-Khuza'i:_

I heard the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saying, "(O people!) Give in charity (for Allah's cause) because a time will come when a person will carry his object of charity from place to place (and he will not find any person to take it) and any person whom he shall request to take it, I will reply, 'If you had brought it yesterday I would have taken it, but today I am not

in need of it."


## Hadith 2:506

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When a woman gives in charity some of the foodstuff (which she has in her house) without spoiling it, she will receive the reward for what she has spent, and her husband will receive the reward because of his earning, and the storekeeper will also have a reward similar to it. The reward of one will not decrease the reward of the others . ”


## Hadith 2:507

_Narrated Abu Huraira :_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “The best charity is that which is practiced by a wealthy person. And start giving first to your dependents.”


## Hadith 2:508

_Narrated Hakim bin Hizam_

The Prophet said, “The upper hand is better than the lower hand (i.e. he who gives in charity is better than him who takes it). One should start giving first to his dependents. And the best object of charity is that which is given by a wealthy person (from the money which is left after his expenses). And whoever abstains from asking others for some financial help, Allah will give him and save him from asking others, Allah will make him self-sufficient.”


## Hadith 2:509

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

I heard Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) while he was on the pulpit speaking about charity, to abstain from asking others for some financial help and about begging others, saying, “The upper hand is better than the lower hand. The upper hand is that of the giver and the lower (hand) is that of the beggar.”


## Hadith 2:510

_Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:_

Once the Prophet offered the 'Asr prayer and then hurriedly went to his house and returned immediately. I (or somebody else) asked him (as to what was the matter) and he said, “I left at home a piece of gold which was from the charity and I disliked to let it remain a night in my house, so I got it distributed . ”


## Hadith 2:511

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet went out for the 'Id prayer on the 'Id day and offered a two Rakat prayer; and he neither offered a prayer before it or after it. Then he went towards the women along with Bilal. He preached them and ordered them to give in charity. And some (amongst the women) started giving their fore-arm bangles and ear-rings.


## Hadith 2:512

_Narrated Abu Burda bin Abu Musa:_

that his father said, “Whenever a beggar came to Allah's Apostle or he was asked for something, he used to say (to his companions), ”Help and recommend him and you will receive the reward for it; and Allah will bring about what He will through His Prophet's tongue."


## Hadith 2:513

_Narrated Asma:_

The Prophet said to me, “Do not withhold your money, (for if you did so) Allah would with-hold His blessings from you.”


## Hadith 2:514

_Narrated 'Abda:_

T he Prophet said, “Do not with-hold your money by counting it (i.e. hoarding it), (for if you did so), Allah would also with-hold His blessings from you.”


## Hadith 2:515

_Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:_

that she had gone to the Prophet and he said, “Do not shut your money bag; otherwise Allah too will with-hold His blessings from you. Spend (in Allah's Cause) as much as you can afford. ”


## Hadith 2:516

_Narrated Abu Wail:_

Hudhaifa said, “'Umar said, 'Who amongst you remembers the statement of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) about afflictions'?' I said, 'I know it as the Prophet had said it.' 'Umar said, 'No doubt, you are bold. How did he say it?' I said, 'A man's afflictions (wrong deeds) concerning his wife, children and neighbors are expiated by (his) prayers, charity, and enjoining good.' (The sub-narrator Sulaiman added that he said, 'The prayer, charity, enjoining good and forbidding evil.') 'Umar said, 'I did not mean that, but I ask about that affliction which will spread like the waves of the sea.' I said, 'O chief of the believers! You need not be afraid of it as there is a closed door between you and it.' He asked, 'Will the door be broken or opened?' I replied, 'No, it will be broken.' He said, 'Then, if it is broken, it will never be closed again?' I replied, 'Yes.' ” Then we were afraid to ask what that door was, so we asked Masruq to inquire, and he asked Hudhaifa regarding it. Hudhaifa said, “The door was 'Umar. ”We further asked Hudhaifa whether 'Umar knew what that door meant. Hudhaifa replied in the affirmative and added, “He knew it as one knows that there will be a night before the tomorrow morning.”


## Hadith 2:517

_Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:_

I said to Allah's Apostle, “Before embracing Islam I used to do good deeds like giving in charity, slave-manumitting, and the keeping of good relations with Kith and kin. Shall I be rewarded for those deeds?” The Prophet replied, “You became Muslim with all those good deeds (Without losing their reward).”


## Hadith 2:518

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When a woman gives in charity from her husband's meals without wasting the property of her husband, she will get a reward for it, and her husband too will get a reward for what he earned and the store-keeper will have the reward likewise.”


## Hadith 2:519

_Narrated Abu Musa :_

The Prophet said, “An honest Muslim store-keeper who carries out the orders of his master and pays fully what he has been ordered to give with a good heart and pays to that person to whom he was ordered to pay, is regarded as one of the two charitable persons.”


## Hadith 2:520

_Narrated_

Narrate Aisha :

The Prophet said, “If a woman gives in charity from her husband's house ..” The Prophet (p.b.u.h) also said, “If a lady gives meals (in charity) from her husband's house without spoiling her husband's property, she will get a reward and her husband will also get a reward likewise. The husband will get a reward because of his earnings and the woman because of her spending.”


## Hadith 2:521

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “When a woman gives in charity from her house meals in Allah's Cause without spoiling her husband's property, she will get a reward for it, and her husband will also get the reward for his earnings and the storekeeper will get a reward likewise.”


## Hadith 2:522

_Narrated Abu Huraira :_

The Prophet said, “Every day two angels come down from Heaven and one of them says, 'O Allah! Compensate every person who spends in Your Cause,' and the other (angel) says, 'O Allah! Destroy every miser.' ”


## Hadith 2:523

_Narrated Abu Huraira :_

The Prophet said, “The example of a miser and an alms-giver is like the example of two persons wearing iron cloaks.” Allah's Apostle also said, "The example of an alms-giver and a miser is like the example of two persons who have two iron cloaks on them from their breasts to their collar bones, and when the alms-giver wants to give in charity, the cloak becomes capacious till it covers his whole body to such an extent that it hides his fingertips and covers his footprints (obliterates his tracks). (1) And when the miser wants to spend, it (the iron cloak) sticks and every ring gets stuck to its place and he tries to widen it, but it did not become wide.


## Hadith 2:524

_Narrated Abu Burda:_

from his father from his grandfather that the Prophet said, “Every Muslim has to give in charity.” The people asked, “O Allah's Prophet! If someone has nothing to give, what will he do?” He said, “He should work with his hands and benefit himself and also give in charity (from what he earns).” The people further asked, “If he cannot find even that?” He replied, “He should help the needy who appeal for help.” Then the people asked, “If he cannot do that?” He replied, “Then he should perform good deeds and keep away from evil deeds and this will be regarded as charitable deeds.”


## Hadith 2:525

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya:_

A sheep was sent to me (Nusaiba Al-Ansariya) (in charity) and I sent some of it to 'Aisha. The Prophet asked 'Aisha for something to eat. 'Aisha replied that there was nothing except what Nusaiba Al-Ansariya had sent of that sheep. The Prophet said to her, “Bring it as it has reached its place.”


## Hadith 2:526

_Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri :_

Allah's Apostle said, "There is no Zakat on less than five camels and also there is no Zakat on less than five Awaq (of silver). (5 Awaq = 22 Fransa Riyals of Yamen or 200 Dirhams.) And there is no Zakat on less than five Awsuq. (A special measure of food-grains, and one Wasq equals 60 Sa's.) (For gold 20, Dinars i.e. equal to 12 Guinea English. No Zakat for less than 12 Guinea (English) of gold or for silver less than 22 Fransa Riyals of Yamen.)


## Hadith 2:527

_Narrated Abi Sa'id Al-Khudri :_

I heard the Prophet saying (as above—No. 526 ..)


## Hadith 2:528

_Narrated Anas:_

Abu Bakr wrote to me what Allah had instructed His Apostle (p.b.u.h) to do regarding the one who had to pay one Bint Makhad (i.e. one year-old she-camel) as Zakat, and he did not have it but had got Bint Labun (two year old she-camel). (He wrote that) it could be accepted from him as Zakat, and the collector of Zakat would return him 20 Dirhams or two sheep; and if the Zakat payer had not a Bint Makhad, but he had Ibn Labun (a two year old he-camel) then it could be accepted as his Zakat, but he would not be paid anything .


## Hadith 2:529

_Narrated Ibn Abbas :_

I am a witness that Allah's Apostle offered the Id prayer before delivering the sermon and then he thought that the women would not be able to hear him (because of the distance), so he went to them along with Bilal who was spreading his garment. The Prophet advised and ordered them to give in charity. So the women started giving their ornaments (in charity). (The sub-narrator Aiyub pointed towards his ears and neck meaning that they gave ornaments from those places such as ear-rings and necklaces.)


## Hadith 2:530

_Narrated Anas:_

Abu Bakr wrote to me what was made compulsory by Allah's Apostle and that was (regarding the payments of Zakat): Neither the property of different people may be taken together nor the joint property may be split for fear of (paying more, or receiving less) Zakat. (1)


## Hadith 2:531

_Narrated Anas:_

Abu Bakr wrote to me what Allah's Apostle has made compulsory (regarding Zakat) and this was mentioned in it: If a property is equally owned by two partners, they should pay the combined Zakat and it will be considered that both of them have paid their Zakat equally.


## Hadith 2:532

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

A Bedouin asked Allah's Apostle about the emigration. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “May Allah have mercy on you! The matter of emigration is very hard. Have you got camels? Do you pay their Zakat?” The Bedouin said, “Yes, I have camels and I pay their Zakat.” The Prophet said, Work beyond the seas and Allah will not decrease (waste) any of your good deeds." (See Hadith No. 260 Vol. 5).


## Hadith 2:533

_Narrated Anas:_

Abu Bakr , wrote to me about the Zakat which Allah had ordered His Apostle to observe: Whoever had to pay Jahda (Jahda means a four-year-old she-camel) as Zakat from his herd of camels and he had not got one, and he had Hiqqa (three-year-old she-camel), that Hiqqa should be accepted from him along with two sheep if they were available or twenty Dirhams (one Durham equals about 1/4 Saudi Riyal) and whoever had to pay Hiqqa as Zakat and he had no Hiqqa but had a Jadha, the Jadha should be accepted from him, and the Zakat collector should repay him twenty Dirhams or two sheep; and whoever had to pay Hiqqa as Zakat and he had not got one, but had a Bint Labun (two-year-old she-camel), it should be accepted from him along with two sheep or twenty Dirhams; and whoever had to pay Bint Labun and had a Hiqqa, that Hiqqa should be accepted from him and the Zakat collector should repay him twenty Dirhams or two sheep; and whoever had to pay Bint Labun and he had not got one but had a Bint Makhad (one-year-old she camel), that Bint Makhad should be accepted from him along with twenty Dirhams or two sheep.


## Hadith 2:534

_Narrated Anas:_

When Abu Bakr; sent me to (collect the Zakat from) Bahrein, he wrote to me the following:— (In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful). These are the orders for compulsory charity (Zakat) which Allah's Apostle had made obligatory for every Muslim, and which Allah had ordered His Apostle to observe: Whoever amongst the Muslims is asked to pay Zakat accordingly, he should pay it (to the Zakat collector) and whoever is asked more than that (what is specified in this script) he should not pay it; for twenty-four camels or less, sheep are to be paid as Zakat; for every five camels one sheep is to be paid, and if there are between twenty-five to thirty-five camels, one Bint Makhad is to be paid; and if they are between thirty-six to forty-five (camels), one Bint Labun is to be paid; and if they are between forty-six to sixty (camels), one Hiqqa is to be paid; and if the number is between sixty-one to seventy-five (camels), one Jadh'a is to be paid; and if the number is between seventy-six to ninety (camels), two Bint Labuns are to be paid; and if they are from ninety-one to one-hundred-and twenty (camels), two Hiqqas are to be paid; and if they are over one-hundred and-twenty (camels), for every forty (over one-hundred-and-twenty) one Bint Labun is to be paid, and for every fifty camels (over one-hundred-and-twenty) one Hiqqa is to be paid; and who ever has got only four camels, has to pay nothing as Zakat, but if the owner of these four camels wants to give something, he can. If the number of camels increases to five, the owner has to pay one sheep as Zakat. As regards the Zakat for the (flock) of sheep; if they are between forty and one-hundred-and-twenty sheep, one sheep is to be paid; and if they are between one-hundred-and-twenty to two hundred (sheep), two sheep are to be paid; and if they are between two-hundred to three-hundred (sheep), three sheep are to be paid; and for over three-hundred sheep, for every extra hundred sheep, one sheep is to be paid as Zakat. And if somebody has got less than forty sheep, no Zakat is required, but if he wants to give, he can. For silver the Zakat is one-fortieth of the lot (i.e. 2.5%), and if its value is less than two-hundred Dirhams, Zakat is not required, but if the owner wants to pay he can.'


## Hadith 2:535

_Narrated Anas:_

Abu Bakr wrote to me what Allah had ordered His Apostle (about Zakat) which goes: Neither an old nor a defected animal, nor a male-goat may be taken as Zakat except if the Zakat collector wishes (to take it).


## Hadith 2:536

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Abu Bakr said, “By Allah! If they (pay me the Zakat and) with-hold even a she-kid which they used to pay during the life-time of Allah's Apostle, I will fight with them for it.” 'Umar said, “It was nothing but Allah Who opened Abu Bakr's chest towards the decision to fight, and I came to know that his decision was right.”


## Hadith 2:537

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

When Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) sent Muadh to Yemen, he said (to him), “YOU are going to people of a (Divine) Book. First of all invite them to worship Allah (alone) and when they come to know Allah, inform them that Allah has enjoined on them, five prayers in every day and night; and if they start offering these prayers, inform them that Allah has enjoined on them, the Zakat. And it is to be taken from the rich amongst them and given to the poor amongst them; and if they obey you in that, take Zakat from them and avoid (don't take) the best property of the people as Zakat.”


## Hadith 2:538

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri :_

Allah's Apostle said, “No Zakat is imposed on less than five Awsuq of dates; no Zakat is imposed on less than five Awaq of silver, and no Zakat is imposed on less than five camels.”


## Hadith 2:539

_Narrated Abu Dhar:_

Once I went to him (the Prophet ) and he said, “By Allah in Whose Hands my life is (or probably said, 'By Allah, except Whom none has the right to be worshipped) whoever had camels or cows or sheep and did not pay their Zakat, those animals will be brought on the Day of Resurrection far bigger and fatter than before and they will tread him under their hooves, and will butt him with their horns, and (those animals will come in circle): When the last does its turn, the first will start again, and this punishment will go on till Allah has finished the judgments amongst the people.”


## Hadith 2:540

_Narrated Ishaq bin 'Abdullah bin Al Talha:_

I heard Anas bin Malik saying, “Abu Talha had more property of date-palm trees gardens than any other amongst the Ansar in Medina and the most beloved of them to him was Bairuha garden, and it was in front of the Mosque of the Prophet . Allah's Apostle used to go there and used to drink its nice water.” Anas added, “When these verses were revealed:—'By no means shall you Attain righteousness unless You spend (in charity) of that Which you love. ' (3.92) Abu Talha said to Allah's Apostle 'O Allah's Apostle! Allah, the Blessed, the Superior says: By no means shall you attain righteousness, unless you spend (in charity) of that which you love. And no doubt, Bairuha' garden is the most beloved of all my property to me. So I want to give it in charity in Allah's Cause. I expect its reward from Allah. O Allah's Apostle! Spend it where Allah makes you think it feasible.' On that Allah's Apostle said, 'Bravo! It is useful property. I have heard what you have said (O Abu Talha), and I think it would be proper if you gave it to your Kith and kin.' Abu Talha said, I will do so, O Allah's Apostle.' Then Abu Talha distributed that garden amongst his relatives and his cousins.”


## Hadith 2:541

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri_

On 'Id ul Fitr or 'Id ul Adha Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) went out to the Musalla. After finishing the prayer, he delivered the sermon and ordered the people to give alms. He said, “O people! Give alms.” Then he went towards the women and said. “O women! Give alms, for I have seen that the majority of the dwellers of Hell-Fire were you (women).” The women asked, “O Allah's Apostle! What is the reason for it?” He replied, “O women! You curse frequently, and are ungrateful to your husbands. I have not seen anyone more deficient in intelligence and religion than you. O women, some of you can lead a cautious wise man astray.” Then he left. And when he reached his house, Zainab, the wife of Ibn Masud, came and asked permission to enter It was said, “O Allah's Apostle! It is Zainab.” He asked, 'Which Zainab?“ The reply was that she was the wife of Ibn Mas'ub. He said, ”Yes, allow her to enter.“ And she was admitted. Then she said, ”O Prophet of Allah! Today you ordered people to give alms and I had an ornament and intended to give it as alms, but Ibn Masud said that he and his children deserved it more than anybody else.“ The Prophet replied, ”Ibn Masud had spoken the truth. Your husband and your children had more right to it than anybody else."


## Hadith 2:542

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “There is no Zakat either on a horse or a slave belonging to a Muslim”


## Hadith 2:543

_Narrated Abu Huraira :-_

The Prophet said,"There is no Zakat either on a slave or on a horse belonging to a Muslim.


## Hadith 2:544

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri :_

Once the Prophet sat on a pulpit and we sat around him. Then he said, “The things I am afraid of most for your sake (concerning what will befall you after me) is the pleasures and splendors of the world and its beauties which will be disclosed to you.” Somebody said, “O Allah's Apostle! Can the good bring forth evil?” The Prophet remained silent for a while. It was said to that person, “What is wrong with you? You are talking to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) while he is not talking to you.” Then we noticed that he was being inspired divinely. Then the Prophet wiped off his sweat and said, “Where is the questioner?” It seemed as if the Prophet liked his question. Then he said, “Good never brings forth evil. Indeed it is like what grows on the banks of a water-stream which either kill or make the animals sick, except if an animal eats its fill the Khadira (a kind of vegetable) and then faces the sun, and then defecates and urinates and grazes again. No doubt this wealth is sweet and green. Blessed is the wealth of a Muslim from which he gives to the poor, the orphans and to needy travelers. (Or the Prophet said something similar to it) No doubt, whoever takes it illegally will be like the one who eats but is never satisfied, and his wealth will be a witness against him on the Day of Resurrection.”


## Hadith 2:545

_Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith:_

Zainab, the wife of 'Abdullah said, “I was in the Mosque and saw the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saying, 'O women ! Give alms even from your ornaments.' ” Zainab used to provide for 'Abdullah and those orphans who were under her protection. So she said to 'Abdullah, “Will you ask Allah's Apostle whether it will be sufficient for me to spend part of the Zakat on you and the orphans who are under my protection?” He replied “Will you yourself ask Allah's Apostle ?” (Zainab added): So I went to the Prophet and I saw there an Ansari woman who was standing at the door (of the Prophet ) with a similar problem as mine. Bilal passed by us and we asked him, 'Ask the Prophet whether it is permissible for me to spend (the Zakat) on my husband and the orphans under my protection.' And we requested Bilal not to inform the Prophet about us. So Bilal went inside and asked the Prophet regarding our problem. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) asked, “Who are those two?” Bilal replied that she was Zainab. The Prophet said, “Which Zainab?” Bilal said, “The wife of 'Adullah (bin Masud).” The Prophet said, “Yes, (it is sufficient for her) and she will receive a double rewards (for that): One for helping relatives, and the other for giving Zakat.”


## Hadith 2:546

_Narrated Zainab,:_

(the daughter of Um Salama) My mother said, “O Allah's Apostle! Shall I receive a reward if I spend for the sustenance of Abu Salama's offspring, and in fact they are also my sons?” The Prophet replied, “Spend on them and you will get a reward for what you spend on them.”


## Hadith 2:547

_Narrated Abu Huraira_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) ordered (a person) to collect Zakat, and that person returned and told him that Ibn Jamil, Khalid bin Al-Walid, and Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib had refused to give Zakat.“ The Prophet said, ”What made Ibn Jamll refuse to give Zakat though he was a poor man, and was made wealthy by Allah and His Apostle ? But you are unfair in asking Zakat from Khalid as he is keeping his armor for Allah's Cause (for Jihad). As for Abbas bin 'Abdul Muttalib, he is the uncle of Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) and Zakat is compulsory on him and he should pay it double."


## Hadith 2:548

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Some Ansari persons asked for (something) from Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) and he gave them. They again asked him for (something) and he again gave them. And then they asked him and he gave them again till all that was with him finished. And then he said “If I had anything. I would not keep it away from you. (Remember) Whoever abstains from asking others, Allah will make him contented, and whoever tries to make himself self-sufficient, Allah will make him self-sufficient. And whoever remains patient, Allah will make him patient. Nobody can be given a blessing better and greater than patience.”


## Hadith 2:549

_Narrated Abu Huraira :_

Allah's Apostle said, “By Him in Whose Hand my life is, it is better for anyone of you to take a rope and cut the wood (from the forest) and carry it over his back and sell it (as a means of earning his living) rather than to ask a person for something and that person may give him or not.”


## Hadith 2:550

_Narrated Az-Zubair bin Al'Awwam:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “It is better for anyone of you to take a rope (and cut) and bring a bundle of wood (from the forest) over his back and sell it and Allah will save his face (from the Hell-Fire) because of that, rather than to ask the people who may give him or not.”


## Hadith 2:551

_Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair and Said bin Al-Musaiyab:_

Haklm bin Hizam said, “(Once) I asked Allah's Apostle (for something) and he gave it to me. Again I asked and he gave (it to me). Again I asked and he gave (it to me). And then he said, ”O Hakim! This property is like a sweet fresh fruit; whoever takes it without greediness, he is blessed in it, and whoever takes it with greediness, he is not blessed in it, and he is like a person who eats but is never satisfied; and the upper (giving) hand is better than the lower (receiving) hand.“ Hakim added, ”I said to Allah's Apostle , 'By Him (Allah) Who sent you with the Truth, I shall never accept anything from anybody after you, till I leave this world.' “ Then Abu Bakr (during his caliphate) called Hakim to give him his share from the war booty (like the other companions of the Prophet ), he refused to accept anything. Then 'Umar (during his caliphate) called him to give him his share but he refused. On that 'Umar said, ”O Muslims! I would like you to witness that I offered Hakim his share from this booty and he refused to take it." So Hakim never took anything from anybody after the Prophet till he died.


## Hadith 2:552

_Narrated 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle used to give me something but I would say to him, “would you give it to a poorer and more needy one than l?” The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said to me, “Take it. If you are given something from this property, without asking for it or having greed for it take it; and if not given, do not run for it.”


## Hadith 2:553

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar_

The Prophet said, “A man keeps on asking others for something till he comes on the Day of Resurrection without any piece of flesh on his face.” The Prophet added, “On the Day of Resurrection, the Sun will come near (to, the people) to such an extent that the sweat will reach up to the middle of the ears, so, when all the people are in that state, they will ask Adam for help, and then Moses, and then Muhammad (p.b.u.h) .” The sub-narrator added "Muhammad will intercede with Allah to judge amongst the people. He will proceed on till he will hold the ring of the door (of Paradise) and then Allah will exalt him to Maqam Mahmud (the privilege of intercession, etc.). And all the people of the gathering will send their praises to Allah.


## Hadith 2:554

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The poor person is not the one who asks a morsel or two (of meals) from the others, but the poor is the one who has nothing and is ashamed to beg from others.”


## Hadith 2:555

_Narrated Ash-sha'bi:_

The clerk of Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba narrated, “Muawiya wrote to Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba: Write to me something which you have heard from the Prophet (p.b.u.h) .” So Al-Mughira wrote: I heard the Prophet saying, "Allah has hated for you three things:

1\. Vain talks, (useless talk) that you talk too much or about others.

2\. Wasting of wealth (by extravagance)

3\. And asking too many questions (in disputed religious matters) or asking others for something (except in great need). (See Hadith No. 591, Vol. Ill)


## Hadith 2:556

_Narrated Sad (bin Abi Waqqas) :_

Allah's Apostle distributed something (from the resources of Zakat) amongst a group of people while I was sitting amongst them, but he left a man whom I considered the best of the lot. So, I went up to Allah's Apostle and asked him secretly, “Why have you left that person? By Allah! I consider him a believer.” The Prophet said, “Or merely a Muslim (Who surrender to Allah).” I remained quiet for a while but could not help repeating my question because of what I knew about him. I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Why have you left that person? By Allah! I consider him a believer. ” The Prophet said, “Or merely a Muslim.” I remained quiet for a while but could not help repeating my question because of what I knew about him. I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Why have you left that person? By Allah! I consider him a believer.” The Prophet said, “Or merely a Muslim.” Then Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) said, “I give to a person while another is dearer to me, for fear that he may be thrown in the Hell-fire on his face (by renegating from Islam).”


## Hadith 2:557

_Narrated Abu Huraira_

Allah's Apostle said, “The poor person is not the one who goes round the people and ask them for a mouthful or two (of meals) or a date or two but the poor is that who has not enough (money) to satisfy his needs and whose condition is not known to others, that others may give him something in charity, and who does not beg of people.”


## Hadith 2:558

_Narrated Abu Huraira_

The Prophet said, “No doubt, it is better for a person to take a rope and proceed in the morning to the mountains and cut the wood and then sell it, and eat from this income and give alms from it than to ask others for something.”


## Hadith 2:559

_Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi_

We took part in the holy battle of Tabuk in the company of the Prophet and when we arrived at the Wadi-al-Qura, there was a woman in her garden. The Prophet asked his companions to estimate the amount of the fruits in the garden, and Allah's Apostle estimated it at ten Awsuq (One Wasaq = 60 Sa's) and 1 Sa'= 3 kg. approximately). The Prophet said to that lady, “Check what your garden will yield.” When we reached Tabuk, the Prophet said, “There will be a strong wind to-night and so no one should stand and whoever has a camel, should fasten it.” So we fastened our camels. A strong wind blew at night and a man stood up and he was blown away to a mountain called Taiy, The King of Aila sent a white mule and a sheet for wearing to the Prophet as a present, and wrote to the Prophet that his people would stay in their place (and will pay Jizya taxation.) (1) When the Prophet reached Wadi-al-Qura he asked that woman how much her garden had yielded. She said, “Ten Awsuq,” and that was what Allah's Apostle had estimated. Then the Prophet said, “I want to reach Medina quickly, and whoever among you wants to accompany me, should hurry up.” The sub-narrator Ibn Bakkar said something which meant: When the Prophet (p.b.u.h) saw Medina he said, “This is Taba.” And when he saw the mountain of Uhud, he said, “This mountain loves us and we love it. Shall I tell you of the best amongst the Ansar?” They replied in the affirmative. He said, “The family of Bani-n-Najjar, and then the family of Bani Sa'ida or Bani Al-Harith bin Al-Khazraj. (The above-mentioned are the best) but there is goodness in all the families of Ansar.”


## Hadith 2:560

_Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah from his father:_

The Prophet said, “On a land irrigated by rain water or by natural water channels or if the land is wet due to a near by water channel Ushr (i.e. one-tenth) is compulsory (as Zakat); and on the land irrigated by the well, half of an Ushr (i.e. one-twentieth) is compulsory (as Zakat on the yield of the land).”


## Hadith 2:561

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri :_

The Prophet said, “There is no Zakat on less than five Awsuq (of dates), or on less than five camels, or on less than five Awaq of silver.” (22 Yameni Riyals Faransa).


## Hadith 2:562

_Narrated Abu Huraira :_

Dates used to be brought to Allah's Apostle immediately after being plucked. Different persons would bring their dates till a big heap collected (in front of the Prophet). Once Al-Hasan and Al-Husain were playing with these dates. One of them took a date and put it in his mouth. Allah's Apostle looked at him and took it out from his mouth and said, “Don't you know that Muhammad's offspring do not eat what is given in charity?”


## Hadith 2:563

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet had forbidden the sale of dates till they were good (ripe), and when it was asked what it meant, the Prophet said, “Till there is no danger of blight.”


## Hadith 2:564

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

The Prophet had forbidden the sale of fruits till they were ripe (free from blight).


## Hadith 2:565

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of fruits until they were ripe. The Prophet (p.b.u.h) added, “It means that they become red .”


## Hadith 2:566

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Umar bin Al-Khattab gave a horse in charity in Allah's Cause and later he saw it being sold in the market and intended to purchase it. Then he went to the Prophet and asked his permission. The Prophet said, “Do not take back what you have given in charity.” For this reason, Ibn 'Umar never purchased the things which he had given in charity, and in case he had purchased something (unknowingly) he would give it in charity again.


## Hadith 2:567

_Narrated 'Umar:_

Once I gave a horse in Allah's Cause (in charity) but that person did not take care of it. I intended to buy it, as I thought he would sell it at a low price. So, I asked the Prophet (p.b.u.h) about it. He said, “Neither buy, nor take back your alms which you have given, even if the seller were willing to sell it for one Dirham, for he who takes back his alms is like the one who swallows his own vomit.”


## Hadith 2:568

_Narrated Abu Huraira :_

Al-Hasan bin 'Ali took a date from the dates given in charity and put it in his mouth. The Prophet said, “Expel it from your mouth. Don't you know that we do not eat a thing which is given in charity?”


## Hadith 2:569

_Narrated Ibn Abbas :_

The Prophet saw a dead sheep which had been given in charity to a freed slavegirl of Maimuna, the wife of the Prophet . The Prophet said, “Why don't you get the benefit of its hide?” They said, “It is dead.” He replied, “Only to eat (its meat) is illegal.”


## Hadith 2:570

_Narrated Al-Aswad:_

'Aisha intended to buy Barira (a slave-girl) in order to manumit her and her masters intended to put the condition that her Al-wala would be for them. 'Aisha mentioned that to the Prophet who said to her, “Buy her, as the ”Wala“ is for the manumitted.” Once some meat was presented to the Prophet and 'Aisha said to him, “This (meat) was given in charity to Barira.” He said, “It is an object of charity for Barira but a gift for us.”


## Hadith 2:571

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya Al-Ansariya :_

The Prophet went to 'Aisha and asked her whether she had something (to eat). She replied that she had nothing except the mutton (piece) which Nusaiba (Um 'Atiyya) had sent to us (Buraira) in charity.“ The Prophet said, ”It has reached its place and now it is not a thing of charity but a gift for us."


## Hadith 2:572

_Narrated Anas:_

Some meat was presented to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and it had been given to Barira (the freed slave-girl of Aisha) in charity. He said, “This meat is a thing of charity for Barira but it is a gift for us.”


## Hadith 2:573

_Narrated Abu Ma'bad,:_

(the slave of Ibn Abbas) Allah's Apostle said to Muadh when he sent him to Yemen, “You will go to the people of the Scripture. So, when you reach there, invite them to testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and that Muhammad is His Apostle. And if they obey you in that, tell them that Allah has enjoined on them five prayers in each day and night. And if they obey you in that tell them that Allah has made it obligatory on them to pay the Zakat which will be taken from the rich among them and given to the poor among them. If they obey you in that, then avoid taking the best of their possessions, and be afraid of the curse of an oppressed person because there is no screen between his invocation and Allah.”


## Hadith 2:574

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa :_

Whenever a person came to the Prophet with his alms, the Prophet would say, “O Allah! Send your Blessings upon so and so.” My father went to the Prophet with his alms and the Prophet said, “O Allah! Send your blessings upon the offspring of Abu Aufa.”


## Hadith 2:574

_Narrated Abu Huraira_

The Prophet said, “A man from Bani Israel asked someone from Bani Israel to give him a loan of one thousand Dinars and the later gave it to him. The debtor went on a voyage (when the time for the payment of the debt became due) but he did not find a boat, so he took a piece of wood and bored it and put 1000 diners in it and threw it into the sea. The creditor went out and took the piece of wood to his family to be used as fire-wood.” (See Hadith No. 488 B, Vol. 3). And the Prophet narrated the narration (and said), “When he sawed the wood, he found his money.”


## Hadith 2:575

_Narrated Abu Huraira_

Allah's Apostle said, “There is no compensation for one killed or wounded by an animal or by falling in a well, or because of working in mines; but Khumus is compulsory on Rikaz.”


## Hadith 2:576

_Narrated Abu Humaid Al-Sa'idi:_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) appointed a man called Ibn Al-Lutbiya, from the tribe of Al-Asd to collect Zakat from Bani Sulaim. When he returned, (after collecting the Zakat) the Prophet checked the account with him.


## Hadith 2:577

_Narrated Anas:_

Some people from 'Uraina tribe came to Medina and its climate did not suit them, so Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) allowed them to go to the herd of camels (given as Zakat) and they drank their milk and urine (as medicine) but they killed the shepherd and drove away all the camels. So Allah's Apostle sent (men) in their pursuit to catch them, and they were brought, and he had their hands and feet cut, and their eyes were branded with heated pieces of iron and they were left in the Harra (a stony place at Medina) biting the stones. (See Hadith No. 234, Vol. 1)


## Hadith 2:578

_Narrated Anas bin Malik_

took 'Abdullah bin Abu Talha to Allah's Apostle to perform Tahnik for him. (Tahnik was a custom among the Muslims that whenever a child was born they used to take it to the Prophet who would chew a piece of date and put a part of its juice in the child's mouth). I saw the Prophet and he had an instrument for branding in his hands and was branding the camels of Zakat.


## Hadith 2:579

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

Allah's Apostle enjoined the payment of one Sa' of dates or one Sa' of barley as Zakat-ul-Fitr on every Muslim slave or free, male or female, young or old, and he ordered that it be paid before the people went out to offer the 'Id prayer. (One Sa' = 3 Kilograms approx.)


## Hadith 2:580

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle made it incumbent on all the slave or free Muslims, male or female, to pay one Sa' of dates or barley as Zakat-ul-Fitr.


## Hadith 2:581

_Narrated Abu Said:_

We used to give one Sa' of barley as Sadaqatul-Fitr (per head).


## Hadith 2:582

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

We used to give one Sa' of meal or one Sa' of barley or one Sa' of dates, or one Sa' of cottage cheese or one Sa' of Raisins (dried grapes) as Zakat-ul-Fitr.


## Hadith 2:583

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar_

The Prophet ordered (Muslims) to give one Sa' of dates or one Sa' of barley as Zakat-ul-Fitr. The people rewarded two Mudds of wheat as equal to that.


## Hadith 2:584

_Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:_

In the life-time of the Prophet we used to give one Sa' of food or one Sa' of dates or one Sa' of barley or one Sa' of Raisins (dried grapes) as Sadaqat-ul-Fitr. And when Muawiya became the Caliph and the wheat was (available in abundance) he said, "I think (observe) that one Mudd (of wheat) equals two Mudds (of any of the above mentioned things).


## Hadith 2:585

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet ordered the people to pay Zakat-ul-Fitr before going to the 'Id prayer.


## Hadith 2:586

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

In the life-time of Allah's Apostle , we used to give one Sa' of food (edible things) as Sadaqat-ul-Fit,r (to the poor). Our food used to be either of barley, raisins (dried grapes), cottage cheese or dates.


## Hadith 2:587

_Narrated Nafi':_

Ibn 'Umar said, “The Prophet made incumbent on every male or female, free man or slave, the payment of one Sa' of dates or barley as Sadaqat-ul-Fitr (or said Sadaqa-Ramadan).” The people then substituted half Sa' of wheat for that. Ibn 'Umar used to give dates (as Sadaqat-ulFitr). Once there was scarcity of dates in Medina and Ibn 'Umar gave barley. 'And Ibn 'Umar used to give Sadaqat-ul-Fitr for every young and old person. He even used to give on behalf of my children. Ibn 'Umar used to give Sadaqatul-Fitr to those who had been officially appointed for its collection. People used to give Sadaqat-ul-Fitr (even) a day or two before the 'Id.


## Hadith 2:588

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle has made Sadaqatul-Fitr obligatory, (and it was), either one Sa' of barley or one Sa' of dates (and its payment was obligatory) on young and old people, and on free men as well as on slaves.


## Hadith 2:589

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas :_

Al-Fadl (his brother) was riding behind Allah's Apostle and a woman from the tribe of Khath'am came and Al-Fadl started looking at her and she started looking at him. The Prophet turned Al-Fadl's face to the other side. The woman said, “O Allah's Apostle! The obligation of Hajj enjoined by Allah on His devotees has become due on my father and he is old and weak, and he cannot sit firm on the Mount; may I perform Hajj on his behalf?” The Prophet replied, “Yes, you may.” That happened during the Hajj-al-Wida (of the Prophet ).


## Hadith 2:590

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

I saw that Allah's Apostle used to ride on his Mount at Dhul Hulaifa and used to start saying, “Labbaik” when the Mount stood upright.


## Hadith 2:591

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

that Allah's Apostle started saying, “Labbaik” from Dhul-Hulaifa when his Mount stood upright carrying him .


## Hadith 2:592

_Narrated Thumama bin 'Abdullah bin Anas:_

Anas performed the Hajj on a pack-saddle and he was not a miser. Anas said, "Allah's Apostle

performed Hajj on a pack-saddle and the same Mount was carrying his baggage too."


## Hadith 2:593

_Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad:_

'Aisha said, “O Allah's Apostle! You performed 'Umra but I did not.” He said, “O 'Abdur-Rahman! Go along with your sister and let her perform 'Umra from Tan'im.” 'Abdur-Rahman made her ride over the pack-saddle of a she-camel and she performed 'Umra.


## Hadith 2:594

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet was asked, “Which is the best deed?” He said, “To believe in Allah and His Apostle.” He was then asked, “Which is the next (in goodness)?” He said, “To participate in Jihad in Allah's Cause.” He was then asked, “Which is the next?” He said, “To perform Hajj-Mabrur. ”


## Hadith 2:595

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the mother of the faithful believers) I said, “O Allah's Apostle! We consider Jihad as the best deed.” The Prophet said, “The best Jihad (for women) is Hajj Mabrur. ”


## Hadith 2:596

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “Whoever performs Hajj for Allah's pleasure and does not have sexual relations with his wife, and does not do evil or sins then he will return (after Hajj free from all sins) as if he were born anew.”


## Hadith 2:597

_Narrated Zaid bin Jubair:_

I went to visit 'Abdullah bin 'Umar at his house which contained many tents made of cotton cloth and these were encircled with Suradik (part of the tent). I asked him from where, should one assume Ihram for Umra. He said, “Allah's Apostle had fixed as Miqat (singular of Mawaqit) Qarn for the people of Najd, Dhul-Hulaifa for the people of Medina, and Al-Juhfa for the people of Sham.”


## Hadith 2:598

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The people of Yemen used to come for Hajj and used not to bring enough provisions with them and used to say that they depend on Allah. On their arrival in Medina they used to beg the people, and so Allah revealed, “And take a provision (with you) for the journey, but the best provision is the fear of Allah.” (2.197).


## Hadith 2:599

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) made Dhul-Huiaifa as the Miqat for the people of Medina; Al-Juhfa for the people of Sham; Qarn-al-Manazil for the people of Najd; and Yalamlam for the people of Yemen; and these Mawaqit are for the people at those very places, and besides them for those who come thorough those places with the intention of performing Hajj and 'Umra; and whoever is living within these boundaries can assume lhram from the place he starts, and the people of Mecca can assume Ihram from Mecca.


## Hadith 2:600

_Narrated Nafi':_

'Abdullah bin 'Umar said, “Allah's Apostle said, 'The people of Medina should assume lhram from Dhul-Hulaifa; the people of Sham from Al-Juhfa; and the people of Najd from Qarn.” And 'Abdullah added, “I was informed that Allah's Apostle had said, 'The people of Yemen should assume Ihram from Yalamlam.' ”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_500">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:401 to 2:500</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_700">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:601 to 2:700</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
