---
title: "Hadith 2:601 to 2:700"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_600">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:501 to 2:600</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_800">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:701 to 2:800</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 2:601

_Narrated Ibn Abbas :_

Allah's Apostle had fixed Dhul Hulaifa as the Mlqat for the people of Medina; Al-Juhfa for the people of Sham; and Qarn Ul-Manazil for the people of Najd; and Yalamlam for the people of Yemen. So, these (above mentioned) are the Mawaqit for all those living at those places, and besides them for those who come through those places with the intention of performing Hajj and 'Umra and whoever lives within these places should assume Ihram from his dwelling place, and similarly the people of Mecca can assume lhram from Mecca.


## Hadith 2:602

_Narrated Salim from his father who said,:_

"The Prophet had fixed the Mawaqit as follows: (No. 603)


## Hadith 2:603

_Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah from his father:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “The Miqat for the people of Medina is Dhul-Hulaifa; for the people of Sham is Mahita; (i.e. Al-Juhfa); and for the people of Najd is Qarn. And said Ibn 'Umar, ”They claim, but I did not hear personally, that the Prophet said, “The Miqat for the people of Yemen is Yalamlam.”


## Hadith 2:604

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet fixed Dhul-Hulaifa as the Miqat for the people of Medina, Al-Juhfa, for the people of Sham, Yalamlam for the people of Yemen, and Qarn for the people of Najd. And these Mawaqlt are for those living at those very places, and besides them for those who come through those places with the intention of performing Hajj and Umra; and whoever is living inside these places can assume lhram from his own dwelling place, and the people of Mecca can assume lhram from Mecca.


## Hadith 2:605

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) fixed Dhul-Hulaifa as the Miqat for the people of Medina, Al-Juhfa for the people of Sham, Qarn-ul-Manazil for the people of Najd, and Yalamlam for the people of Yemen; and these Mawaqit are for those living at those very places, and besides them for those whom come through them with the intention of performing Hajj and Umra; and whoever is living within these Mawaqit should assume lhram from where he starts, and the people of Mecca can assume Ihram from Mecca.


## Hadith 2:606

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

When these two towns (Basra and Kufa) were captured, the people went to 'Umar and said, “O the Chief of the faithful believers! The Prophet fixed Qarn as the Miqat for the people of Najd, it is beyond our way and it is difficult for us to pass through it.” He said, “Take as your Miqat a place situated opposite to Qarn on your usual way. So, he fixed Dhatu-Irq (as their Miqat).”


## Hadith 2:607

_Narrated Nafi :_

'Abdullah bin 'Umar' said, “Allah's Apostle made his camel sit (i.e. he dismounted) at Al-Batha' in Dhul-Hulaifa and offered the prayer.” 'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to do the same.


## Hadith 2:608

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar :_

Allah's Apostle used to go (for Hajj) via Ash-Shajara way and return via Muarras way; and no doubt, whenever Allah's Apostle went to Mecca, he used to offer the prayer in the Mosque of Ash-Shajara; and on his return, he used to offer the prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa in the middle of the valley, and pass the night there till morning.


## Hadith 2:609

_Narrated 'Umar:_

In the valley of Al-'Aqiq I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “To night a messenger came to me from my Lord and asked me to pray in this blessed valley and to assume Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra together. ”


## Hadith 2:610

_Narrated Musa bin 'Uqba:_

Salim bin 'Abdullah's father said, “The Prophet said that while resting in the bottom of the valley at Mu'arras in Dhul-Hulaifa, he had been addressed in a dream: 'You are verily in a blessed valley.' ” Salim made us to dismount from our camels at the place where 'Abdullah used to dismount, aiming at the place where Allah's Apostle had rested and it was below the Mosque situated in the middle of the valley in between them (the residence) and the road.


## Hadith 2:611

_Narrated Said bin Jubair:_

Ibn 'Umar used to oil his hair. I told that to Ibrahim who said, “What were now observing the glitter of the scent in the parting of the hair of the Prophet while he was Muhrim?”


## Hadith 2:612

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) I used to scent Allah's Apostle when he wanted to assume Ihram and also on finishing Ihram before the Tawaf round the Ka'ba (Tawaf-al-ifada).


## Hadith 2:613

_Narrated Salim from his father:_

I heard that Allah's Apostle assumed Ihram with his hair matted together.


## Hadith 2:614

_Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah :_

I heard my father saying, "Never did Allah's Apostle assume Ihram except at the Mosque, that is, at the Mosque of Dhul-Hulaifa.


## Hadith 2:615

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

A man asked, “O Allah's Apostle! What kind of clothes should a Muhrim wear?” Allah's Apostle replied, “He should not wear a shirt, a turban, trousers, a headcloak or leather socks except if he can find no slippers, he then may wear leather socks after cutting off what might cover the ankles. And he should not wear clothes which are scented with saffron or Wars (kinds of Perfumes) . ”


## Hadith 2:616

_Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah:_

Ibn Abbas' said, “Usama rode behind Allah's Apostle from 'Arafat to Al-Muzdalifa; and then Al-Fadl rode behind Allah's Apostle from Al-Muzdalifa to Mina.” Ibn Abbas added, “Both of them said, 'The Prophet kept on reciting Talbiya till he did the Rami of Jamrat-al-'Aqaba.' ”


## Hadith 2:617

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:_

The Prophet with his companions started from Medina after combing and oiling his hair and putting on two sheets of lhram (upper body cover and waist cover). He did not forbid anyone to wear any kind of sheets except the ones colored with saffron because they may leave the scent on the skin. And so in the early morning, the Prophet mounted his Mount while in Dhul-Hulaifa and set out till they reached Baida', where he and his companions recited Talbiya, and then they did the ceremony of Taqlid (which means to put the colored garlands around the necks of the Budn (camels for sacrifice). And all that happened on the 25th of Dhul-Qa'da. And when he reached Mecca on the 4th of Dhul-Hijja he performed the Tawaf round the Ka'ba and performed the Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. And as he had a Badana and had garlanded it, he did not finish his Ihram. He proceeded towards the highest places of Mecca near Al-Hujun and he was assuming the Ihram for Hajj and did not go near the Ka'ba after he performed Tawaf (round it) till he returned from 'Arafat. Then he ordered his companions to perform the Tawaf round the Ka'ba and then the Tawaf of Safa and Marwa, and to cut short the hair of their heads and to finish their Ihram. And that was only for those people who had not garlanded Budn. Those who had their wives with them were permitted to contact them (have sexual intercourse), and similarly perfume and (ordinary) clothes were permissible for them.


## Hadith 2:618

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet offered four Rakat in Medina and then two Rakat at DhulI lulaifa and then passed the night at Dhul-Hulaifa till it was morning and when he mounted his Mount and it stood up, he started to recite Talbiya.


## Hadith 2:619

_Narrated Abu Qilaba:_

Anas bin Malik said, “The Prophet offered four Rakat of the Zuhr prayer in Medina and two Rakat of 'Asr prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa.” I think that the Prophet passed the night there till morning.


## Hadith 2:620

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet offered four Rakat of the Zuhr prayer in Medina and two Rakat of the 'Asr prayer in Dhul-Hulaifa and I heard them (the companions of the Prophet) reciting Talbiya together loudly to the extent of shouting.


## Hadith 2:621

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :_

The Talbiya of Allah's Apostle was : 'Labbaika Allahumma labbaik, Labbaika la sharika Laka labbaik, Inna-l-hamda wan-ni'mata Laka walmu Lk, La sharika Laka' (I respond to Your call O Allah, I respond to Your call, and I am obedient to Your orders, You have no partner, I respond to Your call All the praises and blessings are for You, All the sovereignty is for You, And You have no partners with you.


## Hadith 2:622

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I know how the Prophet used to say (Talbiya) and it was: 'Labbaika Allahumma Labbaik, Labbaika la sharika Laka labbaik, Inna-l-hamda wan-ni'mata Laka walmu Lk, La sharika Laka'.


## Hadith 2:623

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle offered four Rakat of Zuhr prayer at Medina and we were in his company, and two Rakat of the Asr prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa and then passed the night there till it was dawn; then he rode, and when he reached Al-Baida', he praised and glorified Allah and said Takbir (i.e. Alhamdu-lillah and Subhanallah(1) and Allahu-Akbar). Then he and the people along with him recited Talbiya with the intention of performing Hajj and Umra. When we reached (Mecca) he ordered us to finish the lhram (after performing the Umra) (only those who had no Hadi (animal for sacrifice) with them were asked to do so) till the day of Tarwiya that is 8th Dhul-Hijja when they assumed Ihram for Hajj. The Prophet sacrificed many camels (slaughtering them) with his own hands while standing. While Allah's Apostle was in Medina he sacrificed two horned rams black and white in color in the Name of Allah."


## Hadith 2:624

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) recited Talbiya when he had mounted his Mount and was ready to set out.


## Hadith 2:625

_Narrated Nafi':_

Whenever Ibn 'Umar intended to go to Mecca he used to oil himself with a sort of oil that had no pleasant smell, then he would go to the Mosque of Al-Hulaita and offer the prayer, and then ride. When he mounted well on his Mount and the Mount stood up straight, he would proclaim the intention of assuming Ihram, and he used to say that he had seen the Prophet doing the same.


## Hadith 2:626

_Narrated Mujahid:_

I was in the company of Ibn Abbas and the people talked about Ad-Dajjal and said, “Ad-Dajjal will come with the word Kafir (non-believer) written in between his eyes.” On that Ibn Abbas said, “I have not heard this from the Prophet but I heard him saying, 'As if I saw Moses just now entering the valley reciting Talbyia. ' ”


## Hadith 2:627

_Narrated Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) We set out with the Prophet in his last Hajj and we assumed Ihram for Umra. The Prophet then said, “Whoever has the Hadi with him should assume Ihram for Hajj along with 'Umra and should not finish the Ihram till he finishes both.” I was menstruating when I reached Mecca, and so I neither did Tawaf round the Ka'ba nor Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. I complained about that to the Prophet on which he replied, “Undo and comb your head hair, and assume Ihram for Hajj (only) and leave the Umra.” So, I did so. When we had performed the Hajj, the Prophet sent me with my brother 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr to Tan'im. So I performed the 'Umra. The Prophet said to me, “This 'Umra is instead of your missed one.” Those who had assumed Ihram for 'Umra (Hajj-atTamattu) performed Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa and then finished their Ihram. After returning from Mina, they performed another Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa). Those who had assumed Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra together (Hajj-al-Qiran) performed only one Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa).


## Hadith 2:628

_Narrated Ata:_

Jabir said, “The Prophet ordered Ali to keep on assuming his Ihram.” The narrator then informed about the narration of Suraqa.


## Hadith 2:629

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Ali came to the Prophet (p.b.u.h) from Yemen (to Mecca). The Prophet asked Ali, “With what intention have you assumed Ihram?” Ali replied, “I have assumed Ihram with the same intention as that of the Prophet.” The Prophet said, “If I had not the Hadi with me I would have finished the Ihram.” Muhammad bin Bakr narrated extra from Ibn Juraij, “The Prophet said to Ali, ”With what intention have you assumed the Ihram, O Ali?“ He replied, ”With the same (intention) as that of the Prophet.“ The Prophet said, ”Have a Hadi and keep your Ihram as it is."


## Hadith 2:630

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

The Prophet sent me to some people in Yemen and when I returned, I found him at Al-Batha. He asked me, “With what intention have you assumed Ihram (i.e. for Hajj or for Umra or for both?”) I replied, “I have assumed Ihram with an intention like that of the Prophet.” He asked, “Have you a Hadi with you?” I replied in the negative. He ordered me to perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa and then to finish my Ihram. I did so and went to a woman from my tribe who combed my hair or washed my head. Then, when Umar came (i.e. became Caliph) he said, “If we follow Allah's Book, it orders us to complete Hajj and Umra; as Allah says: ”Perform the Hajj and Umra for Allah.“ (2.196). And if we follow the tradition of the Prophet who did not finish his Ihram till he sacrificed his Hadi.”


## Hadith 2:631

_Narrated Al-Qasim bin Muhammad:_

' Aisha said, “We set out with Allah's Apostles in the months of Hajj, and (in) the nights of Hajj, and at the time and places of Hajj and in a state of Hajj. We dismounted at Sarif (a village six miles from Mecca). The Prophet then addressed his companions and said, ”Anyone who has not got the Hadi and likes to do Umra instead of Hajj may do so (i.e. Hajj-al-Tamattu) and anyone who has got the Hadi should not finish the Ihram after performing ' Umra). (i.e. Hajj-al-Qiran). Aisha added, “The companions of the Prophet obeyed the above (order) and some of them (i.e. who did not have Hadi) finished their Ihram after Umra.” Allah's Apostle and some of his companions were resourceful and had the Hadi with them, they could not perform Umra (alone) (but had to perform both Hajj and Umra with one Ihram). Aisha added, “Allah's Apostle came to me and saw me weeping and said, ”What makes you weep, O Hantah?“ I replied, ”I have heard your conversation with your companions and I cannot perform the Umra.“ He asked, ”What is wrong with you?' I replied, ' I do not offer the prayers (i.e. I have my menses).' He said, ' It will not harm you for you are one of the daughters of Adam, and Allah has written for you (this state) as He has written it for them. Keep on with your intentions for Hajj and Allah may reward you that.“ Aisha further added, ”Then we proceeded for Hajj till we reached Mina and I became clean from my menses. Then I went out from Mina and performed Tawaf round the Ka'ba.“ Aisha added, ”I went along with the Prophet in his final departure (from Hajj) till he dismounted at Al-Muhassab (a valley outside Mecca), and we too, dismounted with him.“ He called ' Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr and said to him, ' Take your sister outside the sanctuary of Mecca and let her assume Ihram for ' Umra, and when you had finished ' Umra, return to this place and I will wait for you both till you both return to me.' ” ' Aisha added, ' ' So we went out of the sanctuary of Mecca and after finishing from the ' Umra and the Tawaf we returned to the Prophet at dawn. He said, 'Have you performed the ' Umra?' We replied in the affirmative. So he announced the departure amongst his companions and the people set out for the journey, and the Prophet: too left for Medina.''


## Hadith 2:632

_Narrated Al-Aswad:_

' Aisha said, We went out with the Prophet (from Medina) with the intention of performing Hajj only and when we reached Mecca we performed Tawaf round the Kaba and then the Prophet ordered those who had not driven the Hadi along with them to finish their Ihram. So the people who had not driven the Hadi along with them finished their Ihram. The Prophet's wives, too, had not driven the Hadi with them, so they too, finished their Ihram.“ 'Aisha added, ”I got my menses and could not perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba.“ So when it was the night of Hasba (i.e. when we stopped at Al-Muhassab), I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Everyone is returning after performing Hajj and 'Umra but I am returning after performing Hajj only.' He said, 'Didn't you perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba the night we reached Mecca?' I replied in the negative. He said, 'Go with your brother to Tan'im and assume the Ihram for'Umra, (and after performing it) come back to such and such a place.' On that Safiya said, 'I feel that I will detain you all.' The Prophet said, 'O 'Aqra Halqa! Didn't you perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba on the day of sacrifice? (i.e. Tawaf-al-ifada) Safiya replied in the affirmative. He said, (to Safiya). 'There is no harm for you to proceed on with us.' ” 'Aisha added, “(after returning from 'Umra), the Prophet met me while he was ascending (from Mecca) and I was descending to it, or I was ascending and he was descending.”


## Hadith 2:633

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

We set out with Allah's Apostles (to Mecca) in the year of the Prophet's Last Hajj. Some of us had assumed Ihram for 'Umra only, some for both Hajj and 'Umra, and others for Hajj only. Allah's Apostle assumed Ihram for Hajj. So whoever had assumed Ihram for Hajj or for both Hajj and 'Umra did not finish the Ihram till the day of sacrifice. (See Hadith No. 631, 636, and 639).


## Hadith 2:634

_Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam:_

I saw 'Uthman and 'Ali. 'Uthman used to forbid people to perform Hajj-at-Tamattu' and Hajj-al-Qiran (Hajj and 'Umra together), and when 'Ali saw (this act of 'Uthman), he assumed Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra together saying, “Lubbaik for 'Umra and Hajj,” and said, “I will not leave the tradition of the Prophet on the saying of somebody.”


## Hadith 2:635

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The people (of the Pre-lslamic Period) used to think that to perform 'Umra during the months of Hajj was one of the major sins on earth. And also used to consider the month of Safar as a forbidden (i.e. sacred) month and they used to say, “When the wounds of the camel's back heal up (after they return from Hajj) and the signs of those wounds vanish and the month of Safar passes away then (at that time) 'Umra is permissible for the one who wishes to perform it.” In the morning of the 4th of Dhul-Hijja, the Prophet and his companions reached Mecca, assuming Ihram for Hajj and he ordered his companions to make their intentions of the Ihram for'Umra only (instead of Hajj) so they considered his order as something great and were puzzled, and said, “O Allah's Apostle! What kind (of finishing) of Ihram is allowed?” The Prophet replied, “Finish the Ihram completely like a non-Muhrim (you are allowed everything).”


## Hadith 2:636

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

came to the Prophet (from Yemen and was assuming Ihram for Hajj) and he ordered me to finish the Ihram (after performing the 'Umra).


## Hadith 2:637

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Hafsa the wife of the Prophet said, “O Allah's Apostle! Why have the people finished their Ihram after performing 'Umra but you have not finished your Ihram after performing 'Umra?” He replied, “I have matted my hair and garlanded my Hadi. So I will not finish my Ihram till I have slaughtered (my Hadi). ”


## Hadith 2:638

_Narrated Shu'ba:_

Abu Jamra Nasr bin 'Imran Ad-Duba'i said, “I intended to perform Hajj-at-Tamattu' and the people advised me not to do so. I asked Ibn Abbas regarding it and he ordered me to perform Hajj-at-Tammatu'. Later I saw in a dream someone saying to me, 'Hajj-Mabrur (Hajj performed in accordance with the Prophet's tradition without committing sins and accepted by Allah) and an accepted 'Umra.' So I told that dream to Ibn Abbas. He said, 'This is the tradition of Abu-l-Qasim.' Then he said to me, 'Stay with me and I shall give you a portion of my property.' ” I (Shu'ba) asked, “Why (did he invite you)?” He (Abu Jamra) said, “Because of the dream which I had seen.”


## Hadith 2:639

_Narrated Abu Shihab:_

I left for Mecca for Hajj-at-Tamattu' assuming Ihram for 'Umra. I reached Mecca three days before the day of Tarwiya (8th Dhul-Hijja). Some people of Mecca said to me, “Your Hajj will be like the Hajj performed by the people of Mecca (i.e. you will lose the superiority of assuming Ihram from the Miqat). So I went to 'Ata' asking him his view about it. He said, ”Jabir bin 'Abdullah narrated to me, 'I performed Hajj with Allah's Apostle on the day when he drove camels with him. The people had assumed Ihram for Hajj-al-Ifrad. The Prophet ordered them to finish their Ihram after Tawaf round the Ka'ba, and between Safa and Marwa and to cut short their hair and then to stay there (in Mecca) as non-Muhrims till the day of Tarwiya (i.e. 8th of Dhul-Hijja) when they would assume Ihram for Hajj and they were ordered to make the Ihram with which they had come as for 'Umra only. They asked, 'How can we make it 'Umra (Tamattu') as we have intended to perform Hajj?' The Prophet said, 'Do what I have ordered you. Had I not brought the Hadi with me, I would have done the same, but I cannot finish my Ihram till the Hadi reaches its destination (i.e. is slaughtered).' So, they did (what he ordered them to do)."


## Hadith 2:640

_Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:_

'Ali and 'Uthman differed regarding Hajj-at-Tamattu' while they were at 'Usfan (a familiar place near Mecca). 'Ali said, “I see you want to forbid people to do a thing that the Prophet did?” When 'Ali saw that, he assumed Ihram for both Hajj and 'Umra.


## Hadith 2:641

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah :_

We came with Allah's Apostle (to Mecca) and we were saying: 'Labbaika Allahumma Labbaik' for Hajj. Allah's Apostle ordered us to perform 'Umra with that Ihram (instead of Hajj).


## Hadith 2:642

_Narrated 'Imran:_

We performed Hajj-at-Tamattu' in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and then the Quran was revealed (regarding Hajj-at-Tamattu') and somebody said what he wished (regarding Hajj-at-Tamattu') according his own opinion.


## Hadith 2:643

_Narrated Nafi:_

On reaching the sanctuary of Mecca, Ibn 'Umar used to stop, reciting Talbiya and then he would pass the night at Dhi-Tuwa and then offer the Fajr prayer and take a bath. He used to say that the Prophet used to do the same.


## Hadith 2:644

_Narrated Nafi:_

' Ibn 'Umar said, “The Prophet passed the night at Dhi-Tuwa till it was dawn and then he entered Mecca.” Ibn 'Umar used to do the same.


## Hadith 2:645

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle used to enter Mecca from the high Thaniya and used to leave Mecca from the low Thaniya.


## Hadith 2:646

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle entered Mecca from Kada' from the highest Thaniya which is at Al-Batha' and used to leave Mecca from the low Thaniya.


## Hadith 2:647

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When the Prophet came to Mecca he entered from its higher side and left from its lower side.


## Hadith 2:648

_Narrated 'Aisha':_

In the year of the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet entered Mecca from Kada' and left Mecca from Kuda, from the higher part of Mecca.


## Hadith 2:649

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

In the year of the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet entered Mecca from Kada' at the higher place of Mecca. (Hisham, a sub-narrator said, “ 'Urwa used to enter (Mecca) from both Kada' and Kuda and he often entered through Kada' which was nearer to his dwelling place.)”


## Hadith 2:650

_Narrated Hisham:_

'Urwa said, “The Prophet entered Mecca in the year of the conquest of Mecca from the side of Kada' which is at the higher part of Mecca.” 'Urwa often entered from Kada' which was nearer of the two to his dwelling place.


## Hadith 2:651

_Narrated Hisham from his father :_

In the year of the conquest of Mecca, the Prophet entered Mecca from the side of Kada. Urwa used to enter through both places and he often entered through Kada' which was nearer of the two to his dwelling place.


## Hadith 2:652

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

When the Ka'ba was built, the Prophet and Abbas went to bring stones (for its construction). Al Abbas said to the Prophet, “Take off your waist sheet and put it on your neck.” (When the Prophet took it off) he fell on the ground with his eyes open towards the sky and said, “Give me my waist sheet.” And he covered himself with it.


## Hadith 2:653

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) that Allah's Apostle said to her, “Do you know that when your people (Quraish) rebuilt the Ka'ba, they decreased it from its original foundation laid by Abraham?” I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Why don't you rebuild it on its original foundation laid by Abraham?” He replied, “Were it not for the fact that your people are close to the pre-lslamic Period of ignorance (i.e. they have recently become Muslims) I would have done so.” The sub-narrator, 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar ) stated: 'Aisha 'must have heard this from Allah's Apostle for in my opinion Allah's Apostle had not placed his hand over the two corners of the Ka'ba opposite Al-Hijr only because the Ka'ba was not rebuilt on its original foundations laid by Abraham.


## Hadith 2:654

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I asked the Prophet whether the round wall (near Ka'ba) was part of the Ka'ba. The Prophet replied in the affirmative. I further said, “What is wrong with them, why have they not included it in the building of the Ka'ba?” He said, “Don't you see that your people (Quraish) ran short of money (so they could not include it inside the building of Ka'ba)?” I asked, “What about its gate? Why is it so high?” He replied, “Your people did this so as to admit into it whomever they liked and prevent whomever they liked. Were your people not close to the Pre-lslamic Period of ignorance (i.e. they have recently embraced Islam) and were I not afraid that they would dislike it, surely I would have included the (area of the) wall inside the building of the Ka'ba and I would have lowered its gate to the level of the ground.”


## Hadith 2:655

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle said to me, “Were your people not close to the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance, I would have demolished the Ka'ba and would have rebuilt it on its original foundations laid by Abraham (for Quraish had curtailed its building), and I would have built a back door (too).”


## Hadith 2:656

_Narrated Yazid bin Ruman from 'Urwa:_

'Aisha said that the Prophet said to her, “O Aisha! Were your nation not close to the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance, I would have had the Ka'ba demolished and would have included in it the portion which had been left, and would have made it at a level with the ground and would have made two doors for it, one towards the east and the other towards the west, and then by doing this it would have been built on the foundations laid by Abraham.” That was what urged Ibn-Az-Zubair to demolish the Ka'ba. Jazz said, “I saw Ibn-Az-Zubair when he demolished and rebuilt the Ka'ba and included in it a portion of Al-Hijr (the unroofed portion of Ka'ba which is at present in the form of a compound towards the north-west of the Ka'ba). I saw the original foundations of Abraham which were of stones resembling the humps of camels.” So Jarir asked Yazid, “Where was the place of those stones?” Jazz said, “I will just now show it to you.” So Jarir accompanied Yazid and entered Al-Hijr, and Jazz pointed to a place and said, “Here it is.” Jarir said, “It appeared to me about six cubits from Al-Hijr or so.”


## Hadith 2:657

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

On the Day of the Conquest of Mecca, Allah's Apostle said, “Allah has made this town a sanctuary. Its thorny bushes should not be cut, its game should not be chased, and its fallen things should not be picked up except by one who would announce it publicly.”


## Hadith 2:658

_Narrated 'Usama bin Zaid:_

I asked, “O Allah's Apostle! Where will you stay in Mecca? Will you stay in your house in Mecca?” He replied, “Has 'Aqil left any property or house?” Aqil along with Talib had inherited the property of Abu Talib. Jafar and Ali did not inherit anything as they were Muslims and the other two were non-believers. 'Umar bin Al-Khattab used to say, “A believer cannot inherit (anything from an) infidel.” Ibn Shihab, (a sub-narrator) said, “They (Umar and others) derived the above verdict from Allah's Statement: ”Verily! those who believed and Emigrated and strove with their life And property in Allah's Cause, And those who helped (the emigrants) And gave them their places to live in, These are (all) allies to one another." (8.72)


## Hadith 2:659

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

When Allah's Apostle intended to enter Mecca he said, “Our destination tomorrow, if Allah wished, will be Khaif Bani Kinana where (the pagans) had taken the oath of Kufr.” (Against the Prophet i.e. to be loyal to heathenism by boycotting Bani Ha shim, the Prophets folk) (See Hadith No. 221 Vol. 5)


## Hadith 2:660

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

On the Day of Nahr at Mina, the Prophet said, “Tomorrow we shall stay at Khaif Bani Kinana where the pagans had taken the oath of Kufr (heathenism).” He meant (by that place) Al-Muhassab where the Quraish tribe and Bani Kinana concluded a contract against Bani Hashim and Bani 'Abdul-Muttalib or Bani Al-Muttalib that they would not intermarry with them or deal with them in business until they handed over the Prophet to them.


## Hadith 2:661

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet;; said, “Dhus-Suwaiqa-tain (literally: One with two lean legs) from Ethiopia will demolish the Ka'ba.”


## Hadith 2:662

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The people used to fast on 'Ashura (the tenth day of the month of Muharram) before the fasting of Ramadan was made obligatory. And on that day the Ka'ba used to be covered with a cover. When Allah made the fasting of the month of Ramadan compulsory, Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever wishes to fast (on the day of 'Ashura') may do so; and whoever wishes to leave it can do so.”


## Hadith 2:663

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

The Prophet said “The people will continue performing the Hajj and 'Umra to the Ka'ba even after the appearance of Gog and Magog.”

The Hour (Day of Judgment) will not be established till the Hajj (to the Ka'ba) is abandoned.


## Hadith 2:664

_Narrated Abu Wail:_

(One day) I sat along with Shaiba on the chair inside the Ka'ba. He (Shaiba) said, “No doubt, Umar sat at this place and said, 'I intended not to leave any yellow (i.e. gold) or white (i.e. silver) (inside the Ka'ba) undistributed.' I said (to 'Umar), 'But your two companions (i.e. The Prophet and Abu Bakr) did not do so.' 'Umar said, They are the two persons whom I always follow.' ”


## Hadith 2:665

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “As if I were looking at him, a black person with thin legs plucking the stones of the Ka'ba one after another. ”


## Hadith 2:666

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “DhusSuwaiqatain (the thin legged man) from Ethiopia will demolish the Ka'ba.”


## Hadith 2:667

_Narrated 'Abis bin Rabia:_

'Umar came near the Black Stone and kissed it and said “No doubt, I know that you are a stone and can neither benefit anyone nor harm anyone. Had I not seen Allah's Apostle kissing you I would not have kissed you.”


## Hadith 2:668

_Narrated Salim that his father said,_

“Allah's Apostle, Usama bin Zaid, Bilal, and 'Uthman bin abu Talha entered the Ka'ba and then closed its door. When they opened the door I was the first person to enter (the Ka'ba). I met Bilal and asked him, ”Did Allah's Apostle offer a prayer inside (the Ka'ba)?“ Bilal replied in the affirmative and said, ”(The Prophet offered the prayer) in between the two right pillars."


## Hadith 2:669

_Narrated Nafi':_

Whenever Ibn 'Umar entered the Ka'ba he used to walk straight keeping the door at his back on entering, and used to proceed on till about three cubits from the wall in front of him, and then he would offer the prayer there aiming at the place where Allah's Apostle prayed, as Bilal had told him. There is no harm for any person to offer the prayer at any place inside the Ka'ba.


## Hadith 2:670

_Narrated Isma'li bin Abu Khalid:_

'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa said, “Allah's Apostle performed the 'Umra. He performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and offered two Rakat behind the Maqam (Abraham's place) and was accompanied by those who were screening him from the people.” Somebody asked 'Abdullah, “Did Allah's Apostle enter the Ka'ba?” 'Abdullah replied in the negative.


## Hadith 2:671

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

When Allah's Apostle came to Mecca, he refused to enter the Ka'ba with idols in it. He ordered (idols to be taken out). So they were taken out. The people took out the pictures of Abraham and Ishmael holding Azlams in their hands. Allah's Apostle said, “May Allah curse these people. By Allah, both Abraham and Ishmael never did the game of chance with Azlams.” Then he entered the Ka'ba and said Takbir at its corners but did not offer the prayer in it.


## Hadith 2:672

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

When Allah's Apostle and his companions came to Mecca, the pagans circulated the news that a group of people were coming to them and they had been weakened by the Fever of Yathrib (Medina). So the Prophet ordered his companions to do Ramal in the first three rounds of Tawaf of the Ka'ba and to walk between the two corners (The Black Stone and Yemenite corner). The Prophet did not order them to do Ramal in all the rounds of Tawaf out of pity for them.


## Hadith 2:673

_Narrated Salim that his father said:_

I saw Allah's Apostle arriving at Mecca; he kissed the Black Stone Corner first while doing Tawaf and did ramal in the first three rounds of the seven rounds (of Tawaf).


## Hadith 2:674

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar :_

The Prophet did Ramal in (first) three rounds (of Tawaf), and walked in the remaining four, in Hajj and Umra.


## Hadith 2:675

_Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father who said:_

"Umar bin Al-Khattab addressed the Corner (Black Stone) saying, 'By Allah! I know that you are a stone and can neither benefit nor harm. Had I not seen the Prophet touching (and kissing) you, I would never have touched (and kissed) you.' Then he kissed it and said, 'There is no reason for us to do Ramal (in Tawaf) except that we wanted to show off before the pagans, and now Allah has destroyed them.' 'Umar added, '(Nevertheless), the Prophet did that and we do not want to leave it (i.e. Ramal).'


## Hadith 2:676

_Narrated Nafi':_

Ibn 'Umar. said, “I have never missed the touching of these two stones of Ka'ba (the Black Stone and the Yemenite Corner) both in the presence and the absence of crowds, since I saw the Prophet touching them.” I asked Nafi': “Did Ibn 'Umar use to walk between the two Corners?” Nafi' replied, “He used to walk in order that it might be easy for him to touch it (the Corner Stone).”


## Hadith 2:677

_Narrated Ibn Abbas.:_

In his Last Hajj the Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba riding a camel and pointed a bent-headed stick towards the Corner (Black Stone).


## Hadith 2:678

_Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah that his father said:_

“I have not seen the Prophet touching except the two Yemenite Corners (i.e. the ones facing Yemen).”


## Hadith 2:679

_Narrated Zaid bin Aslam that his father said:_

“I saw 'Umar bin Al-Khattab kissing the Black Stone and he then said, (to it) 'Had I not seen Allah's Apostle kissing you, (stone) I would not have kissed you.' ”


## Hadith 2:680

_Narrated Az-Zubair bin 'Arabi:_

A man asked Ibn 'Umar about the touching of the Black Stone. Ibn 'Umar said, “I saw Allah's Apostle touching and kissing it.” The questioner said, “But if there were a throng (much rush) round the Ka'ba and the people overpowered me, (what would I do?)” He replied angrily, “Stay in Yemen (as that man was from Yemen). I saw Allah's Apostle touching and kissing it.”


## Hadith 2:681

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba while riding a camel, and whenever he came in front of the Corner, he pointed towards it (with something).


## Hadith 2:682

_Narrated Ibn Abbas_

The Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba riding a camel, and every time he came in front of the Corner (having the Black Stone), he pointed towards it with something he had with him and said Takbir.


## Hadith 2:683

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

'Aisha said, “The first thing the Prophet did on reaching Mecca, was the ablution and then he performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and that was not 'Umra (alone), (but Hajj-al-Qiran). 'Urwa added: Later Abu Bakr and 'Umar did the same in their Hajj.” And I performed the Hajj with my father Az-Zubair, and the first thing he did was Tawaf of the Ka'ba. Later I saw the Muhajirin (Emigrants) and the Ansar doing the same. My mother (Asma') told me that she, her sister ('Aisha), Az-Zubair and such and such persons assumed Ihram for 'Umra, and after they passed their hands over the Black Stone Corner (of the Ka'ba) they finished the Ihram. (i.e. After doing Tawaf of the Ka'ba and Sa'i between Safa-Marwa.


## Hadith 2:684

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :_

When Allah's Apostle performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba for Hajj or 'Umra, he used to do Ramal during the first three rounds, and in the last four rounds he used to walk; then after the Tawaf he used to offer two Rakat and then performed Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.


## Hadith 2:685

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

When the Prophet performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba, he did Ramal during the first three rounds and in the last four rounds he used to walk and while doing Tawaf between Safa and Marwa, he used to run in the midst of the rain water passage.


## Hadith 2:686

_Narrated Um Salama:_

(the wife of the Prophet) I informed Allah's Apostle that I was ill. So he said, “Perform the Tawaf while riding behind the people.” I did so, and at that time the Prophet was praying beside the Ka'ba and reciting Surat-at-Tur.


## Hadith 2:687

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

While the Prophet was performing Tawaf of the Kaba, he passed by a person who had tied his hands to another person with a rope or string or something like that. The Prophet cut it with his own hands and said, “Lead him by the hand.”


## Hadith 2:688

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet saw a man performing Tawaf of the Kaba tied with a string or something else. So the Prophet cut that string.


## Hadith 2:689

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

In the year prior to the last Hajj of the Prophet when Allahs Apostle made Abu Bakr the leader of the pilgrims, the latter (Abu Bakr) sent me in the company of a group of people to make a public announcement: 'No pagan is allowed to perform Hajj after this year, and no naked person is allowed to perform Tawaf of the Kaba.' (See Hadith No. 365 Vol. 1)


## Hadith 2:690

_Narrated Amr:_

We asked Ibn Umar: “May a man have sexual relations with his wife during the Umra before performing Tawaf between Safa and Marwa?” He said, “Allah's Apostle arrived (in Mecca) and circumambulated the Kaba seven times, then offered two Rakat behind Maqam Ibrahim (the station of Abraham), then performed Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.” Ibn Umar added, “Verily! In Allah's Apostle you have a good example.” And I asked Jabir bin Abdullah (the same question), and he replied, “You should not go near your wives (have sexual relations) till you have finished Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. ”


## Hadith 2:691

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet arrived at Mecca and performed Tawaf of the Kaba and Sa'i between Safa and Marwa, but he did not go near the Kaba after his Tawaf till he returned from Arafat.


## Hadith 2:692

_Narrated Um Salama:_

(the wife of the Prophet) I informed Allah's Apostle (about my illness). (Through other sub-narrators, Um Salama narrated that when Allah's Apostle was at Mecca and had just decided to leave (Mecca) while she had not yet done Tawaf of the Kaba (and after listening to her). The Prophet said, “When the morning prayer is established, perform the Tawaf on your camel while the people are in prayer.” So she did the same and did not offer the two Rakat of Tawaf until she came out of the Mosque.


## Hadith 2:693

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

The Prophet reached Mecca, circumambulated the Kaba seven times and then offered a two Rakat prayer behind Maqam ibrahim. Then he went towards the Safa. Allah has said, “Verily, in Allah's Apostle you have a good example.”


## Hadith 2:694

_Narrated Urwa from Aisha:_

Some people performed Tawaf (of the Kaba) after the morning prayer and then sat to listen to a preacher till sunrise, and then they stood up for the prayer. Then Aisha commented, “Those people kept on sitting till it was the time in which the prayer is disliked and after that they stood up for the prayer.”


## Hadith 2:695

_Narrated Abdullah:_

heard the Prophet forbidding the offering of prayers at the time of sunrise and sunset.


## Hadith 2:696

_Narrated Abida bin Humaid:_

Abdul, Aziz bin Rufai Said, “I saw Abdullah bin Az-Zubair performing Tawaf of the Kaba after the morning prayer then offering the two Rakat prayer.” Abdul Aziz added, “I saw Abdullah bin Az-Zubair offering a two Rakat prayer after the Asr prayer.” He informed me that Aisha told him that the Prophet used to offer those two Rakat whenever he entered her house."


## Hadith 2:697

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle performed Tawaf (of the Kaba) ending a camel (at that time the Prophet had foot injury). Whenever he came to the Corner (having the Black Stone) he would point out towards it with a thing in his hand and say, “Allahu-Akbar.”


## Hadith 2:698

_Narrated Um Salama:_

I informed Allah's Apostle that I was sick. He said, “Perform Tawaf (of the Kaba) while riding behind the people.” So, I performed the Tawaf while Allah's Apostle was offering the prayer beside the Kaba and was reciting Surat-at-Tur.


## Hadith 2:699

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

Al Abbas bin Abdul-Muttalib asked the permission of Allahs Apostle to let him stay in Mecca during the nights of Mina in order to provide the pilgrims with water to drink, so the Prophet permitted him.


## Hadith 2:700

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle came to the drinking place and asked for water. Al-Abbas said, “O Fadl! Go to your mother and bring water from her for Allah's Apostle .” Allah's Apostle said, “Give me water to drink.” Al-Abbas said, “O Allahs Apostle! The people put their hands in it.” Allah's Apostle again said, 'Give me water to drink. So, he drank from that water and then went to the Zam-zam (well) and there the people were offering water to the others and working at it (drawing water from the well). The Prophet then said to them, “Carry on! You are doing a good deed.” Then he said, “Were I not afraid that other people would compete with you (in drawing water from Zam-zam), I would certainly take the rope and put it over this (i.e. his shoulder) (to draw water).” On saying that the Prophet pointed to his shoulder.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_600">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:501 to 2:600</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_800">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:701 to 2:800</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
