---
title: "Hadith 2:701 to 2:800"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_700">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:601 to 2:700</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_823">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:801 to 2:823</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 2:701

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

I gave Zam-zam water to Allah's Apostle and he drank it while standing. 'Asia (a sub-narrator) said that 'Ikrima took the oath that on that day the Prophet had not been standing but riding a camel.


## Hadith 2:702

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

We set out with Allah's Apostle in the year of his Last Hajj and we mended (the Ihram) for 'Umra. Then the Prophet said, “Whoever has a Hadi with him should assume Ihram for both Hajj and 'Umra, and should not finish it till he performs both of the them (Hajj and 'Umra).” When we reached Mecca, I had my menses. When we had performed our Hajj, the Prophet sent me with 'Abdur-Rahman to Tan'im and I performed the 'Umra. The Prophet said, “This is in lieu of your missed 'Umra.” Those who had assumed Ihram for 'Umra performed Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa) and then finished their Ihram. And then they performed another Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa) after returning from Mina. And those who had assumed lhram for Hajj and 'Umra to get her ( Hajj-Qiran ) performed only one Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa).


## Hadith 2:703

_Narrated Nafi':_

'Abdullah bin 'Abdullah bin 'Umar and his riding animal entered the house of Ibn 'Umar. He (the son of Ibn 'Umar) said, “I fear that this year a battle might take place between the people and you might be prevented from going to the Ka'ba. I suggest that you should stay here.” Ibn Umar said, “Once Allah's Apostle set out for the pilgrimage, and the pagans of Quraish intervened between him and the Ka'ba. So, if the people intervened between me and the Ka'ba, I would do the same as Allah's Apostle had done . . . ”Verily, in Allah's Apostle you have a good example.“ Then he added, ”I make you a witness that I have intended to perform Hajj along with 'Umra." After arriving at Mecca, Ibn 'Umar performed one Tawaf only (between Safa and Marwa).


## Hadith 2:704

_Narrated Nafi':_

Ibn 'Umar intended to perform Hajj in the year when Al-Hajjaj attacked Ibn Az-Zubair. Somebody said to Ibn 'Umar, “There is a danger of an impending war between them.” Ibn 'Umar said, “Verily, in Allah's Apostle you have a good example. (And if it happened as you say) then I would do the same as Allah's Apostle had done. I make you witness that I have decided to perform 'Umra.” Then he set out and when he reached Al-Baida', he said, “The ceremonies of both Hajj and 'Umra are similar. I make you witness that I have made Hajj compulsory for me along with 'Umra.” He drove (to Mecca) a Hadi which he had bought from (a place called) Qudaid and did not do more than that. He did not slaughter the Hadi or finish his Ihram, or shave or cut short his hair till the day of slaughtering the sacrifices (10th Dhul-Hijja). Then he slaughtered his Hadi and shaved his head and considered the first Tawaf (of Safa and Marwa) as sufficient for Hajj and 'Umra. Ibn 'Umar said, “Allah's Apostle did the same.”


## Hadith 2:705

_Narrated Muhammad bin 'AbdurRahman bin Nawfal Al-Qurashi:_

I asked 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair (regarding the Hajj of the Prophet ). 'Urwa replied, “Aisha narrated, 'When the Prophet reached Mecca, the first thing he started with was the ablution, then he performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and his intention was not 'Umra alone (but Hajj and 'Umra together).' ” Later Abu Bakr I performed the Hajj and the first thing he started with was Tawaf of the Ka'ba and it was not 'Umra alone (but Hajj and 'Umra together). And then 'Umar did the same. Then 'Uthman performed the Hajj and the first thing he started with was Tawaf of the Ka'ba and it was not 'Umra alone. And then Muawiya and 'Abdullah bin 'Umar did the same. I performed Hajj with Ibn Az-Zubair and the first thing he started with was Tawaf of the Ka'ba and it was not 'Umra alone, (but Hajj and 'Umra together). Then I saw the Muhajirin (Emigrants) and Ansar doing the same and it was not 'Umra alone. And the last person I saw doing the same was Ibn 'Umar, and he did not do another 'Umra after finishing the first. Now here is Ibn 'Umar present amongst the people! They neither ask him nor anyone of the previous ones. And all these people, on entering Mecca, would not start with anything unless they had performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba, and would not finish their Ihram. And no doubt, I saw my mother and my aunt, on entering Mecca doing nothing before performing Tawaf of the Ka'ba, and they would not finish their lhram. And my mother informed me that she, her sister, Az-Zubair and such and such persons had assumed lhram for 'Umra and after passing their hands over the Corner (the Black Stone) (i.e. finishing their Umra) they finished their Ihram."


## Hadith 2:706

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

I asked 'Aisha : “How do you interpret the statement of Allah,. : Verily! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols of Allah, and whoever performs the Hajj to the Ka'ba or performs 'Umra, it is not harmful for him to perform Tawaf between them (Safa and Marwa.) (2.158). By Allah! (it is evident from this revelation) there is no harm if one does not perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.” 'Aisha said, “O, my nephew! Your interpretation is not true. Had this interpretation of yours been correct, the statement of Allah should have been, 'It is not harmful for him if he does not perform Tawaf between them.' But in fact, this divine inspiration was revealed concerning the Ansar who used to assume lhram for worship ping an idol called ”Manat" which they used to worship at a place called Al-Mushallal before they embraced Islam, and whoever assumed Ihram (for the idol), would consider it not right to perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.

When they embraced Islam, they asked Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) regarding it, saying, “O Allah's Apostle! We used to refrain from Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.” So Allah revealed: 'Verily; (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols of Allah.' “ Aisha added, ”Surely, Allah's Apostle set the tradition of Tawaf between Safa and Marwa, so nobody is allowed to omit the Tawaf between them." Later on I ('Urwa) told Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur-Rahman (of 'Aisha's narration) and he said, 'i have not heard of such information, but I heard learned men saying that all the people, except those whom 'Aisha mentioned and who used to assume lhram for the sake of Manat, used to perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.

When Allah referred to the Tawaf of the Ka'ba and did not mention Safa and Marwa in the Quran, the people asked, 'O Allah's Apostle! We used to perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa and Allah has revealed (the verses concerning) Tawaf of the Ka'ba and has not mentioned Safa and Marwa. Is there any harm if we perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa?' So Allah revealed: “Verily As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols of Allah.” Abu Bakr said, "It seems that this verse was revealed concerning the two groups, those who used to refrain from Tawaf between Safa and Marwa in the Pre-lslamic Period of ignorance and those who used to perform the Tawaf then, and after embracing Islam they refrained from the Tawaf between them as Allah had enjoined Tawaf of the Ka'ba and did not mention Tawaf (of Safa and Marwa) till later after mentioning the Tawaf of the Ka'ba.'


## Hadith 2:707

_Narrated Nafi':_

Ibn 'Umar said, “When Allah's Apostle performed the first Tawaf he did Ramal in the first three rounds and then walked in the remaining four rounds (of Tawaf of the Ka'ba), where as in performing Tawaf between Safa and Marwa he used to run in the midst of the rain-water passage,” I asked Nafi', “Did 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar) use to walk steadily on reaching the Yemenite Corner?” He replied, “No, unless people were crowded at the Corner; otherwise he would not leave it without touching it.”


## Hadith 2:708

_Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar:_

We asked Ibn 'Umar whether a man who, while performing 'Umra, had performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba; and had not yet performed Tawaf between Safa and Marwa, could have sexual relation with his wife, Ibn 'Umar replied “The Prophet (p.b.u.h) reached Mecca and performed the seven rounds (of Tawaf) of the Ka'ba and then offered a two-Rakat prayer behind Maqam ibrahim and then performed the seven rounds (of Tawaf) between Safa and Marwa.” He added, “Verily! In Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) you have a good example.” We asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah (the same question) and he said, “He (that man) should not come near (his wife) till he has completed Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.”


## Hadith 2:709

_Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar:_

I heard Ibn 'Umar saying, “The Prophet arrived at Mecca and performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and then offered a two-Rakat prayer and then performed Tawaf between Safa and Marwa.” Ibn 'Umar then recited (the verse): “Verily! In Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) you have a good example. ”


## Hadith 2:710

_Narrated 'Asim:_

I asked Anas bin Malik: “Did you use to dislike to perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa?” He said, “Yes, as it was of the ceremonies of the days of the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance, till Allah revealed: 'Verily! (The two mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa are among the symbols of Allah. It is therefore no sin for him who performs the pilgrimage to the Ka'ba, or performs 'Umra, to perform Tawaf between them.' ” (2.158)


## Hadith 2:711

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and the Sa'i of Safa and Marwa so as to show his strength to the pagans.


## Hadith 2:712

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I was menstruating when I reached Mecca. So, I neither performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba, nor the Tawaf between Safa and Marwa. Then I informed Allah's Apostle about it. He replied, “Perform all the ceremonies of Hajj like the other pilgrims, but do not perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba till you get clean (from your menses).”


## Hadith 2:713

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet and his companions assumed Ihram for Hajj and none except the Prophet (p.b.u.h) and Talha had the Hadi (sacrifice) with them. 'Ali arrived from Yemen and had a Hadi with him. 'Ali said, “I have assumed Ihram for what the Prophet has done.” The Prophet ordered his companions to perform the 'Umra with the lhram which they had assumed, and after finishing Tawaf (of Ka'ba, Safa and Marwa) to cut short their hair, and to finish their lhram except those who had Hadi with them. They (the people) said, “How can we proceed to Mina (for Hajj) after having sexual relations with our wives?” When that news reached the Prophet he said, “If I had formerly known what I came to know lately, I would not have brought the Hadi with me. Had there been no Hadi with me, I would have finished the state of lhram.” 'Aisha got her menses, so she performed all the ceremonies of Hajj except Tawaf of the Ka'ba, and when she got clean (from her menses), she performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba. She said, “O Allah's Apostle! (All of you) are returning with the Hajj and 'Umra, but I am returning after performing Hajj only.” So the Prophet ordered 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr to accompany her to Tan'im and thus she performed the 'Umra after the Hajj.


## Hadith 2:714

_Narrated Hafsa:_

(On 'Id) We used to forbid our virgins to go out (for 'Id prayer). A lady came and stayed at the Palace of Bani Khalaf. She mentioned that her sister was married to one of the companions of Allah's Apostle who participated in twelve Ghazawats along with Allah's Apostle and her sister was with him in six of them. She said, “We used to dress the wounded and look after the patients.” She (her sister) asked Allah's Apostle , “Is there any harm for a woman to stay at home if she doesn't have a veil?” He said, “She should cover herself with the veil of her companion and she should take part in the good deeds and in the religious gatherings of the believers.” When Um 'Atiyya came, I asked her. “Did you hear anything about that?” Um 'Atiyya said, “Bi Abi” and she never mentioned the name of Allah's Apostle without saying “Bi Abi” (i.e. 'Let my father be sacrificed for you'). We asked her, “Have you heard Allah's Apostle saying so and so (about women)?” She replied in the affirmative and said, “Let my father be sacrificed for him. He told us that unmarried mature virgins who stay often screened or unmarried young virgins and mature girls who stay often screened should come out and take part in the good deeds and in the religious gatherings of the believers. But the menstruating women should keep away from the Musalla (praying place).” I asked her, “The menstruating women?” She replied, “Don't they present themselves at 'Arafat and at such and such places?”


## Hadith 2:715

_Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz bin Rufai:_

I asked Anas bin Malik, “Tell me what you remember from Allah's Apostle (regarding these questions): Where did he offer the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers on the day of Tarwiya (8th day of Dhul-Hajja)?” He relied, “(He offered these prayers) at Mina.” I asked, “Where did he offer the 'Asr prayer on the day of Nafr (i.e. departure from Mina on the 12th or 13th of Dhul-Hijja)?” He replied, “At Al-Abtah,” and then added, “You should do as your chiefs do.”


## Hadith 2:716

_Narrated 'Abdul 'Aziz:_

I went out to Mina on the day of Tarwiya and met Anas going on a donkey. I asked him, “Where did the Prophet offer the Zuhr prayer on this day?” Anas replied, “See where your chiefs pray and pray similarly.”


## Hadith 2:717

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar :_

Allah's Apostle offered a two-Rakat prayer at Mina. Abu Bakr, 'Umar and 'Uthman, (during the early years of his caliphate) followed the same practice.


## Hadith 2:718

_Narrated Haritha bin Wahab Al-Khuza'i:_

The Prophet led us in a two-Rakat prayer at Mina although our number was more than ever and we were in better security than ever.


## Hadith 2:719

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Masud:_

I offered (only a) two Rakat prayer with the Prophet (at Mina), and similarly with Abu Bakr and with 'Umar, and then you d offered in opinions. Wish that I would be lucky enough to have two of the four Rakat accepted (by Allah).


## Hadith 2:720

_Narrated Um Al-Fadl:_

The people doubted whether the Prophet was observing the fast on the Day of 'Arafat, so I sent something for him to drink and he drank it.


## Hadith 2:721

_Narrated Muhammad bin Abu Bakr Al-Thaqafi:_

I asked Anas bin Malik while we were proceeding from Mina to 'Arafat, “What do you use to do on this day when you were with Allah's Apostle ?” Anas said, “Some of us used to recite Talbiya and nobody objected to that, and others used to recite Takbir and nobody objected to that.”


## Hadith 2:722

_Narrated Salim:_

'Abdul Malik wrote to Al-Hajjaj that he should not differ from Ibn 'Umar during Hajj. On the Day of 'Arafat, when the sun declined at midday, Ibn 'Umar came along with me and shouted near Al-Hajjaj's cotton (cloth) tent. Al-Hajjaj came Out, wrapping himself with a waist-sheet dyed with safflower, and said, “O Abu Abdur-Rahman! What is the matter?” He said, If you want to follow the Sunna (the tradition of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) ) then proceed (to 'Arafat).“ Al-Hajjaj asked, ”At this very hour?“ Ibn 'Umar said, ”Yes.“ He replied, ”Please wait for me till I pour some water over my head (i.e. take a bath) and come out.“ Then Ibn 'Umar dismounted and waited till Al-Hajjaj came out. So, he (Al-Hajjaj) walked in between me and my father (Ibn 'Umar). I said to him, ”If you want to follow the Sunna then deliver a brief sermon and hurry up for the stay at 'Arafat." He started looking at 'Abdullah (Ibn 'Umar) (inquiringly), and when 'Abdullah noticed that, he said that he had told the truth.


## Hadith 2:723

_Narrated Um Al-Fadl bint Al Harith:_

On the day of 'Arafat, some people who were with me, differed about the fasting of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) some said that he was fasting while others said that he was not fasting. So I sent a bowl full of milk to him while he was riding his camel, and he drank that milk.


## Hadith 2:724

_Narrated Salim bin 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

'Abdul-Malik bin Marwan wrote to Al-Hajjaj that he should follow 'Abdullah bin 'Umar in all the ceremonies of Hajj. So when it was the Day of 'Arafat (9th of Dhul-Hajja), and after the sun has deviated or has declined from the middle of the sky, I and Ibn 'Umar came and he shouted near the cotton (cloth) tent of Al-Hajjaj, “Where is he?” Al-Hajjaj came out. Ibn 'Umar said, “Let us proceed (to 'Arafat).” Al-Hajjaj asked, “Just now?” Ibn 'Umar replied, “Yes.” Al-Hajjaj said, “Wait for me till I pour water on me (i.e. take a bath).” So, Ibn 'Umar dismounted (and waited) till Al-Hajjaj came out. He was walking between me and my father. I informed Al-Hajjaj, “If you want to follow the Sunna today, then you should shorten the sermon and then hurry up for the stay (at 'Arafat).” Ibn 'Umar said, “He (Salim) has spoken the truth.”


## Hadith 2:725

_Narrated Muhammad bin Jubair bin Mut'im:_

My father said, “(Before Islam) I was looking for my camel ..” The same narration is told by a different sub-narrator. Jubair bin Mut'im said, “My camel was lost and I went out in search of it on the day of 'Arafat, and I saw the Prophet standing in 'Arafat. I said to myself: By Allah he is from the Hums (literally: strictly religious, Quraish were called so, as they used to say, 'We are the people of Allah we shall not go out of the sanctuary). What has brought him here?”


## Hadith 2:726

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

During the pre-lslamic period of Ignorance, the people used to perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba naked except the Hums; and the Hums were Quraish and their offspring. The Hums used to give clothes to the men who would perform the Tawaf wearing them; and women (of the Hums) used to give clothes to the women who would perform the Tawaf wearing them. Those to whom the Hums did not give clothes would perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba naked. Most of the people used to go away (disperse) directly from 'Arafat but they (Hums) used to depart after staying at Al-Muzdalifa. 'Urwa added, “My father narrated that 'Aisha had said, 'The following verses were revealed about the Hums: Then depart from the place whence all the people depart—(2.199) 'Urwa added, ”They (the Hums) used to stay at Al-Muzdalifa and used to depart from there (to Mina) and so they were sent to 'Arafat (by Allah's order)."


## Hadith 2:727

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

Usama was asked in my presence, “How was the speed of (the camel of) Allah's Apostle while departing from 'Arafat during the Hajjatul Wada?” Usama replied, “The Prophet proceeded on with a modest pace, and when there was enough space he would (make his camel) go very fast.”


## Hadith 2:728

_Narrated Usama bin Zaid:_

As soon as the Prophet departed from 'Arafat, he went towards the mountain pass, and there he answered the call of) the prayer is ahead of you (i.e. at asked, “O Allah's Apostle! Will you offer the prayer here?” He replied, “(The place of) the prayer is ahead of you (i.e. at Al-Muzdalifa).”


## Hadith 2:729

_Narrated Nafi':_

'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to offer the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together at Jam' (Al-Muzdalifa). But he used to pass by that mountain pass where Allah's Apostle went, and he would enter it and answer the call of nature and perform ablution, and would not offer any prayer till he had prayed at Jam.'


## Hadith 2:730

_Narrated Usama bin Zaid_

rode behind Allah's Apostle from 'Arafat and when Allah's Apostle reached the mountain pass on the left side which is before Al-Muzdalifa he made his camel kneel and then urinated, and then I poured water for his ablution. He performed light ablution and then I said to him: (Is it the time for) the prayer, O Allah's Apostle!“ He replied, ”The (place of) prayer is ahead of you (i.e. at Al-Muzdalifa).“ So Allah's Apostle rode till he reached Al-Muzdalifa and then he offered the prayer (there) . Then in the morning (10th Dhul-Hijja) Al-Faql (bin Abbas) rode behind Allah's Apostle. Kuraib, (a sub-narrator) said that 'Abdullah bin Abbas narrated from Al-Fadl, ”Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) kept on reciting Talbiya (during the journey) till he reached the Jamra." (Jamrat-al-Aqaba)


## Hadith 2:731

_Narrated Ibn Abbas. :_

I proceeded along with the Prophet on the day of 'Arafat (9th Dhul-Hijja). The Prophet heard a great hue and cry and the beating of camels behind him. So he beckoned to the people with his lash, “O people! Be quiet. Hastening is not a sign of righteousness.”


## Hadith 2:732

_Narrated Usama bin Zaid:_

Allah's Apostle proceeded from 'Arafat and dismounted at the mountainous pass and then urinated and performed a light ablution. I said to him, “(Shall we offer) the prayer?” He replied, “The prayer is ahead of you (i.e. at Al-Muzdalifa).” When he came to Al-Muzdalifa, he performed a perfect ablution. Then Iqama for the prayer was pronounced and he offended the Maghrib prayer and then every person made his camel kneel at his place; and then Iqama for the prayer was pronounced and he offered the ('Isha') prayer and he did not offer any prayer in between them (i.e. Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers).


## Hadith 2:733

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet offered the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together at Jam' (i.e. Al-Muzdalifa) with a separate Iqama for each of them and did not offer any optional prayer in between them or after each of them.


## Hadith 2:734

_Narrated Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari :_

Allah's Apostle coffered the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together at Al-Muzdalifa.


## Hadith 2:735

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid:_

'Abdullah;- performed the Hajj and we reached Al-Muzdalifa at or about the time of the 'Isha' prayer. He ordered a man to pronounce the Adhan and Iqama and then he offered the Maghrib prayer and offered two Rakat after it. Then he asked for his supper and took it, and then, I think, he ordered a man to pronounce the Adhan and Iqama (for the 'isha' prayer). ('Amr, a sub-narrator said: The intervening statement 'I think', was said by the sub-narrator Zuhair) (i.e. not by 'Abdu-Rahman). Then 'Abdullah offered two Rakat of 'Isha' prayer. When the day dawned, 'Abdullah said, “The Prophet never offered any prayer at this hour except this prayer at this time and at this place and on this day.” 'Abdullah added, “These two prayers are shifted from their actual times — the Maghrib prayer (is offered) when the people reached Al-Muzdalifa and the Fajr (morning) prayer at the early dawn.” 'Abdullah added, “I saw the Prophet doing that.”


## Hadith 2:736

_Narrated Salim:_

'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to send the weak among his family early to Mina. So they used to depart from Al-Mash'ar Al-Haram (that is Al-Muzdalifa) at night (when the moon had set) and invoke Allah as much as they could, and then they would return (to Mina) before the Imam had started from Al-Muzdalifa to Mina. So some of them would reach Mina at the time of the Fajr prayer and some of them would come later. When they reached Mina they would throw pebbles on the Jamra (Jamrat-al-Aqaba) Ibn 'Umar used to say, “Allah's Apostle gave the permission to them (weak people) to do so.”


## Hadith 2:737

_Narrated Ibn Abbas :_

Allah's Apostle had sent me from Jam' (i.e. Al-Muzdalifa) at night.


## Hadith 2:738

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

I as among those whom the Prophet sent on the night of Al-Muzdalifa early being among the weak members of his family.


## Hadith 2:739

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

(the slave of Asma') During the night of Jam', Asma' got down at Al-Muzdalifa and stood up for (offering) the prayer and offered the prayer for some time and then asked, “O my son! Has the moon set?” I replied in the negative and she again prayed for another period and then asked, “Has the moon set?” I replied, “Yes.” So she said that we should set out (for Mina), and we departed and went on till she threw pebbles at the Jamra (Jamrat-al-Aqaba) and then she returned to her dwelling place and offered the morning prayer. I asked her, “O you! I think we have come (to Mina) early in the night.” She replied, “O my son! Allah's Apostle gave permission to the women to do so.”


## Hadith 2:740

_Narrated 'Aisha :_

Sauda asked the permission of the Prophet to leave earlier at the night of Jam', and she was a fat and very slow woman. The Prophet gave her permission.


## Hadith 2:741

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

We got down at Al-Muzdalifa and Sauda asked the permission of the Prophet to leave (early) before the rush of the people. She was a slow woman and he gave her permission, so she departed (from Al-Muzdalifa) before the rush of the people. We kept on staying at Al-Muzdalifa till dawn, and set out with the Prophet but (I suffered so much that) I wished I had taken the permission of Allah's Apostle as Sauda had done, and that would have been dearer to me than any other happiness.


## Hadith 2:742

_Narrated Abdullah:_

I never saw the Prophet offering any prayer not at its stated time except two; he prayed the Maghrib and the 'Isha' together and he offered the morning prayer before its usual time.


## Hadith 2:743

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid_

I went out with 'Abdullah , to Mecca and when we proceeded to am' he offered the two prayers (the Maghrib and the 'Isha') together, making the Adhan and Iqama separately for each prayer. He took his supper in between the two prayers. He offered the Fajr prayer as soon as the day dawned. Some people said, “The day had dawned (at the time of the prayer),” and others said, “The day had not dawned.” 'Abdullah then said, “Allah's Apostle said, 'These two prayers have been shifted from their stated times at this place only (at Al-Muzdalifa); first: The Maghrib and the 'Isha'. So the people should not arrive at Al-Muzdalifa till the time of the 'Isha' prayer has become due. The second prayer is the morning prayer which is offered at this hour.' ” Then 'Abdullah stayed there till it became a bit brighter. He then said, “If the chief of the believers hastened onwards to Mina just now, then he had indeed followed the Sunna.” I do not know which proceeded the other, his ('Abdullah's) statement or the departure of 'Uthman . Abdullah was reciting Talbiya till he threw pebbles at the Jamrat-al-'Aqaba on the Day of Nahr (slaughtering) (that is the 10th of Dhul-Hijja).


## Hadith 2:744

_Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun:_

I saw 'Umar, offering the Fajr (morning) prayer at Jam'; then he got up and said, “The pagans did not use to depart (from Jam') till the sun had risen, and they used to say, 'Let the sun shine on Thabir (a mountain).' But the Prophet contradicted them and departed from Jam' before sunrise.”


## Hadith 2:745

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet made Al-Faql ride behind him, and Al-Fadl informed that he (the Prophet ) kept on reciting Talbiya till he did the Rami of the Jamra. (Jamrat-al-Aqaba.)


## Hadith 2:746

_Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah:_

Ibn Abbas said, “Usama bin Zaid rode behind the Prophet from 'Arafat to Al-Muzdalifa; and then from Al-Muzdalifa to Mina, Al-Fadl rode behind him.” He added, “Both of them (Usama and Al-Fadl) said, 'The Prophet was constantly reciting Talbiya till he did Rami of the Jamarat-al-'Aqaba.”


## Hadith 2:747

_Narrated Abu Jamra:_

I asked Ibn Abbas about Hajj-at-Tamattu'. He ordered me to perform it. I asked him about the Hadi (sacrifice). He said, “You have to slaughter a camel, a cow or a sheep, or you may share the Hadi with the others.” It seemed that some people disliked it (Hajj-at-Tamattu). I slept and dreamt as if a person was announcing: “Hajj Mabrur and accepted Mut'ah (Hajj-At-Tamattu')” I went to Ibn Abbas and narrated it to him. He said, “Allah is Greater. (That was) the tradition of Abu was. ”An accepted 'Umra and Hajj-Mabrur. "


## Hadith 2:748

_Narrated Abu Huraira' :_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) saw a man driving his Badana (sacrificial camel). He said, “Ride on it.” The man said, “It is a Badana.” The Prophet said, “Ride on it.” He (the man) said, “It is a Badana.” The Prophet said, “Ride on it.” And on the second or the third time he (the Prophet ) added, “Woe to you.”


## Hadith 2:749

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet saw a man driving a Badana. He said, “Ride on it.” The man replied, “It is a Badana.” The Prophet said (again), “Ride on it.” He (the man) said, “It is a Badana.” The Prophet said thrice, “Ride on it.”


## Hadith 2:750

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

During the last Hajj (Hajj-al-Wada') of Allah's Apostle he performed 'Umra and Hajj. He drove a Hadi along with him from Dhul-Hulaifa. Allah's Apostle started by assuming Ihram for'Umra and Hajj. And the people, too, performed the 'Umra and Hajj along with the Prophet. Some of them brought the Hadi and drove it along with them, while the others did not. So, when the Prophet arrived at Mecca. he said to the people, "Whoever among you has driven the Hadi, should not finish his Ihram till he completes his Hajj. And whoever among you has not (driven) the Hadi with him, should perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba and the Tawaf between Safa and Marwa, then cut short his hair and finish his Ihram, and should later assume Ihram for Hajj; but he must offer a Hadi (sacrifice); and if anyone cannot afford a Hadi, he should fast for three days during the Hajj and seven days when he returns home. The Prophet performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba on his arrival (at Mecca); he touched the (Black Stone) corner first of all and then did Ramal (fast walking with moving of the shoulders) during the first three rounds round the Ka'ba, and during the last four rounds he walked. After finishing Tawaf of the Ka'ba, he offered a two Rakat prayer at Maqam Ibrahim, and after finishing the prayer he went to Safa and Marwa and performed seven rounds of Tawaf between them and did not do any deed forbidden because of Ihram, till he finished all the ceremonies of his Hajj and sacrificed his Hadi on the day of Nahr (10th day of Dhul-Hijja). He then hastened onwards (to Mecca) and performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and then everything that was forbidden because of Ihram became permissible. Those who took and drove the Hadi with them did the same as Allah's Apostle did.


## Hadith 2:751

_Narrated Nafi':_

'Abdullah (bin 'Abdullah) bin 'Umar said to his father, “Stay here, for I am afraid that it (affliction between Ibn Zubair and Al-Hajjaj) might prevent you from reaching the Ka'ba.” Ibn 'Umar said, “(In this case) I would do the same as Allah's Apostle did, and Allah has said, 'Verily, in Allah's Apostle, you have a good example (to follow).' So, I make you, people, witness that I have made 'Umra compulsory for me.” So he assumed lhram for'Umra. Then he went out and when he reached Al-Baida', he assumed Ihram for Hajj and 'Umra (together) and said, “The conditions (requisites) of Hajj and 'Umra are the same.” He, then brought a Hadi from Qudaid. Then he arrived (at Mecca) and performed Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa) once for both Hajj and 'Umra and did not finish the lhram till he had finished both Hajj and 'Umra.


## Hadith 2:752

_Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and Marwan:_

The Prophet set out from Medina with over one thousand of his companions (at the time of the Treaty of Hudaibiya) and when they reached Dhul-Hulaifa, the Prophet garlanded his Hadi and marked it and assumed Ihram for'Umra.


## Hadith 2:753

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I twisted with my own hands the garlands for the Budn of the Prophet who garlanded and marked them, and then made them proceed to Mecca; Yet no permissible thing was regarded as illegal for him then.


## Hadith 2:754

_Narrated Hafsa:_

I said, “O Allah's Apostle! What is wrong with the people, they have finished their Ihram but you have not?” He said, “I matted my hair and I have garlanded my Hadi, so I will not finish my Ihram till I finished my Hajj .”


## Hadith 2:755

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to send the Hadi from Medina and I used to twist the garlands for his Hadi and he did not keep away from any of these things which a Muhrim keeps away from.


## Hadith 2:756

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I twisted the garlands for the Hadis of the Prophet and then he marked and garlanded them (or I garlanded them) and then made them proceed to the Ka'ba but he remained in Medina and no permissible thing was regarded as illegal for him then .


## Hadith 2:757

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Bakr bin 'Amr bin Hazm_

that 'Amra bint 'Abdur-Rahman had told him, “Zaid bin Abu Sufyan wrote to 'Aisha that 'Abdullah bin Abbas had stated, 'Whoever sends his Hadi (to the Ka'ba), all the things which are illegal for a (pilgrim) become illegal for that person till he slaughters it (i.e. till the 10th of Dhul-Hijja).' ” 'Amra added, 'Aisha said, 'It is not like what Ibn Abbas had said: I twisted the garlands of the Hadis of Allah's Apostle with my own hands. Then Allah's Apostle put them round their necks with his own hands, sending them with my father; Yet nothing permitted by Allah was considered illegal for Allah's Apostle till he slaughtered the Hadis.' "


## Hadith 2:758

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Once the Prophet sent sheep as Hadi.


## Hadith 2:759

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I used to make the garlands for (the Hadis of) the Prophet and he would garland the sheep (with them) and would stay with his family as a non-Muhrim.


## Hadith 2:760

_Narrated Aisha:_

I used to twist the garlands for the sheep of the Prophet and he would send them (to the Ka'ba), and stay as a non-Muhrim.


## Hadith 2:761

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I twisted (the garlands) for the Hadis of the Prophet before he assumed Ihram.


## Hadith 2:762

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I twisted the garlands of the Hadis from the wool which was with me.


## Hadith 2:763

_Narrated 'Ikrima:_

Abu Huraira said, “The Prophet saw a man driving a Badana (sacrificial camel). The Prophet (p.b.u.h) said (to him), 'Ride on it.' He replied, 'It is a Badana.' The Prophet again said, 'Ride on it!' Abu Huraira added, 'Then I saw that man riding it, showing obedience to the Prophet (p.b.u.h), and a shoe was (hanging) from its neck.' ”


## Hadith 2:764

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

From the Prophet: (as above).


## Hadith 2:765

_Narrated 'Ali:_

Allah's Apostle ordered me to give in charity the skin and the coverings of the Budn which I had slaughtered.


## Hadith 2:766

_Narrated Nafi':_

Ibn 'Umar intended to perform Hajj in the year of the Hajj of Al-Harawriya during the rule of Ibn Az-Zubair. Some people said to him, “It is very likely that there will be a fight among the people, and we are afraid that they might prevent you (from performing Hajj).” He replied, “Verily, in Allah's Apostle there is a good example for you (to follow). In this case I would do the same as he had done. I make you witness that I have intended to perform 'Umra.” When he reached Al-Baida', he said, “The conditions for both Hajj and 'Umra are the same. I make you witness that I have intended to perform Hajj along with 'Umra.” After that he took a garlanded Hadi (to Mecca) which he bought (on the way). When he reached (Mecca), he performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and of Safa (and Marwa) and did not do more than that. He did not make legal for himself the things which were illegal for a Muhrim till it was the Day of Nahr (sacrifice), when he had his head shaved and slaughtered (the sacrifice) and considered sufficient his first Tawaf (between Safa and Marwa), as a (Sa'i) for his Hajj and 'Umra both. He then said, “The Prophet used to do like that.”


## Hadith 2:767

_Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman:_

I heard 'Aisha saying, “Five days before the end of Dhul-Qa'ada we set out from Medina in the company of Allah's Apostle with the intention of performing Hajj only. When we approached Mecca, Allah's Apostle ordered those who had no Hadi with them to finish their lhram after performing Tawaf of the Ka'ba and (Sa'i) and between Safa and Marwa.” 'Aisha added, “On the day of Nahr (slaughtering of sacrifice) beef was brought to us. I asked, 'What is this?' The reply was, 'Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) has slaughtered (sacrifices) on behalf of his wives.' ”


## Hadith 2:768

_Narrated Nafi':_

'Abdullah (bin 'Umar), used to slaughter (his sacrifice) at the Manhar. ('Ubaidullah, a sub-narrator said, “The Manhar of Allah's Apostle.”)


## Hadith 2:769

_Narrated Nafi':_

Ibn 'Umar used to send his Hadi from Jam' (to Mina) in the last third of the night with the pilgrims amongst whom there were free men and slaves, till it was taken into the Manhar (slaughtering place) of the Prophet .


## Hadith 2:770

_Narrated Sahl bin Bakkar:_

The narration of Anas abridged, saying, "The Prophet slaughtered seven Budn (camels) while standing, with his own hands. On the day of 'Id-ul-Adha he slaughtered (sacrificed) two horned rams, black and white in color.


## Hadith 2:771

_Narrated Zaid bin Jubair:_

I saw Ibn 'Umar passing by a man who had made his Badana sit to slaughter it. Ibn 'Umar said, “Slaughter it while it is standing with one leg tied up as is the tradition of Muhammad.”


## Hadith 2:772

_Narrated Anas :_

The Prophet offered four Rakat of Zuhr prayer at Medina; and two Rakat of 'Asr prayer at Dhul-hulaifa and spent the night there and when (the day) dawned, he mounted his Mount and started saying, “None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and Glorified be Allah.” When he reached Al-Baida' he recited Talbiya for both Hajj and 'Umra. And when he arrived at Mecca, he ordered them (his companions) to finish their Ihram. The Prophet slaughtered seven Budn (camel) with his own hands while the camels were standing He also sacrificed two horned rams (black and white in color) at Medina.


## Hadith 2:773

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet (p.b.u.h) offered four Rakat of Zuhr prayer at Medina and Anas said, “Then he (the Prophet passed the night there till dawn and then he offered the morning (Fajr) prayer, and mounted his Mount and when it arrived at Al-Baida' he assumed Ihram for both 'Umra and Hajj.”


## Hadith 2:774

_Narrated 'Ali:_

The Prophet sent me to supervise the (slaughtering of) Budn (Hadi camels) and ordered me to distribute their meat, and then he ordered me to distribute their covering sheets and skins. 'All added, “The Prophet ordered me to supervise the slaughtering (of the Budn) and not to give anything (of their bodies) to the butcher as wages for slaughtering.”


## Hadith 2:775

_Narrated 'Ali:_

The Prophet ordered me to supervise the (slaughtering) of Budn (Hadi camel) and to distribute their meat, skins and covering sheets in charity and not to give anything (of their bodies) to the butcher as wages for slaughtering.


## Hadith 2:776

_Narrated 'Ali:_

The Prophet offered one hundred Budn as Hadi and ordered me to distribute their meat (in charity) and I did so. Then he ordered me to distribute their covering sheets in charity and I did so. Then he ordered me to distribute their skins in charity and I did so.


## Hadith 2:777

_Narrated Ibn Juraij:_

'Ata' said, “I heard Jabir bin 'Abdullah saying, 'We never ate the meat of the Budn for more than three days of Mina. Later, the Prophet gave us permission by saying: 'Eat and take (meat) with you. So we ate (some) and took (some) with us.' ” I asked 'Ata', “Did Jabir say (that they went on eating the meat) till they reached Medina?” 'Ata' replied, “No.”


## Hadith 2:778

_Narrated 'Amra:_

I heard 'Aisha saying, “We set out (from Medina) along with Allah's Apostle five days before the end of Dhul-Qa'da with the intention of performing Hajj only. When we approached Mecca, Allah's Apostle ordered those who had no Hadi along with them to finish the lhram after performing Tawaf of the Ka'ba, (Safa and Marwa). 'Aisha added, ”Beef was brought to us on the Day of Nahr and I said, 'What is this?' Somebody said, 'The Prophet has slaughtered (cows) on behalf of his wives.' "


## Hadith 2:779

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet was asked about a person who had his head shaved before slaughtering (his Hadi) (or other similar ceremonies of Hajj). He replied, “There is no harm, there is no harm.”


## Hadith 2:780

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

A man said to the Prophet “I performed the Tawaf-al-Ifada before the Rami (throwing pebbles at the Jamra).” The Prophet replied, “There is no harm.” The man said, “I had my head shaved before slaughtering.” The Prophet replied, “There is no harm.” He said, “I have slaughtered the Hadi before the Rami.” The Prophet replied, “There is no harm.”


## Hadith 2:781

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet was asked by a man who said, “I have done the Rami in the evening.” The Prophet replied, “There is no harm in it.” Another man asked, “I had my head shaved before the slaughtering.” The Prophet replied, “There is no harm in it.”


## Hadith 2:782

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

came upon Allah's Apostle when he was at Al-Bat-ha. He asked me, “Have you intended to perform the Hajj?” I replied in the affirmative. He asked, “For what have you assumed lhram?” I replied,“ I have assumed Ihram with the same intention as that of the Prophet .” The Prophet said, “You have done well! Go and perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa.” Then I went to one of the women of Bani Qais and she took out lice from my head. Later, I assumed the Ihram for Hajj. So, I used to give this verdict to the people till the caliphate of 'Umar. When I told him about it, he said, "If we take (follow) the Holy Book, then it orders us to complete Hajj and 'Umra (Hajj-at-Tamattu') and if we follow the tradition of Allah's Apostle then Allah's Apostle did not finish his lhram till the Hadi had reached its destination (had been slaughtered). (i.e. Hajj-al-Qiran). (See Hadith No. 630)


## Hadith 2:783

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Hafsa said, “O Allah's Apostle! What is wrong with the people; they finished their Ihram after performing 'Umra, but you have not finished it after your 'Umra?” He replied, “I matted my hair and have garlanded my Hadi. So, I cannot finish my Ihram till I slaughter (my Hadi). ”


## Hadith 2:784

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle (p.b.u.h) (got) his head shaved after performing his Hajj.


## Hadith 2:785

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “O Allah! Be merciful to those who have their head shaved.” The people said, “O Allah's Apostle! And (invoke Allah for) those who get their hair cut short.” The Prophet said, “O Allah! Be merciful to those who have their head shaved.” The people said, “O Allah's Apostle! And those who get their hair cut short.” The Prophet said (the third time), “And to those who get their hair cut short.” Nafi' said that the Prophet had said once or twice, “O Allah! Be merciful to those who get their head shaved,” and on the fourth time he added, “And to those who have their hair cut short.”


## Hadith 2:786

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “O Allah! Forgive those who get their heads shaved.” The people asked. “Also those who get their hair cut short?” The Prophet said, “O Allah! Forgive those who have their heads shaved.” The people said, “Also those who get their hair cut short?” The Prophet (invoke Allah for those who have their heads shaved and) at the third time said, “also (forgive) those who get their hair cut short.”


## Hadith 2:787

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet and some of his companions got their heads shaved and some hair of Allah's Apostle with a long blade.


## Hadith 2:788

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

When the Prophet came to Mecca, he ordered his Companions to perform Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa, to finish their Ihram and get their hair shaved off or cut short.


## Hadith 2:789

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

We performed Hajj with the Prophet and performed Tawaf-al-ifada on the Day of Nahr (slaughtering). Safiya got her menses and the Prophets desired from her what a husband desires from his wife. I said to him, “O Allah's Apostle! She is having her menses.” He said, “Is she going to detain us?” We informed him that she had performed Tawaf-al-Ifada on the Day of Nahr. He said, “(Then you can) depart.”


## Hadith 2:790

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet was asked about the slaughtering, shaving (of the head), and the doing of Rami before or after the due times. He said, “There is no harm in that.”


## Hadith 2:791

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet was asked (as regards the ceremonies of Hajj) at Mina on the Day of Nahr and he replied that there was no harm. Then a man said to him, “I got my head shaved before slaughtering.” He replied, “Slaughter (now) and there is no harm in it.” (Another) man said, “I did the Rami (of the Jimar) after midday.” The Prophet replied, “There was no harm in it.”


## Hadith 2:792

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr :_

Allah's Apostle stopped (for a while near the Jimar at Mina) during his last Hajj and the people started asking him questions. A man said, “Ignorantly I got my head shaved before slaughtering.” The Prophet replied, “Slaughter (now) and there is no harm in it.” Another man said, “Unknowingly I slaughtered the Hadi before doing the Rami.” The Prophet said, “Do Rami now and there is no harm in it.” So, on that day, when the Prophet was asked about anything (about the ceremonies of Hajj) done before or after (its stated time) his reply was, “Do it (now) and there is no harm.”


## Hadith 2:793

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:_

I witnessed the Prophet when he was delivering the sermon on the Day of Nahr. A man stood up and said, “I thought that such and such was to be done before such and such. I got my hair shaved before slaughtering.” (Another said), “I slaughtered the Hadi before doing the Rami.” So, the people asked about many similar things. The Prophet said, “Do it (now) and there is no harm in all these cases.” Whenever the Prophet was asked about anything on that day, he replied, “Do it (now) and there is no harm in it.”


## Hadith 2:794

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:_

Allah's Apostle stopped while on his she-camel (the subnarrator then narrated the Hadith as above, i.e. 793).


## Hadith 2:795

_Narrated 'Ikrima:_

Ibn Abbas said: “Allah's Apostle delivered a sermon on the Day of Nahr, and said, 'O people! (Tell me) what is the day today?' The people replied, 'It is the forbidden (sacred) day.' He asked again, 'What town is this?' They replied, 'It is the forbidden (Sacred) town.' He asked, 'Which month is this?' They replied, 'It is the forbidden (Sacred) month.' He said, 'No doubt! Your blood, your properties, and your honor are sacred to one another like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this (sacred) town (Mecca) of yours, in this month of yours.' The Prophet repeated his statement again and again. After that he raised his head and said, 'O Allah! Haven't conveyed (Your Message) to them'. Haven't I conveyed Your Message to them?' ” Ibn Abbas added, “By Him in Whose Hand my soul is, the following was his will (Prophet's will) to his followers:—It is incumbent upon those who are present to convey this information to those who are absent Beware don't renegade (as) disbelievers (turn into infidels) after me, Striking the necks (cutting the throats) of one another.' ”


## Hadith 2:796

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

I heard the Prophet delivering a sermon at 'Arafat.


## Hadith 2:797

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

The Prophet delivered to us a sermon on the Day of Nahr. He said, “Do you know what is the day today?” We said, “Allah and His Apostle know better.” He remained silent till we thought that he might give that day another name. He said, “Isn't it the Day of Nahr?” We said, “It is.” He further asked, “Which month is this?” We said, “Allah and His Apostle know better.” He remained silent till we thought that he might give it another name. He then said, “Isn't it the month of Dhul-Hijja?” We replied: “Yes! It is.” He further asked, “What town is this?” We replied, “Allah and His Apostle know it better.” He remained silent till we thought that he might give it another name. He then said, “Isn't it the forbidden (Sacred) town (of Mecca)?” We said, “Yes. It is.” He said, “No doubt, your blood and your properties are sacred to one another like the sanctity of this day of yours, in this month of yours, in this town of yours, till the day you meet your Lord. No doubt! Haven't I conveyed Allah's message to you? They said, ”Yes.“ He said, ”O Allah! Be witness. So it is incumbent upon those who are present to convey it (this information) to those who are absent because the informed one might comprehend it (what I have said) better than the present audience, who will convey it to him. Beware! Do not renegade (as) disbelievers after me by striking the necks (cutting the throats) of one another."


## Hadith 2:798

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

At Mina, the Prophet (p.b.u.h) said, “Do you know what is the day today?” The people replied, “Allah and His Apostle know it better.” He said, “It is the forbidden (sacred) day. And do you know what town is this?” They replied, “Allah and His Apostle know it better.” He said, “This is the forbidden (Sacred) town (Mecca). And do you know which month is this?” The people replied, “Allah and His Apostle know it better.” He said, “This is the forbidden (sacred) month.” The Prophet added, “No doubt, Allah made your blood, your properties, and your honor sacred to one another like the sanctity of this day of yours in Day of Nahr (10th of Dhul-Hijja), the Prophet stood in between the Jamrat during his Hajj which he performed (as in the previous Hadith) and said, ”This is the greatest Day (i.e. 10th of Dhul-Hijjah).“ The Prophet started saying repeatedly, ”O Allah! Be Witness (I have conveyed Your Message).“ He then bade the people farewell. The people said, ”This is Hajjat-al-Wada)."


## Hadith 2:799

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet permitted (them).


## Hadith 2:800

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar_

That the Prophet allowed (as above).

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_700">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:601 to 2:700</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_823">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 2:801 to 2:823</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
