---
title: "Hadith 2:801 to 2:823"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_800">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:701 to 2:800</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_100">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:1 to 3:100</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 2:801

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Al-Abbas asked the permission from the Prophet to stay at Mecca during the nights of Mina in order to provide water to the people, so the Prophet allowed him.


## Hadith 2:802

_Narrated Wabra:_

I asked Ibn 'Umar, “When should I do the Rami of the Jimar?” He replied, “When your leader does that.” I asked him again the same question. He replied, “We used to wait till the sun declined and then we would do the Rami (i.e. on the 11th and 12th of Dhul-Hijja).”


## Hadith 2:803

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid:_

'Abdullah, did the Rami from the middle of the valley. So, I said, “O, Abu 'Abdur-Rahman! Some people do the Rami (of the Jamra) from above it (i.e. from the top of the valley).” He said, “By Him except whom none has the right to be worshipped, this is the place from where the one on whom Surat-al-Baqara was revealed (i.e. Allah's Apostle) did the Rami.”


## Hadith 2:804

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid:_

When 'Abdullah, reached the big Jamra (i.e. Jamrat-ul-Aqaba) he kept the Ka'ba on the left side and Mina on his right side and threw seven pebbles (at the Jamra) and said, “The one on whom Surat-al-Baqara was revealed (i.e. the Prophet) had done the Rami similarly.”


## Hadith 2:805

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid:_

I performed Hajj with Ibn Masud , and saw him doing Rami of the big Jamra (Jamrat-ul-Aqaba) with seven small pebbles, keeping the Ka'ba on his left side and Mina on his right. He then said, “This is the place where the one on whom Surat-al-Baqara was revealed (i.e. Allah's Apostle ) stood.”


## Hadith 2:806

_Narrated Al-Amash:_

I heard Al-Hajjaj saying on the pulpit, “The Sura in which Al-Baqara (the cow) is mentioned and the Sura in which the family of 'Imran is mentioned and the Sura in which the women (An-Nisa) is mentioned.” I mentioned this to Ibrahim, and he said, 'Abdur-Rahman bin Yazid told me, 'I was with Ibn Masud, when he did the Rami of the Jamrat-ul-Aqaba. He went down the middle of the valley, and when he came near the tree (which was near the Jamra) he stood opposite to it and threw seven small pebbles and said: 'Allahu-Akbar' on throwing every pebble.' Then he said, 'By Him, except Whom none has the right to be worshipped, here (at this place) stood the one on whom Surat-al-Baqra was revealed (i.e. Allah's Apostle).' "


## Hadith 2:807

_Narrated Salim:_

Ibn 'Umar used to do Rami of the Jamrat-ud-Dunya (the Jamra near to the Khaif mosque) with seven small stones and used to recite Takbir on throwing every pebble. He then would go ahead till he reached the level ground where he would stand facing the Qibla for a long time to invoke (Allah) while raising his hands (while invoking). Then he would do Rami of the Jamrat-ul-Wusta (middle Jamra) and then he would go to the left towards the middle ground, where he would stand facing the Qibla. He would remain standing there for a long period to invoke (Allah) while raising his hands, and would stand there for a long period. Then he would do Rami of the Jamrat-ul-Aqaba from the middle of the valley, but he would not stay by it, and then he would leave and say, “I saw the Prophet doing like this.”


## Hadith 2:808

_Narrated Salim bin Abdullah:_

'Abdullah bin 'Umar used to do Rami of the Jamrat-ud-Dunya with seven small pebbles and used to recite Takbir on throwing each stone. He, then, would proceed further till he reached the level ground, where he would stay for a long time, facing the Qibla to invoke (Allah) while raising his hands. Then he would do Rami of the Jamrat-ul-Wusta similarly and would go to the left towards the level ground, where he would stand for a long time facing the Qibla to invoke (Allah) while raising his hands. Then he would do Rami of the Jamrat-ul-'Aqaba from the middle of the valley, but he would not stay by it. Ibn 'Umar used to say, “I saw Allah's Apostle doing like that.”


## Hadith 2:809

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Al-Qasim:_

I heard my father who was the best man of his age, saying, “I heard 'Aisha saying, 'I perfumed Allah's Apostle with my own hands before finishing his Ihram while yet he has not performed Tawaf-al-Ifada.' She spread her hands (while saying so.)”


## Hadith 2:810

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The people were ordered to perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba (Tawaf-al-Wada') as the lastly thing, before leaving (Mecca), except the menstruating women who were excused.


## Hadith 2:811

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet offered the Zuhr, 'Asr, Maghrib and the 'Isha' prayers and slept for a while at a place called Al-Mahassab and then rode to the Ka'ba and performed Tawaf round it .


## Hadith 2:812

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Safiya bint Huyay, the wife of the Prophet got her menses, and Allah's Apostle was informed of that. He said, “Would she delay us?” The people said, “She has already performed Tawaf-al-Ifada.” He said, “Therefore she will not (delay us).”


## Hadith 2:813

_Narrated 'Ikrima:_

The people of Medina asked Ibn Abbas about a woman who got her menses after performing Tawaf-al-Ifada. He said, “She could depart (from Mecca).” They said, “We will not act on your verdict and ignore the verdict of Zaid.” Ibn Abbas said, “When you reach Medina, inquire about it.” So, when they reached Medina they asked (about that). One of those whom they asked was Um Sulaim. She told them the narration of Safiya (812).


## Hadith 2:814

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

A menstruating woman was allowed to leave Mecca if she had done Tawaf-al-Ifada. Tawus (a sub-narrator) said from his father, “I heard Ibn 'Umar saying that she would not depart. Then later I heard him saying that the Prophet had allowed them (menstruating women) to depart.”


## Hadith 2:815

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

We set out with the Prophet with the intention of performing Hajj only. The Prophet reached Mecca and performed Tawaf of the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa and did not finish the Ihram, because he had the Hadi with him. His companions and his wives performed Tawaf (of the Ka'ba and between Safa and Marwa), and those who had no Hadi with them finished their Ihram. I got the menses and performed all the ceremonies of Hajj. So, when the Night of Hasba (night of departure) came, I said, “O Allah's Apostle! All your companions are returning with Hajj and 'Umra except me.” He asked me, “Didn't you perform Tawaf of the Ka'ba (Umra) when you reached Mecca?” I said, “No.” He said, “Go to Tan'im with your brother 'Abdur-Rahman, and assume Ihram for 'Umra and I will wait for you at such and such a place.” So I went with 'Abdur-Rahman to Tan'im and assumed Ihram for 'Umra. Then Safiya bint Huyay got menses. The Prophet said, “ 'Aqra Halqa! You will detain us! Didn't you perform Tawaf-al-Ifada on the Day of Nahr (slaughtering)?” She said, “Yes, I did.” He said, “Then there is no harm, depart.” So I met the Prophet when he was ascending the heights towards Mecca and I was descending, or vice-versa.


## Hadith 2:816

_Narrated 'Abdul-Aziz bin Rufai:_

I asked Anas bin Malik, “Tell me something you have observed about the Prophet concerning where he offered the Zuhr prayer on the Day of Tarwiya (8th Dhul-Hijja).” Anas replied, “He offered it at Mina.” I said, “Where did he offer the Asr prayer on the Day of Nafr (day of departure from Mina)?” He replied, “At Al-Abtah,” and added, “You should do as your leaders do.”


## Hadith 2:817

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet offered the Zuhr, 'Asr, Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers and slept for a while at a place called Al-Mahassab and then he rode towards the Ka'ba and performed Tawaf (al-Wada').


## Hadith 2:818

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

It (i.e. Al-Abtah) was a place where the Prophet used to camp so that it might be easier for him to depart.


## Hadith 2:819

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Staying at Al-Mahassab is not one of the ceremonies (of Hajj), but Al-Mahassab is a place where Allah's Apostle camped (during his Hajjat-ul-wida).


## Hadith 2:820

_Narrated Nafi:_

Ibn 'Umar used to spend the night at Dhi-Tuwa in between the two Thaniyas and then he would enter Mecca through the Thaniya which is at the higher region of Mecca, and whenever he came to Mecca for Hajj or 'Umra, he never made his she camel kneel down except near the gate of the Masjid (Sacred Mosque) and then he would enter (it) and go to the Black (stone) Corner and start from there circumambulating the Ka'ba seven times: hastening in the first three rounds (Ramal) and walking in the last four. On finishing, he would offer two Rakat prayer and set out to perform Tawaf between Safa and Marwa before returning to his dwelling place. On returning (to Medina) from Hajj or 'Umra, he used to make his camel kneel down at Al-Batha which is at Dhu-l-Hulaifa, the place where the Prophet used to make his camel kneel down.


## Hadith 2:821

_Narrated Khalid bin Al-Harith:_

'Ubaidullah was asked about Al Mahassab. 'Ubaidullah narrated: Nafi' said, 'Allah's Apostles, 'Umar and Ibn 'Umar camped there.“ Nafi' added, ”Ibn 'Umar used to offer the Zuhr and 'Asr prayers at it (i.e. Al-Mahassab).“ I think he mentioned the Maghrib prayer also. I said, ”I don't doubt about 'Isha' (i.e. he used to offer it there also), and he used to sleep there for a while. He used to say, 'The Prophet used to do the same.' "


## Hadith 2:822

_Narrated Ibn ' Abbas :_

Dhul-Majaz and 'Ukaz were the markets of the people during the pre-lslamic period of ignorance. When the people embraced Islam, they disliked to do bargaining there till the following Holy Verses were revealed:— There is no harm for you If you seek of the bounty Of your Lord (during Hajj by trading, etc.) (2.198)


## Hadith 2:823

_Narrated ' Aisha:_

Safiya got her menses on the night of Nafr (departure from Hajj), and she said, “I see that I will detain you.” The Prophet said, “Aqra Halqa! Did she perform the Tawaf on the Day of Nahr (slaughtering)?” Somebody replied in the affirmative. He said, “Then depart.” (Different narrators mentioned that) 'Aisha said, “We set out with Allah's Apostle (from Medina) with the intention of performing Hajj only. When we reached Mecca, he ordered us to finish the Ihram. When it was the night of Nafr (departure), Safiya bint Huyay got her menses. The Prophet said, ”Halqa Aqra! I think that she will detain you,“ and added, ”Did you perform the Tawaf (Al-Ifada) on the Day of Nahr (slaughtering)?“ She replied, ”Yes.“ He said, ”Then depart.“ I said, ”O Allah's Apostle! I have not (done the Umra).“ He replied, ”Perform 'Umra from Tan'im.“ My brother went with me and we came across the Prophet in the last part of the night. He said, ”Wait at such and such a place."

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_800">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:701 to 2:800</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_100">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:1 to 3:100</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
