---
title: "Hadith 3:1 to 3:100"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_823">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:801 to 2:823</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_200">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:101 to 3:200</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 3:1

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “(The performance of) 'Umra is an expiation for the sins committed (between it and the previous one). And the reward of Hajj Mabrur (the one accepted by Allah) is nothing except Paradise.”


## Hadith 3:2

_Narrated Ibn Juraij:_

Ikrima bin Khalid asked Ibn 'Umar about performing 'Umra before Hajj. Ibn 'Umar replied, “There is no harm in it.” 'Ikrima said, “Ibn 'Umar also said, 'The Prophet had performed 'Umra before performing Hajj.'”


## Hadith 3:3

_Narrated 'Ikrima bin Khalid:_

“I asked Ibn 'Umar the same (as above).”


## Hadith 3:4

_Narrated Mujahid:_

Ursa bin AzZubair and I entered the Mosque (of the Prophet) and saw 'Abdullah bin Umar sitting near the dwelling place of Aisha and some people were offering the Duha prayer. We asked him about their prayer and he replied that it was a heresy. He (Ursa) then asked him how many times the Prophet had performed 'Umra. He replied, 'Four times; one of them was in the month of Rajab.“ We disliked to contradict him. Then we heard 'Aisha, the Mother of faithful believers cleaning her teeth with Siwak in the dwelling place. 'Ursa said, ”O Mother! O Mother of the believers! Don't you hear what Abu 'Abdur Rahman is saying?“ She said, ”What does he say?“ 'Ursa said, ”He says that Allah's Apostle performed four 'Umra and one of them was in the month of Rajab.“ 'Aisha said, ”May Allah be merciful to Abu 'Abdur Rahman! The Prophet did not perform any 'Umra except that he was with him, and he never performed any 'Umra in Rajab."


## Hadith 3:5

_Narrated 'Ursa bin Az-Zubair:_

I asked 'Aisha (whether the Prophet had performed 'Umra in Rajab). She replied, “Allah's Apostle never performed any 'Umra in Rajab.”


## Hadith 3:6

_Narrated Qatada:_

I asked Anas how many times the Prophet had performed 'Umra. He replied, “Four times. 1. 'Umra of Hudaibiya in Dhi-l-Qa'da when the pagans hindered him; 2. 'Umra in the following year in Dhi-l-Qa'da after the peace treaty with them (the pagans); 3. 'Umra from Al-Jr'rana where he distributed the war booty.” I think he meant the booty (of the battle) of Hunain. I asked, “How many times did he perform Hajj?” He (Anas) replied, “Once. ”


## Hadith 3:7

_Narrated Qatada:_

I asked Anas (about the Prophet's 'Umra) and he replied, “The Prophet performed 'Umra when the pagans made him return, and Umra of al-Hudaibiya (the next year), and another 'Umra in Dhi-l-Qa'da, and another 'Umra in combination with his Hajj.”


## Hadith 3:8

_Narrated Hammam:_

The Prophet performed four 'Umra (three) in Dhi-l-Qa'da except the (one) 'Umra which he performed with his Hajj: His 'Umra from Al-hudaibiya, and the one of the following year, and the one from Al-Jr'rana where he distributed the booty (of the battle) of Hunain, and another 'Umra with his Hajj.


## Hadith 3:9

_Narrated Abu Ishaq:_

I asked Masruq, 'Ata' and Mujahid (about the 'Umra of Allah's Apostle). They said, “Allah's Apostle had performed 'Umra in Dhi-l-Qa'da before he performed Hajj.” I heard Al-Bara' bin 'Azib saying, “Allah's Apostle had performed 'Umra in Dhi-l-Qa'da twice before he performed Hajj.”


## Hadith 3:10

_Narrated Ata:_

I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, “Allah's Apostle asked an Ansari woman (Ibn 'Abbas named her but 'Ata' forgot her name), 'What prevented you from performing Hajj with us?' She replied, 'We have a camel and the father of so-and-so and his son (i.e. her husband and her son) rode it and left one camel for us to use for irrigation.' He said (to her), 'Perform 'Umra when Ramadan comes, for 'Umra in Ramadan is equal to Hajj (in reward),' or said something similar.”


## Hadith 3:11

_Narrated Aisha:_

We set out along with Allah's Apostle shortly before the appearance of the new moon (crescent) of the month of Dhi-l-Hijja and he said to us, “Whoever wants to assume Ihram for Hajj may do so; and whoever wants to assume Ihram for 'Umra may do so. Hadn't I brought the Hadi (animal for sacrificing) (with me), I would have assumed Ihram for 'Umra.” ('Aisha added,): So some of us assumed Ihram for 'Umra while the others for Hajj. I was amongst those who assumed Ihram for 'Umra. The day of 'Arafat approached and I was still menstruating. I complained to the Prophet (about that) and he said, “Abandon your 'Umra, undo and comb your hair, and assume Ihram for Hajj;.” When it was the night of Hasba, he sent 'Abdur Rahman with me to At-Tan'im and I assumed Ihram for 'Umra (and performed it) in lieu of my missed 'Umra.


## Hadith 3:12

_Narrated 'Amr bin Aus:_

Abdul Rahman bin Abu Bakr told me that the Prophet had ordered him to let 'Aisha ride behind him and to make he perform 'Umra from At-Tan'im.


## Hadith 3:13

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet and his companions assumed Ihram for Hajj and none except the Prophet and Talha had the Hadi with them. 'Ali had come from Yemen and he had the Hadi with him. He ('Ali) said, “I have assumed Ihram with an intention like that of Allah's Apostle has assumed it.” The Prophet ordered his companions to intend the Ihram with which they had come for 'Umra, to perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba (and between Safa and Marwa), to get their hair cut short and then to finish their Ihram with the exception of those who had the Hadi with them. They asked, “Shall we go to Mina and the private organs of some of us are dribbling (if we finish Ihram and have sexual relations with our wives)?” The Prophet heard that and said, “Had I known what I know now, I would not have brought the Hadi. If I did not have the Hadi with me I would have finished my Ihram.” 'Aisha got her menses and performed all the ceremonies (of Hajj) except the Tawaf . So when she became clean from her menses, and she had performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba, she said, “O Allah's Apostle! You (people) are returning with both Hajj and 'Umra and I am returning only with Hajj!” So, he ordered 'Abdur Rahman bin Abu Bakr to go with her to At-Tan'im. Thus she performed 'Umra after the Hajj in the month of Dhi-l-Hijja. Suraqa bin Malik bin Ju'sham met the Prophet at Al-'Aqaba (Jamrat-ul 'Aqaba) while the latter was stoning it and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Is this permissible only for you?” The Prophet replied, “No, it is for ever (i.e. it is permissible for all Muslims to perform 'Umra before Hajj.”


## Hadith 3:14

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

We set out with Allah's Apostle shortly before the appearance of the new moon of Dhi-l-Hiija and he said, “Whoever wants to assume Ihram for 'Umra may do so, and whoever wants to assume Ihram for Hajj may do so. Had not I brought the Hadi with me, I would have assumed Ihram for 'Umra.” Some of the people assumed Ihram for 'Umra while others for Hajj. I was amongst those who had assumed Ihram for 'Umra. I got my menses before entering Mecca, and was menstruating till the day of 'Arafat. I complained to Allah's Apostle about it, he said, “Abandon your 'Umra, undo and comb your hair, and assume Ihram for Hajj.” So, I did that accordingly. When it was the night of Hasba (day of departure from Mina), the Prophet sent 'Abdur Rahman with me to At-Tanim.

The sub-narrator adds: He ('AbdurRahman) let her ride behind him. And she assumed Ihram for 'Umra in lieu of the abandoned one. Aisha completed her Hajj and 'Umra, and no Hadi, Sadaqa (charity), or fasting was obligatory for her.


## Hadith 3:15

_Narrated Al-Aswad:_

That 'Aisha said, “O Allah's Apostle! The people are returning after performing the two Nusuks (i.e. Hajj and 'Umra) but I am returning with one only?” He said, “Wait till you become clean from your menses and then go to At-Tan'im, assume Ihram (and after performing 'Umra) join us at such-and-such a place. But it (i.e. the reward if 'Umra) is according to your expenses or the hardship (which you will undergo while performing it).”


## Hadith 3:16

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

We set out assuming the Ihram for Hajj in the months of Hajj towards the sacred precincts of Hajj. We dismounted at Sarif and the Prophet said to his companions, “Whoever has not got the Hadi with him and likes to make it as 'Umra, he should do it, but he who has got the Hadi with him should not do it.” The Prophet and some of his wealthy companions had the Hadi with them, so they did not finish Ihram after performing the 'Umra. The Prophet came to me while I was weeping. He asked me the reason for it. I replied, “I have heard of what you have said to your companions and I cannot do the 'Umra.” He asked me, “What is the matter with you?” I replied, “I am not praying.” He said, “There is no harm in it as you are one of the daughters of Adam and the same is written for you as for others. So, you should perform Hajj and I hope that Allah will enable you to perform the 'Umra as well.” So, I carried on till we departed from Mina and halted at Al-Mahassab. The Prophet called 'Abdur-Rahman and said, “Go out of the sanctuary with your sister and let her assume Ihram for 'Umra, and after both of you have finished the Tawaf I will be waiting for you at this place.” We came back at mid-night and the Prophet asked us, “Have you finished?” I replied in the affirmative. He announced the departure and the people set out for the journey and some of them had performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba before the morning prayer, and after that the Prophet set out for Medina.


## Hadith 3:17

_Narrated Safwan bin Ya'la bin Umaiya from his father who said:_

“A man came to the Prophet while he was at Ji'rana. The man was wearing a cloak which had traces of Khaluq or Sufra (a kind of perfume). The man asked (the Prophet ), 'What do you order me to perform in my 'Umra?' So, Allah inspired the Prophet divinely and he was screened by a place of cloth. I wished to see the Prophet being divinely inspired. 'Umar said to me, 'Come! Will you be pleased to look at the Prophet while Allah is inspiring him?' I replied in the affirmative. 'Umar lifted one corner of the cloth and I looked at the Prophet who was snoring. (The sub-narrator thought that he said: The snoring was like that of a camel). When that state was over, the Prophet asked, ”Where is the questioner who asked about 'Umra? Put off your cloak and wash away the traces of Khaluq from your body and clean the Sufra (yellow color) and perform in your Umra what you perform in your Hajj (i.e. the Tawaf round the Ka'ba and the Sa'i between Safa and Marwa). "


## Hadith 3:18

_Narrated Hisham Ibn 'Urwa from his father who said:_

While I was a youngster, I asked 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet. "What about the meaning of the Statement of Allah;

“Verily! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al Marwa, are among the symbols of Allah. So, it is not harmful if those who perform Hajj or 'Umra of the House (Ka'ba at Mecca) to perform the going (Tawaf) between them? (2.158) I understand (from that) that there is no harm if somebody does not perform the Tawaf between them.” 'Aisha replied, "No, for if it were as you are saying, then the recitation would have been like this: 'It is not harmful not to perform Tawaf between them.' This verse was revealed in connection with the Ansar who used to assume the Ihram for the idol Manat which was put beside a place called Qudaid and those people thought it not right to perform the Tawaf of As-Safa and Al-Marwa. When Islam came, they asked Allah's Apostle about that, and Allah revealed:—

“Verily! (the mountains) As-Safa and Al-Marwa Are among the symbols of Allah. So, it is not harmful of those who perform Hajj or 'Umra of the House (Ka'ba at Mecca) to perform the going (Tawaf) between them.” (2.158) Sufyan and Abu Muawiya added from Hisham (from 'Aisha): "The Hajj or 'Umra of the person who does not perform the going (Tawaf) between As-Safa and Al-Marwa is incomplete in Allah's sight.


## Hadith 3:19

_Narrated Isma'il:_

Abdullah bin Abu Aufa said: “Allah's Apostle performed 'Umra and we too performed 'Umra along with him. When he entered Mecca he performed the Tawaf (of Ka'ba) and we too performed it along with him, and then he came to the As-Safa and Al-Marwa (i.e. performed the Sai) and we also came to them along with him. We were shielding him from the people of Mecca lest they may hit him with an arrow.” A friend of his asked him (i.e. 'Abdullah bin Aufa), “Did the Prophet enter the Ka'ba (during that 'Umra)?” He replied in the negative. Then he said, “What did he (the Prophet ) say about Khadija?” He (Abdullah bin Aufa) said, “(He said) 'Give Khadija the good tidings that she will have a palace made of Qasab in Paradise and there will be neither noise nor any trouble in it.”


## Hadith 3:20

_Narrated 'Amr bin Dinar:_

We asked Ibn 'Umar whether a man who had performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba but had not performed the Tawaf between As-Safa and Al-Marwa yet, was permitted to have sexual relation with his wife. He replied, “The Prophet arrived (at Mecca) and circumambulated the Ka'ba seven times and then offered a two Rak'at prayer behind Maqam-lbrahim and then performed the going (Tawaf) between As-Safa and Al-Marwa (seven times) (and verily, in Allah's Apostle you have a good example.” And we asked Jabir bin 'Abdullah (the same question) and he replied, “He should not go near her till he has finished the going (Tawaf) between As-Safa and Al-Marwa.”


## Hadith 3:21

_Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:_

I came to the Prophet at Al-Batha' while his camel was kneeling down and he asked me, “Have you intended to perform the Hajj?” I replied in the affirmative. He asked me, 'With what intention have you assumed Ihram?“ I replied, ”I have assumed Ihram with the same intention as that of the Prophet. He said, “You have done well. Perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba and (the Sai) between As-safa and Al-Marwa and then finish the Ihram.” So, I performed the Tawaf around the Ka'ba and the Sai) between As-Safa and Al-Marwa and then went to a woman of the tribe of Qais who cleaned my head from lice. Later I assumed the Ihram for Hajj. I used to give the verdict of doing the same till the caliphate of 'Umar who said, “If you follow the Holy Book then it orders you to remain in the state of Ihram till you finish from Hajj, if you follow the Prophet then he did not finish his Ihram till the Hadi (sacrifice) had reached its place of slaughtering (Hajj-al-Qiran).”


## Hadith 3:22

_Narrated Al-Aswad:_

Abdullah the slave of Asma bint Abu Bakr, told me that he used to hear Asma', whenever she passed by Al-Hajun, saying, “May Allah bless His Apostle Muhammad. Once we dismounted here with him, and at that time we were traveling with light luggage; we had a few riding animals and a little food ration. I, my sister, 'Aisha, Az-Zubair and such and such persons performed 'Umra, and when we had passed our hands over the Ka'ba (i.e. performed Tawaf round the Ka'ba and between As-Safa and Al-Marwa) we finished our lhram. Later on we assumed Ihram for Hajj the same evening.”


## Hadith 3:23

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle returned from a Ghazwa, Hajj or 'Umra, he used to say Takbir thrice at every elevation of the ground and then would say, “None has the right to be worshipped but Allah; He is One and has no partner. All the kingdoms is for Him, and all the praises are for Him, and He is Omnipotent. We are returning with repentance, worshipping, prostrating, and praising our Lord. He has kept up His promise and made His slave victorious, and He Alone defeated all the clans of (non-believers).”


## Hadith 3:24

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

When the Prophet arrived at Mecca, some boys of the tribe of Bani 'Abdul Muttalib went to receive him, and the Prophet made one of them ride in front of him and the other behind him.


## Hadith 3:25

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle left for Mecca, he used to pray in the mosque of Ash-Shajra, and when he returned (to Medina), he used to pray in the middle of the valley of Dhul-Hulaifa and used to pass the night there till morning.


## Hadith 3:26

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet never returned to his family from a journey at night. He


## Hadith 3:27

_Narrated Jabir:_

The Prophet forbade going to one's family at night (on arrival from a


## Hadith 3:28

_Narrated Humaid:_

Anas said, “Whenever Allah's Apostle returned from a journey, he, on seeing the high places of Medina, would make his she-camel proceed faster; and if it were another animal, even then he used to make it proceed faster.”

his love for Medina.


## Hadith 3:29

_Narrated Anas:_

As above, but mentioned “the walls of Medina” instead of "the high places of Medina. Al-Harith bin Umar agrees with Anas.


## Hadith 3:30

_Narrated Abu Ishaq:_

I heard Al-Bara' saying, "The above Verse was revealed regarding us, for the Ansar on returning from Hajj never entered their houses through the proper doors but from behind. One of the Ansar came and entered through the door and he was taunted for it. Therefore, the following was revealed: —

“It is not righteousness That you enter the houses from the back, But the righteous man is He who fears Allah, Obeys His order and keeps away from What He has forbidden So, enter houses through the proper doors.” (2.189)


## Hadith 3:31

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Traveling is a kind of torture as it prevents one from eating, drinking and sleeping properly. So, when one's needs are fulfilled, one should return quickly to one's family.”


## Hadith 3:32

_Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father:_

I was with Ibn 'Umar on the way to Mecca, and he got the news that Safiya bint Abu Ubaid was seriously ill. So, he hastened his pace, and when the twilight disappeared, he dismounted and offered the Maghrib and 'Isha' prayers together. Then he said, “I saw that whenever the Prophet had to hasten when traveling, he would delay the Maghrib prayer and join them together (i.e. offer the Maghrib and the Isha prayers together).”


## Hadith 3:33

_Narrated Nafi:_

When Abdullah bin Umar set out for Mecca intending to perform Umra, at the time of afflictions, he said, “If I should be prevented from reaching the Kaba, then I would do the same as Allah's Apostle did, so I assume the lhram for Umra as Allah's Apostle assumed the Ihram for Umra in the year of Hudaibiya.”


## Hadith 3:34

_Narrated Nafi:_

That Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah and Salim bin 'Abdullah informed him that they told Ibn 'Umar when Ibn Az-Zubair was attacked by the army, saying “There is no harm for you if you did not perform Hajj this year. We are afraid that you may be prevented from reaching the Kaba.” Ibn 'Umar said “We set out with Allah's Apostle and the non-believers of Quraish prevented us from reaching the Ka'ba, and so the Prophet slaughtered his Hadi and got his head shaved.” Ibn 'Umar added, “I make you witnesses that I have made 'Umra obligatory for me. And, Allah willing, I will go and then if the way to Ka'ba is clear, I will perform the Tawaf, but if I am prevented from going to the Ka'ba then I will do the same as the Prophet did while I was in his company.” Ibn 'Umar then assumed Ihram for Umra from Dhul-Hulaifa and proceeded for a while and said, “The conditions of 'Umra and Hajj are similar and I make you witnesses that I have made 'Umra and Hajj obligatory for myself.” So, he did not finish the Ihram till the day of Nahr (slaughtering) came, and he slaughtered his Hadi. He used to say, “I will not finish the Ihram till I perform the Tawaf, one Tawaf on the day of entering Mecca (i.e. of Safa and Marwa for both 'Umra and Hajj).”


## Hadith 3:35

_Narrated Nafi:_

Some of the sons of 'Abdullah told him (i.e. 'Abdullah) if he had sta


## Hadith 3:36

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle was prevented from performing ('Umra) Therefore, he shaved his head and had sexual relations with his wives and slaughtered his Hadi and performed Umra in the following year.


## Hadith 3:37

_Narrated Salim:_

(Abdullah) bin 'Umar used to say, “Is not (the following of) the tradition of Allah's Apostle sufficient for you? If anyone of you is prevented from performing Hajj, he should perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba and between As-Safa and Al-Marwa and then finish the Ihram and everything will become legal for him which was illegal for him (during the state of Ihram) and he can perform Hajj in a following year and he should slaughter a Hadi or fast in case he cannot afford the Hadi.”


## Hadith 3:38

_Narrated Al-Miswar:_

Allah's Apostle slaughtered (the Hadi) before he had his head shaved and then he ordered his Companions to do the same.


## Hadith 3:39

_Narrated Nafi:_

That Abdullah and Salim said to 'Abdullah bin 'Umar, “(You should not go for Hajj this year).” 'Abdullah bin 'Umar replied, “We set out with the Prophet (to Mecca for performing 'Umra) and e infidels of Quraish prevented us from reaching the Ka'ba. Allah's Apostle slaughtered his Budn (camels for sacrifice) and got his head shaved.”


## Hadith 3:40

_Narrated Nafi:_

When Abdullah bin 'Umar set out for Mecca with the intentions performing 'Umra in the period of afflictions, he said, “If I should be prevented from reaching the Ka'ba, then I would do the same as we did while in the company of Allah's Apostle .” So, he assumed the Ihram for 'Umra since the Prophet had assumed the Ihram for 'Umra in the year of Al-Hudaibiya. Then 'Abdullah bin 'Umar thought about it and said, “The conditions for both Hajj and 'Umra are similar.” He then turned towards his companions and said, “The conditions of both Hajj and 'Umra are similar and I make you witnesses that I have made the performance of Hajj obligatory for myself along with 'Umra.” He then performed one Tawaf (between As-Safa and Al-Marwa) for both of them (i.e. Hajj and ('Umra) and considered that to be sufficient for him and offered a Hadi.


## Hadith 3:41

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Layla:_

Ka'b bin 'Ujra said that Allah's Apostle said to him (Ka'b), “Perhaps your lice have troubled you?” Ka'b replied, “Yes! O Allah's Apostle.” Allah's Apostle said, “Have your head shaved and then either fast three days or feed six poor persons or slaughter one sheep as a sacrifice.”


## Hadith 3:42

_Narrated Ka'b bin 'Umra:_

Allah's Apostle stood beside me at Al-Hudaibiya and the lice were falling from my head in great number. He asked me, “Have your lice troubled you?” I replied in the affirmative. He ordered me to get my head shaved. Ka'b added, “This Holy Verse:—'And if any of you is ill, or has ailment in his scalp (2.196), etc. was revealed regarding me. ”The Prophet then ordered me either to fast three days, or to feed six poor persons with one Faraq (three Sas) (of dates), or to slaughter a sheep, etc (sacrifice) whatever was available.


## Hadith 3:43

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ma'qal:_

I sat with Ka'b bin 'Ujra and asked him about the Fidya. He replied, “This revelation was revealed concerning my case especially, but it is also for you in general. I was carried to Allah's Apostle and the lice were falling in great number on my face. The Prophet said, ”I have never thought that your ailment (or struggle) has reached to such an extent as I see. Can you afford a sheep?“ I replied in the negative. He then said, ”Fast for three days, or feed six poor persons each with half a Sa of food." (1 Sa = 3 Kilograms approx.)


## Hadith 3:44

_Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Layla:_

(Reporting the speech of Ka'b bin Umra) Allah's Apostle saw him (i.e. Ka'b) while the lice were falling on his face. He asked (him), “Have your lice troubled you?” He replied in the affirmative. So, he ordered him to get his head shaved while he was at Al-Hudaibiya. At that time they were not permitted to finish their Ihram, and were still hoping to enter Mecca. So, Allah revealed the verses of Al-Fidya. Allah's Apostle ordered him to feed six poor persons with one Faraq of food or to slaughter one sheep (as a sacrifice) or to fast for three days.


## Hadith 3:45

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever performs Hajj to this House (Ka'ba) and does not approach his wife for sexual relations nor commits sins (while performing Hajj), he will come out as sinless as a newly-born child. (Just delivered by his mother).”


## Hadith 3:46

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever performs Hajj to this Ka'ba and does not approach his wife for sexual relations nor commit sins (while performing Hajj), he will come out as sinless as a new-born child, (just delivered by his mother).”


## Hadith 3:47

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada:_

My father set out (for Mecca) in the year of Al-Hudaibiya, and his companions assumed Ihram, but he did not. At that time the Prophet was informed that an enemy wanted to attack him, so the Prophet proceeded onwards. While my father was among his companions, some of them laughed among themselves. (My father said), “I looked up and saw an onager. I attacked, stabbed and caught it. I then sought my companions' help but they refused to help me. (Later) we all ate its meat. We were afraid that we might be left behind (separated) from the Prophet so I went in search of the Prophet and made my horse to run at a galloping speed at times and let it go slow at an ordinary speed at other times till I met a man from the tribe of Bani Ghifar at midnight. I asked him, ”Where did you leave the Prophet ?“ He replied, ”I left him at Ta'hun and he had the intention of having the midday rest at As-Suqya. I followed the trace and joined the Prophet and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Your people (companions) send you their compliments, and (ask for) Allah's Blessings upon you. They are afraid lest they may be left behind; so please wait for them.' I added, 'O Allah's Apostle! I hunted an onager and some of its meat is with me. The Prophet told the people to eat it though all of them were in the state of Ihram."


## Hadith 3:48

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada:_

That his father said “We proceeded with the Prophet in the year of Al-Hudaibiya and his companions assumed Ihram but I did not. We were informed that some enemies were at Ghaiqa and so we went on towards them. My companions saw an onager and some of them started laughing among themselves. I looked and saw it. I chased it with my horse and stabbed and caught it. I wanted some help from my companions but they refused. (I slaughtered it all alone). We all ate from it (i.e. its meat). Then I followed Allah's Apostle lest we should be left behind. At times I urged my horse to run at a galloping speed and at other times at an ordinary slow speed. On the way I met a man from the tribe of Bani Ghifar at midnight. I asked him where he had left Allah's Apostle . The man replied that he had left the Prophet at a place called Ta'hun and he had the intention of having the midday rest at As-Suqya. So, I followed Allah's Apostle till I reached him and said, ”O Allah's Apostle! I have been sent by my companions who send you their greetings and compliments and ask for Allah's Mercy and Blessings upon you. They were afraid lest the enemy might intervene between you and them; so please wait for them.“ So he did. Then I said, ”O Allah's Apostle! We have hunted an onager and have some of it (i.e. its meat) left over.“ Allah's Apostle told his companions to eat the meat although all of them were in a state of Ihram.”


## Hadith 3:49

_Narrated Abu Qatada:_

We were in the company of the Prophet at a place called Al-Qaha (which is at a distance of three stages of journey from Medina). Abu Qatada narrated through another group of narrators: We were in the company of the Prophet at a place called Al-Qaha and some of us had assumed Ihram while the others had not. I noticed that some of my companions were watching something, so I looked up and saw an onager. (I rode my horse and took the spear and whip) but my whip fell down (and I asked them to pick it up for me) but they said, “We will not help you by any means as we are in a state of Ihram.” So, I picked up the whip myself and attacked the onager from behind a hillock and slaughtered it and brought it to my companions. Some of them said, “Eat it.” While some others said, “Do not eat it.” So, I went to the Prophet who was ahead of us and asked him about it, He replied, “Eat it as it is Halal (i.e. it is legal to eat it).”


## Hadith 3:50

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada:_

That his father had told him that Allah's Apostle set out for Hajj and so did his companions. He sent a batch of his companions by another route and Abu Qatada was one of them. The Prophet said to them, “Proceed along the sea-shore till we meet all together.” So, they took the route of the sea-shore, and when they started all of them assumed Ihram except Abu Qatada. While they were proceeding on, his companions saw a group of onagers. Abu Qatada chased the onagers and attacked and wounded a she-onager. They got down and ate some of its meat and said to each other: “How do we eat the meat of the game while we are in a state of Ihram?” So, we (they) carried the rest of the she-onager's meat, and when they met Allah's Apostle they asked, saying, “O Allah's Apostle! We assumed Ihram with the exception of Abu Qatada and we saw (a group) of onagers. Abu Qatada attacked them and wounded a she-onager from them. Then we got down and ate from its meat. Later, we said, (to each other), 'How do we eat the meat of the game and we are in a state of Ihram?' So, we carried the rest of its meat. The Prophet asked, ”Did anyone of you order Abu Qatada to attack it or point at it?“ They replied in the negative. He said, ”Then eat what is left of its meat."


## Hadith 3:51

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

From As-Sa'b bin Jath-thama Al-Laithi that the latter presented an onager to Allah's Apostle while he was at Al-Abwa' or at Waddan, and he refused it. On noticing the signs of some unpleasant feeling of disappointment on his (As-Sab's) face, the Prophet said to him, “I have only returned it because I am Muhrim.”


## Hadith 3:52

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “It is not sinful of a Muhrim to kill five kinds of animals.”


## Hadith 3:53

_Narrated One of the wives of the Prophet:_

The Prophet said, “A Muhrim can kill (five kinds of animals.)”


## Hadith 3:54

_Narrated Hafsa:_

Allah's Apostle said, “It is not sinful (of a Muhrim) to kill five kinds of animals, namely: the crow, the kite, the mouse, the scorpion and the rabid dog.”


## Hadith 3:55

_Narrated Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Five kinds of animals are harmful and could be killed in the Haram (Sanctuary). These are: the crow, the kite, the scorpion, the mouse and the rabid dog.”


## Hadith 3:56

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

While we were in the company of the Prophet in a cave at Mina, when Surat-wal-Mursalat were revealed and he recited it and I heard it (directly) from his mouth as soon as he recited its revelation. Suddenly a snake sprang at us and the Prophet said (ordered us): “Kill it.” We ran to kill it but it escaped quickly. The Prophet said, “It has escaped your evil and you too have escaped its evil.”


## Hadith 3:57

_Narrated 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet:_

Allah's Apostle called the salamander a bad animal, but I did not hear him ordering it to be killed."


## Hadith 3:58

_Narrated Said bin Abu Said Al-Maqburi:_

Abu Shuraih, Al-'Adawi said that he had said to 'Amr bin Sa'id when he was sending the troops to Mecca (to fight 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair), “O Chief! Allow me to tell you what Allah's Apostle said on the day following the Conquest of Mecca. My ears heard that and my heart understood it thoroughly and I saw with my own eyes the Prophet when he, after Glorifying and Praising Allah, started saying, 'Allah, not the people, made Mecca a sanctuary, so anybody who has belief in Allah and the Last Day should neither shed blood in it, nor should he cut down its trees. If anybody tells (argues) that fighting in it is permissible on the basis that Allah's Apostle did fight in Mecca, say to him, 'Allah allowed His Apostle and did not allow you.' ”Allah allowed me only for a few hours on that day (of the conquest) and today its sanctity is valid as it was before. So, those who are present should inform those who are absent (concerning this fact.“ Abu Shuraih was asked, ”What did 'Amr reply?“ He said, ('Amr said) 'O Abu Shuraih! I know better than you in this respect Mecca does not give protection to a sinner, a murderer or a thief.”


## Hadith 3:59

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

“The Prophet said, 'Allah has made Mecca, a sanctuary, so it was a sanctuary before me and will continue to be a sanctuary after me. It was made legal for me (i.e. I was allowed to fight in it) for a few hours of a day. It is not allowed to uproot its shrubs or to cut its trees, or to chase (or disturb) its game, or to pick up its luqata (fallen things) except by a person who would announce that (what he has found) publicly.' Al-'Abbas said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Except Al-ldhkhir (a kind of grass) (for it is used) by our goldsmiths and for our graves.' The Prophet then said, 'Except Al-idhkhir.' ” 'Ikrima said, 'Do you know what “chasing or disturbing” the game means? It means driving it out of the shade to occupy its place."


## Hadith 3:60

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

their blacksmiths and for their domestic purposes)." So, the Prophet s


## Hadith 3:61

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle was cupped while he was in a state of Ihram.


## Hadith 3:62

_Narrated Ibn Buhaina: The Prophet, while in the state of Ihram, was_

cupped at the middle of his head at Liha-Jamal.


## Hadith 3:63

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet married Maimuna while he was in the state of Ihram, (only the ceremonies of marriage were held).


## Hadith 3:64

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:_

A person stood up and asked, “O Allah's: Apostle! What clothes may be worn in the state of Ihram?” The Prophet replied, “Do not wear a shirt or trousers, or any headgear (e.g. a turban), or a hooded cloak; but if somebody has no shoes he can wear leather stockings provided they are cut short off the ankles, and also, do not wear anything perfumed with Wars or saffron, and the Muhrima (a woman in the state of Ihram) should not cover her face, or wear gloves.”


## Hadith 3:65

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

A man was crushed to death by his she-camel and was brought to Allah's Apostle who said, “Give him a bath and shroud him, but do not cover his head, and do not bring any perfume near to him, as he will be resurrected reciting Talbiya.”


## Hadith 3:66

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Hunain:_

Abdullah bin Al-Abbas and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama differed at Al-Abwa'; Ibn 'Abbas said that a Muhrim could wash his head; while Al-Miswar maintained that he should not do so. 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas sent me to Abu Aiyub Al-Ansari and I found him bathing between the two wooden posts (of the well) and was screened with a sheet of cloth. I greeted him and he asked who I was. I replied, “I am 'Abdullah bin Hunain and I have been sent to you by Ibn 'Abbas to ask you how Allah's Apostle used to wash his head while in the state of lhram.” Abu Aiyub Al-Ansarl caught hold of the sheet of cloth and lowered it till his head appeared before me, and then told somebody to pour water on his head. He poured water on his head, and he (Abu Aiyub) rubbed his head with his hands by bringing them from back to front and from front to back and said, “I saw the Prophet doing like this.”


## Hadith 3:67

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

I heard the Prophet delivering a sermon at 'Arafat saying, “If a Muhrim does not find slippers, he could wear Khuffs (but he has to cut short the Khuffs below the ankles), and if he does not find an Izar (a waist sheet for wrapping the lower half of the body) he could wear trousers.”


## Hadith 3:68

_Narrated Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle was asked what sort of clothes a Muhrim should wear. He replied, "He should not wear a shirt, turbans, trousers, a hooded cloak, or a dress perfumed with saffron or Wars; and if slippers are not available he can wear Khuffs but he should cut them so that they reach below the ankles.


## Hadith 3:69

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet delivered a sermon at 'Arafat and said, “Whoever does not get an Izar can wear trousers, and whoever cannot get a pair of shoes can wear Khuffs.”


## Hadith 3:70

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

The Prophet assumed Ihram for Umra in the month of Dhul-Qa'da but the (pagan) people of Mecca refused to admit him into Mecca till he agreed on the condition that he would not bring into Mecca any arms but sheathed.


## Hadith 3:71

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet fixed Dhul-Hulaifa as the Miqat (the place for assuming Ihram) for the people of Medina, and Qaran-al-Manazil for the people of Najd, and Yalamlam for the people of Yemen. These Mawaqit are for those people and also for those who come through these Mawaqit (from places other than the above-mentioned) with the intention of (performing) Hajj and Umra. And those living inside these Mawaqit can assume Ihram from the place where they start; even the people of Mecca can assume Ihram from Mecca.


## Hadith 3:72

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle entered Mecca in the year of its Conquest wearing an Arabian helmet on his head and when the Prophet took it off, a person came and said, “Ibn Khatal is holding the covering of the Ka'ba (taking refuge in the Ka'ba).” The Prophet said, “Kill him.”


## Hadith 3:73

_Narrated Ya'li:_

ame as you do in your Hajj." A man bit the hand of another man but in


## Hadith 3:75

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

While a man was standing with the Prophet at 'Arafat, he fell from his Mount and his neck was crushed by it. The Prophet said, “Wash the deceased with water and Sidr and shroud him in two pieces of cloth, and neither perfume him nor cover his head, for Allah will resurrect him on the Day of Resurrection and he will be reciting Talbiya.”


## Hadith 3:76

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

A man was in the company of the Prophet and his she-camel crushed his neck while he was in a state of Ihram and he died Allah's Apostle said, “Wash him with water and Sidr and shroud him in his two garments; neither perfume him nor cover his head, for he will be resurrected on the Day of Resurrection, reciting Talbiya.”


## Hadith 3:77

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

A woman from the tribe of Juhaina came to the Prophet and said, “My mother had vowed to perform Hajj but she died before performing it. May I perform Hajj on my mother's behalf?” The Prophet replied, “Perform Hajj on her behalf. Had there been a debt on your mother, would you have paid it or not? So, pay Allah's debt as He has more right to be paid.”


## Hadith 3:78

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

A woman from the tribe of Khath'am came in the year (of ,Hajjat-ul-wada' of the Prophet ) and said, “O Allah's Apostle! My father has come under Allah's obligation of performing Hajj but he is a very old man and cannot sit properly on his Mount. Will the obligation be fulfilled if I perform Hajj on his behalf?” The Prophet replied in the affirmative.


## Hadith 3:79

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

Al-Fadl was riding behind the Prophet and a woman from the tribe of Khath'am came up. Al-Fadl started looking at her and she looked at him. The Prophet turned Al-Fadl's face to the other side. She said, "My father has come under Allah's obligation of performing Hajj but he is a very old man and cannot sit properly on his Mount. Shall I perform Hajj on his behalf? The Prophet replied in the affirmative. That happened during Hajjat-ul-wada' of the Prophet .


## Hadith 3:80

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet sent me (to Mina) with the luggage from Jam'(i.e. Al-Muzdalifa) at night.


## Hadith 3:81

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

I came riding on my she-ass and had (just) then attained the age of puberty. Allah's Apostle was praying at Mina. I passed in front of a part of the first row and then dismounted from it, and the animal started grazing. I aligned with the people behind Allah's Apostle (The sub-narrator added that happened in Mina during the Prophet's Hajjat-ul-wada.)


## Hadith 3:82

_Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:_

(While in the company of my parents) I was made to perform Hajj with Allah's Apostle and I was a seven-year-old boy then. (Fatch-Al-Bari, p.443, Vol.4)


## Hadith 3:83

_Narrated Al-Ju'aid bin 'AbdurRahman:_

I heard 'Umar bin 'Abdul Azlz telling about As-Sa'ib bin Yazid that he had performed Hajj (while carried) with the belongings of the Prophet


## Hadith 3:84

_Narrated Aisha (mother of the faithful believers):_

I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Shouldn't we participate in Holy battles and Jihad along with you?” He replied, “The best and the most superior Jihad (for women) is Hajj which is accepted by Allah.” 'Aisha added: Ever since I heard that from Allah's Apostle I have determined not to miss Hajj.


## Hadith 3:85

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “A woman should not travel except with a Dhu-Mahram (her husband or a man with whom that woman cannot marry at all according to the Islamic Jurisprudence), and no man may visit her except in the presence of a Dhu-Mahram.” A man got up and said, “O Allah's Apostle! I intend to go to such and such an army and my wife wants to perform Hajj.” The Prophet said (to him), “Go along with her (to Hajj).”


## Hadith 3:86

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

When the Prophet returned after performing his Hajj, he asked Um Sinan Al-Ansari, “What did forbid you to perform Hajj?” She replied, “Father of so-and-so (i.e. her husband) had two camels and he performed Hajj on one of them, and the second is used for the irrigation of our land.” The Prophet said (to her), “Perform 'Umra in the month of Ramadan, (as it is equivalent to Hajj or Hajj with me (in reward).”


## Hadith 3:87

_Narrated Qaza'a, the slave of Ziyad: Abu Said who participated in_

twelve Ghazawat with the Prophet said, "I heard four things from Allah's Apostle (or I narrate them from the Prophet ) which won my admiration and appreciation. They are:

1\. "No lady should travel without her husband or without a Dhu-Mahram for a two-days' journey.

2\. No fasting is permissible on two days of 'Id-al-Fitr, and 'Id-al-Adha.

3\. No prayer (may be offered) after two prayers: after the 'Asr prayer till the sun set and after the morning prayer till the sun rises.

4\. Not to travel (for visiting) except for three mosques: Masjid-al-Haram (in Mecca), my Mosque (in Medina), and Masjid-al-Aqsa (in Jerusalem)."


## Hadith 3:88

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet saw an old man walking, supported by his two sons, and asked about him. The people informed him that he had vowed to go on foot (to the Ka'ba). He said, “Allah is not in need of this old man's torturing himself,” and ordered him to ride.


## Hadith 3:89

_Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Amir:_

My sister vowed to go on foot to the Ka'ba, and she asked me to take the verdict of the Prophet about it. So, I did and the Prophet said, “She should walk and also should ride.”


## Hadith 3:91

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “Medina is a sanctuary from that place to that. Its trees should not be cut and no heresy should be innovated nor any sin should be committed in it, and whoever innovates in it an heresy or commits sins (bad deeds), then he will incur the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the people.” (See Hadith No. 409, Vol 9).


## Hadith 3:92

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet came to Medina and ordered a mosque to be built and said, “O Bani Najjar! Suggest to me the price (of your land).” They said, “We do not want its price except from Allah” (i.e. they wished for a reward from Allah for giving up their land freely). So, the Prophet ordered the graves of the pagans to be dug out and the land to be levelled, and the date-palm trees to be cut down. The cut date-palms were fixed in the direction of the Qibla of the mosque.


## Hadith 3:93

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “I have made Medina a sanctuary between its two (Harrat) mountains.” The Prophet went to the tribe of Bani Haritha and said (to them), “I see that you have gone out of the sanctuary,” but looking around, he added, “No, you are inside the sanctuary.”


## Hadith 3:94

_Narrated 'Ali:_

We have nothing except the Book of Allah and this written paper from the Prophet (where-in is written:) Medina is a sanctuary from the 'Air Mountain to such and such a place, and whoever innovates in it an heresy or commits a sin, or gives shelter to such an innovator in it will incur the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the people, none of his compulsory or optional good deeds of worship will be accepted. And the asylum (of protection) granted by any Muslim is to be secured (respected) by all the other Muslims; and whoever betrays a Muslim in this respect incurs the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the people, and none of his compulsory or optional good deeds of worship will be accepted, and whoever (freed slave) befriends (take as masters) other than his manumitters without their permission incurs the curse of Allah, the angels, and all the people, and none of his compulsory or optional good deeds of worship will be accepted.


## Hadith 3:95

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, "I was ordered to migrate to a town which will swallow (conquer) other towns and is called Yathrib and that is Medina, and it turns out (bad) persons as a furnace removes the impurities of iron.


## Hadith 3:96

_Narrated Abu Humaid:_

We came with the Prophet from Tabuk, and when we reached near Medina, the Prophet said, “This is Tabah.”


## Hadith 3:97

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

If I saw deers grazing in Medina, I would not chase them, for Allah's Apostle said, “(Medina) is a sanctuary between its two mountains.”


## Hadith 3:98

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “The people will leave Medina in spite of the best state it will have, and none except the wild birds and the beasts of prey will live in it, and the last persons who will die will be two shepherds from the tribe of Muzaina, who will be driving their sheep towards Medina, but will find nobody in it, and when they reach the valley of Thaniyat-al-Wada', they will fall down on their faces dead.”


## Hadith 3:99

_Narrated Abu Zuhair:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “Yemen will be conquered and some people will migrate (from Medina) and will urge their families, and those who will obey them to migrate (to Yemen) although Medina will be better for them; if they but knew. Sham will also be conquered and some people will migrate (from Medina) and will urge their families and those who will obey them, to migrate (to Sham) although Medina will be better for them; if they but knew. 'Iraq will be conquered and some people will migrate (from Medina) and will urge their families and those who will obey them to migrate (to 'Iraq) although Medina will be better for them; if they but knew.”


## Hadith 3:100

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Verily, Belief returns and goes back to Medina as a snake returns and goes back to its hole (when in danger).”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/2_823">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 2:801 to 2:823</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_200">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:101 to 3:200</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
