---
title: "Hadith 3:101 to 3:200"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:1 to 3:100</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_300">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:201 to 3:300</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 3:101

_Narrated Sad:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “None plots against the people of Medina but that he will be dissolved (destroyed) like the salt is dissolved in water.”


## Hadith 3:102

_Narrated Usama:_

Once the Prophet stood at the top of a (looked out from upon one) castle amongst the castles (or the high buildings) of Medina and said, “Do you see what I see? (No doubt) I see the spots where afflictions will take place among your houses (and these afflictions will be) as numerous as the spots where rain-drops fall.”


## Hadith 3:103

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

The Prophet said, “The terror caused by Al-Masih Ad-Dajjal will not enter Medina and at that time Medina will have seven gates and there will be two angels at each gate guarding them.”


## Hadith 3:104

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “There are angels guarding the entrances (or roads) of Medina, neither plague nor Ad-Dajjal will be able to enter it.”


## Hadith 3:105

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “There will be no town which Ad-Dajjal will not enter except Mecca and Medina, and there will be no entrance (road) (of both Mecca and Medina) but the angels will be standing in rows guarding it against him, and then Medina will shake with its inhabitants thrice (i.e. three earth-quakes will take place) and Allah will expel all the nonbelievers and the hypocrites from it.”


## Hadith 3:106

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Allah's Apostle told us a long narrative about Ad-Dajjal, and among the many things he mentioned, was his saying, “Ad-Dajjal will come and it will be forbidden for him to pass through the entrances of Medina. He will land in some of the salty barren areas (outside) Medina; on that day the best man or one of the best men will come up to him and say, 'I testify that you are the same Dajjal whose description was given to us by Allah's Apostle .' Ad-Dajjal will say to the people, 'If I kill this man and bring him back to life again, will you doubt my claim?' They will say, 'No.' Then Ad-Dajjal will kill that man and bring him back to life. That man will say, 'Now I know your reality better than before.' Ad-Dajjal will say, 'I want to kill him but I cannot.' ”


## Hadith 3:107

_Narrated Jabir:_

A bedouin came to the Prophet and gave a pledge of allegiance for embracing Islam. The next day he came with fever and said (to the Prophet ), “Please cancel my pledge (of embracing Islam and of emigrating to Medina).” The Prophet refused (that request) three times and said, “Medina is like a furnace, it expels out the impurities (bad persons) and selects the good ones and makes them perfect.”


## Hadith 3:108

_Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:_

When the Prophet went out for (the battle of) Uhud, some of his companions (hypocrites) returned (home). A party of the believers remarked that they would kill those (hypocrites) who had returned, but another party said that they would not kill them. So, this Divine Inspiration was revealed: “Then what is the matter with you that you are divided into two parties concerning the hypocrites.” (4.88) The Prophet said, “Medina expels the bad persons from it, as fire expels the impurities of iron.”


## Hadith 3:109

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “O Allah! Bestow on Medina twice the blessings You bestowed on Mecca.”


## Hadith 3:110

_Narrated Anas:_

Whenever the Prophet returned from a journey and observed the walls of Medina, he would make his Mount go fast, and if he was on an animal (i.e. a horse), he would make it gallop because of his love for Medina.


## Hadith 3:111

_Narrated Anas:_

(The people of) Bani Salama intended to shift near the mosque (of the Prophet) but Allah's Apostle disliked to see Medina vacated and said, “O the people of Bani Salama! Don't you think that you will be rewarded for your footsteps which you take towards the mosque?” So, they stayed at their old places.


## Hadith 3:112

_Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "There is a garden from the_

gardens of Paradise between my house and my pulpit, and my pulpit is on my Lake Fount (Al-Kauthar)."


## Hadith 3:113

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When Allah's Apostle reached Medina, Abu Bakr and Bilal became ill. When Abu Bakr's fever got worse, he would recite (this poetic verse): “Everybody is staying alive with his People, yet Death is nearer to him than His shoe laces.” And Bilal, when his fever deserted him, would recite: “Would that I could stay overnight in A valley wherein I would be Surrounded by Idhkhir and Jalil (kinds of good-smelling grass). Would that one day I could Drink the water of the Majanna, and Would that (The two mountains) Shama and Tafil would appear to me!” The Prophet said, “O Allah! Curse Shaiba bin Rabi'a and 'Utba bin Rabi'a and Umaiya bin Khalaf as they turned us out of our land to the land of epidemics.” Allah's Apostle then said, “O Allah! Make us love Medina as we love Mecca or even more than that. O Allah! Give blessings in our Sa and our Mudd (measures symbolizing food) and make the climate of Medina suitable for us, and divert its fever towards Aljuhfa.” Aisha added: When we reached Medina, it was the most unhealthy of Allah's lands, and the valley of Bathan (the valley of Medina) used to flow with impure colored water.


## Hadith 3:114

_Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father:_

Umar said, O Allah! Grant me martyrdom in Your cause, and let my death be in the city of Your Apostle."


## Hadith 3:115

_Narrated Talha bin 'Ubaid-Ullah:_

A bedouin with unkempt hair came to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Inform me what Allah has made compulsory for me as regards the prayers.” He replied: “You have to offer perfectly the five compulsory prayers in a day and night (24 hours), unless you want to pray Nawafil.” The bedouin further asked, “Inform me what Allah has made compulsory for me as regards fasting.” He replied, “You have to fast during the whole month of Ramadan, unless you want to fast more as Nawafil.” The bedouin further asked, “Tell me how much Zakat Allah has enjoined on me.” Thus, Allah's Apostle informed him about all the rules (i.e. fundamentals) of Islam. The bedouin then said, “By Him Who has honored you, I will neither perform any Nawafil nor will I decrease what Allah has enjoined on me. Allah's Apostle said, ”If he is saying the truth, he will succeed (or he will be granted Paradise)."


## Hadith 3:116

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet observed the fast on the 10th of Muharram ('Ashura), and ordered (Muslims) to fast on that day, but when the fasting of the month of Ramadan was prescribed, the fasting of the 'Ashura' was abandoned. 'Abdullah did not use to fast on that day unless it coincided with his routine fasting by chance.


## Hadith 3:117

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(The tribe of) Quraish used to fast on the day of Ashura' in the Pre-lslamic period, and then Allah's Apostle ordered (Muslims) to fast on it till the fasting in the month of Ramadan was prescribed; whereupon the Prophet said, “He who wants to fast (on ‘Ashura’) may fast, and he who does not want to fast may not fast.”


## Hadith 3:118

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Fasting is a shield (or a screen or a shelter). So, the person observing fasting should avoid sexual relation with his wife and should not behave foolishly and impudently, and if somebody fights with him or abuses him, he should tell him twice, 'I am fasting.” The Prophet added, “By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, the smell coming out from the mouth of a fasting person is better in the sight of Allah than the smell of musk. (Allah says about the fasting person), 'He has left his food, drink and desires for My sake. The fast is for Me. So I will reward (the fasting person) for it and the reward of good deeds is multiplied ten times.”


## Hadith 3:119

_Narrated Abu Wail from Hudhaifa:_

Umar asked the people, “Who remembers the narration of the Prophet about the affliction?” Hudhaifa said, “I heard the Prophet saying, 'The affliction of a person in his property, family and neighbors is expiated by his prayers, fasting, and giving in charity.” 'Umar said, “I do not ask about that, but I ask about those afflictions which will spread like the waves of the sea.” Hudhaifa replied, “There is a closed gate in front of those afflictions.” 'Umar asked, “Will that gate be opened or broken?” He replied, “It will be broken.” 'Umar said, “Then the gate will not be closed again till the Day of Resurrection.” We said to Masruq, “Would you ask Hudhaifa whether 'Umar knew what that gate symbolized?” He asked him and he replied "He ('Umar) knew it as one knows that there will be night before tomorrow, morning.


## Hadith 3:120

_Narrated Sahl:_

The Prophet said, “There is a gate in Paradise called Ar-Raiyan, and those who observe fasts will enter through it on the Day of Resurrection and none except them will enter through it. It will be said, ‘Where are those who used to observe fasts?’ They will get up, and none except them will enter through it. After their entry the gate will be closed and nobody will enter through it.”


## Hadith 3:121

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever gives two kinds (of things or property) in charity for Allah's Cause, will be called from the gates of Paradise and will be addressed, ‘O slaves of Allah! Here is prosperity.’ So, whoever was amongst the people who used to offer their prayers, will be called from the gate of the prayer; and whoever was amongst the people who used to participate in Jihad, will be called from the gate of Jihad; and whoever was amongst those who used to observe fasts, will be called from the gate of Ar-Raiyan; whoever was amongst those who used to give in charity, will be called from the gate of charity.” Abu Bakr said, “Let my parents be sacrificed for you, O Allah's Apostle! No distress or need will befall him who will be called from those gates. Will there be any one who will be called from all these gates?” The Prophet replied, “Yes, and I hope you will be one of them.”


## Hadith 3:122

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When Ramadan begins, the gates of Paradise are opened.”


## Hadith 3:123

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When the month of Ramadan starts, the gates of the heaven are opened and the gates of Hell are closed and the devils are chained.”


## Hadith 3:124

_Narrated Ibn Umar: I heard Allah's Apostle saying, "When you see the_

crescent (of the month of Ramadan), start fasting, and when you see the crescent (of the month of Shawwal), stop fasting; and if the sky is overcast (and you can't see It) then reg


## Hadith 3:125

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever established prayers on the night of Qadr out of sincere faith and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his previous sins will be forgiven; and whoever fasts in the month of Ramadan out of sincere faith, and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his previous sins will be forgiven.”


## Hadith 3:126

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet was the most generous amongst the people, and he used to be more so in the month of Ramadan when Gabriel visited him, and Gabriel used to meet him on every night of Ramadan till the end of the month. The Prophet used to recite the Holy Qur'an to Gabriel, and when Gabriel met him, he used to be more generous than a fast wind (which causes rain and welfare).


## Hadith 3:127

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever does not give up forged speech and evil actions, Allah is not in need of his leaving his food and drink (i.e. Allah will not accept his fasting.)”


## Hadith 3:128

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Allah said, 'All the deeds of Adam's sons (people) are for them, except fasting which is for Me, and I will give the reward for it.' Fasting is a shield or protection from the fire and from committing sins. If one of you is fasting, he should avoid sexual relation with his wife and quarreling, and if somebody should fight or quarrel with him, he should say, ‘I am fasting.’ By Him in Whose Hands my soul is' The unpleasant smell coming out from the mouth of a fasting person is better in the sight of Allah than the smell of musk. There are two pleasures for the fasting person, one at the time of breaking his fast, and the other at the time when he will meet his Lord; then he will be pleased because of his fasting.”


## Hadith 3:129

_Narrated 'Alqama: While I was walking with 'Abdullah he said, "We_

were in the company of the Prophet and he said, 'He who can afford to marry should marry, because it will help him refrain from looking at other women, and save his private parts from


## Hadith 3:130

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle mentioned Ramadan and said, “Do not fast unless you see the crescent (of Ramadan), and do not give up fasting till you see the crescent (of Shawwal), but if the sky is overcast (if you cannot see it), then act on estimation (i.e. count Sha'ban as 30 days).”


## Hadith 3:131

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The month (can be) 29 nights (i.e. days), and do not fast till you see the moon, and if the sky is overcast, then complete Sha'ban as thirty days.”


## Hadith 3:132

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “The month is like this and this,” (at the same time he showed the fingers of both his hands thrice) and left out one thumb on the third time.


## Hadith 3:133

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet or Abu-l-Qasim said, “Start fasting on seeing the crescent (of Ramadan), and give up fasting on seeing the crescent (of Shawwal), and if the sky is overcast (and you cannot see it), complete thirty days of Sha'ban.”


## Hadith 3:134

_Narrated Um Salama:_

The Prophet vowed to keep aloof from his wives for a period of one month, and after the completion of 29 days he went either in the morning or in the afternoon to his wives. Someone said to him “You vowed that you would not go to your wives for one month.” He replied, “The month is of 29 days.”


## Hadith 3:135

_Narrated Anas:_

Allah's Apostle vowed to keep aloof from his wives for one month, and he had dislocation of his leg. So, he stayed in a Mashruba for 29 nights and then came down. Some people said, “O Allah's Apostle! You vowed to stay aloof for one month,” He replied, “The month is of 29 days.”


## Hadith 3:136

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

The Prophet said, “The two months of 'Id i.e. Ramadan and Dhul-Hijja, do not decrease (in superiority).”


## Hadith 3:137

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “We are an illiterate nation; we neither write, nor know accounts. The month is like this and this, i.e. sometimes of 29 days and sometimes of thirty days.”


## Hadith 3:138

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “None of you should fast a day or two before the month of Ramadan unless he has the habit of fasting (Nawafil) (and if his fasting coincides with that day) then he can fast that day.”


## Hadith 3:139

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

It was the custom among the companions of Muhammad that if any of them was fasting and the food was presented (for breaking his fast), but he slept before eating, he would not eat that night and the following day till sunset.

Qais bin Sirma-al-Ansari was fasting and came to his wife at the time of Iftar (breaking one's fast) and asked her whether she had anything to eat. She replied, “No, but I would go and bring some for you.” He used to do hard work during the day, so he was overwhelmed by sleep and slept. When his wife came and saw him, she said, “Disappointment for you.” When it was midday on the following day, he fainted and the Prophet was informed about the whole matter and the following verses were revealed: “You are permitted To go to your wives (for sexual relation) At the night of fasting.” So, they were overjoyed by it. And then Allah also revealed: “And eat and drink Until the white thread Of dawn appears to you Distinct from the black thread (of the night).” (2.187)


## Hadith 3:140

_Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:_

When the above verses were revealed: 'Until the white thread appears to you, distinct from the black thread,' I took two (hair) strings, one black and the other white, and kept them under my pillow and went on looking at them throughout the night but could not make anything out of it. So, the next morning I went to Allah's Apostle and told him the whole story. He explained to me, “That verse means the darkness of the night and the whiteness of the dawn.”


## Hadith 3:141

_Narrated Sahl bin Saud:_

When the following verses were revealed: ‘Eat and drink until the white thread appears to you, distinct from the black thread’ and of dawn was not revealed, some people who intended to fast, tied black and white threads to their legs and went on eating till they differentiated between the two. Allah then revealed the words, ‘of dawn’, and it became clear that meant night and day.


## Hadith 3:142

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Bilal used to pronounce the Adhan at night, so Allah's Apostle? said, "Carry on taking your meals (eat and drink) till Ibn Um Maktum pronounces the Adhan, for he does not pronounce it till it is dawn.


## Hadith 3:143

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

I used to take my Suhur meals with my family and then hurry up for presenting myself for the (Fajr) prayer with Allah's Apostle.


## Hadith 3:144

_Narrated Anas:_

Zaid bin Thabit said, “We took the Suhur with the Prophet . Then he stood for the prayer.” I asked, “What was the interval between the Suhur and the Adhan?” He replied, “The interval was sufficient to recite fifty verses of the Quran.”


## Hadith 3:145

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet fasted for days continuously; the people also did the same but it was difficult for them. So, the Prophet forbade them (to fast continuously for more than one day). They slid, “But you fast without break (no food was taken in the evening or in the morning).” The Prophet replied, “I am not like you, for I am provided with food and drink (by Allah).”


## Hadith 3:146

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Take Suhur as there is a blessing in it.”


## Hadith 3:147

_Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:_

Once the Prophet ordered a person on ‘Ashura’ (the tenth of Muharram) to announce, "Whoever has eaten, should not eat any more, but fast, and who has not eaten should not eat, but complete his fast (till the end of the day).


## Hadith 3:148

_Narrated 'Aisha and Um Salama:_

At times Allah's Apostle used to get up in the morning in the state of Janaba after having sexual relations with his wives. He would then take a bath and fast.


## Hadith 3:149

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to kiss and embrace (his wives) while he was fasting, and he had more power to control his desires than any of you. Said Jabir, “The person who gets discharge after casting a look (on his wife) should complete his fast.”


## Hadith 3:150

_Narrated Hisham's father:_

Aisha said, “Allah's Apostle used to kiss some of his wives while he was fasting,” and then she smiled.


## Hadith 3:151

_Narrated Zainab:_

(daughter of Um Salama) that her mother said, “While I was (lying) with Allah's Apostle underneath a woolen sheet, I got the menstruation, and then slipped away and put on the clothes (which I used to wear) in menses. He asked, ”What is the matter? Did you get your menses?“ I replied in the affirmative and then entered underneath that woolen sheet. I and Allah's Apostle used to take a bath from one water pot and he used to kiss me while he was fasting.”


## Hadith 3:152

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(At times) in Ramadan the Prophet used to take a bath in the morning not because of a wet dream and would continue his fast.


## Hadith 3:153

_Narrated Abu Bakr bin 'Abdur-Rahman:_

My father and I went to 'Aisha and she said, “I testify that Allah's Apostle at times used to get up in the morning in a state of Janaba from sexual intercourse, not from a wet dream and then he would fast that day.” Then he went to Um Salama and she also narrated a similar thing.


## Hadith 3:154

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “If somebody eats or drinks forgetfully then he should complete his fast, for what he has eaten or drunk, has been cleaning his teeth with Siwak while he was fasting so many times as I can't count.” And narrated Abu Huraira, “The Prophet said, 'But for my fear that it would be hard for my followers, I would have ordered them to clean their teeth with Siwak on every performance of ablution.” The same is narrated by Jabir and Zaid bin Khalid from the Prophet who did not differentiate between a fasting and a nonfasting person in this respect (using Siwak).

Aisha said, “The Prophet said, ”It (i.e. Siwak) is a purification for the mouth and it is a way of seeking Allah's pleasures.“ Ata' and Qatada said, ”There is no harm in swallowing the resultant saliva."


## Hadith 3:155

_Narrated Humran:_

I saw 'Uthman performing ablution; he washed his hands thrice, rinsed his mouth and then washed his nose, by putting water in it and then blowing it out, and washed his face thrice, and then washed his right forearm up to the elbow thrice, and then the left-forearm up to the elbow thrice, then smeared his head with water, washed his right foot thrice, and then his left foot thrice and said, “I saw Allah's Apostle performing ablution similar to my present ablution, and then he said, 'Whoever performs ablution like my present ablution and then offers two Rakat in which he does not think of worldly things, all his previous sins will be forgiven.”


## Hadith 3:156

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

A man came to the Prophet and said that he had been burnt (ruined). The Prophet asked him what was the matter. He replied, “I had sexual intercourse with my wife in Ramadan (while I was fasting).” Then a basket full of dates was brought to the Prophet and he asked, “Where is the burnt (ruined) man?” He replied, “I am present.” The Prophet told him to give that basket in charity (as expiation).


## Hadith 3:157

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

While we were sitting with the Prophet a man came and said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have been ruined.” Allah's Apostle asked what was the matter with him. He replied “I had sexual intercourse with my wife while I was fasting.” Allah's Apostle asked him, “Can you afford to manumit a slave?” He replied in the negative. Allah's Apostle asked him, “Can you fast for two successive months?” He replied in the negative. The Prophet asked him, “Can you afford to feed sixty poor persons?” He replied in the negative. The Prophet kept silent and while we were in that state, a big basket full of dates was brought to the Prophet . He asked, “Where is the questioner?” He replied, “I (am here).” The Prophet said (to him), “Take this (basket of dates) and give it in charity.” The man said, “Should I give it to a person poorer than I? By Allah; there is no family between its (i.e. Medina's) two mountains who are poorer than I.” The Prophet smiled till his pre-molar teeth became visible and then said, 'Feed your family with it."


## Hadith 3:158

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A man came to the Prophet and said, “I had sexual intercourse with my wife on Ramadan (while fasting).” The Prophet asked him, “Can you afford to manumit a slave?” He replied in the negative. The Prophet asked him, “Can you fast for two successive months?” He replied in the negative. He asked him, “Can you afford to feed sixty poor persons?” He replied in the negative. (Abu Huraira added): Then a basket full of dates was brought to the Prophet and he said (to that man), “Feed (poor people) with this by way of atonement.” He said, “(Should I feed it) to poorer people than we? There is no poorer house than ours between its (Medina's) mountains.” The Prophet said, “Then feed your family with it.”


## Hadith 3:159

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet was cupped while he was in the state of lhram, and also while he was observing a fast.


## Hadith 3:160

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet was cupped while he was fasting.


## Hadith 3:161

_Narrated Thabit Al-Bunani:_

Anas bin Malik was asked whether they disliked the cupping for a fasting person. He replied in the negative and said, “Only if it causes weakness.”


## Hadith 3:162

_Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:_

We were in the company of Allah's Apostle on a journey. He said to a man, “Get down and mix Sawiq (powdered barley) with water for me.” The man said, “The sun (has not set yet), O Allah's Apostle.” The Prophet again said to him, “Get down and mix Sawiq with water for me.” The man again said, “O Allah's Apostle! The sun!” The Prophet said to him (for the third time) “Get down and mix Sawiq with water for me.” The man dismounted and mixed Sawiq with water for him. The Prophet drank it and then beckoned with his hand (towards the East) and said, “When you see the night falling from this side, then a fasting person should break his fast.”


## Hadith 3:163

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Hamza bin 'Amr Al-Aslami said, “O Allah's Apostle! I fast continuously.”


## Hadith 3:164

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Hamza bin 'Amr Al-Aslami asked the Prophet, “Should I fast while traveling?” The Prophet replied, “You may fast if you wish, and you may not fast if you wish.”


## Hadith 3:165

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle set out for Mecca in Ramadan and he fasted, and when he reached Al-Kadid, he broke his fast and the people (with him) broke their fast too. (Abu 'Abdullah said, “Al-Kadid is a land covered with water between Usfan and Qudaid.”)


## Hadith 3:166

_Narrated Abu Ad-Darda:_

We set out with Allah's Apostle on one of his journeys on a very hot day, and it was so hot that one had to put his hand over his head because of the severity of heat. None of us was fasting except the Prophet and Ibn Rawaha.


## Hadith 3:167

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle was on a journey and saw a crowd of people, and a man was being shaded (by them). He asked, “What is the matter?” They said, “He (the man) is fasting.” The Prophet said, “It is not righteousness that you fast on a journey.”


## Hadith 3:168

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

We used to travel with the Prophet and neither did the fasting persons criticize those who were not fasting, nor did those who were not fasting criticize the fasting ones.


## Hadith 3:169

_Narrated Tawus:_

Ibn 'Abbas said, “Allah's Apostle set out from Medina to Mecca and he fasted till he reached 'Usfan, where he asked for water and raised his hand to let the people see him, and then broke the fast, and did not fast after that till he reached Mecca, and that happened in Ramadan.” Ibn 'Abbas used to say, “Allah's Apostle (sometimes) fasted and (sometimes) did not fast during the journeys so whoever wished to fast could fast, and whoever wished not to fast, could do so.”


## Hadith 3:170

_Narrated Nafi:_

Ibn 'Umar recited the verse: "They had a choice either to fast or to feed a poor person for every day, and said that the order of this Verse was cancelled.


## Hadith 3:171

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Sometimes I missed some days of Ramadan, but could not fast in lieu of them except in the month of Sha'ban.“ Said Yahya, a sub-narrator, ”She used to be busy serving the Prophet ."


## Hadith 3:172

_Narrated Abu Said:_

The Prophet said, “Isn't it true that a woman does not pray and does not fast on menstruating? And that is the defect (a loss) in her religion.”


## Hadith 3:173

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever died and he ought to have fasted (the missed days of Ramadan) then his guardians must fast on his behalf.”


## Hadith 3:174

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

A man came to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle! My mother died and she ought to have fasted one month (for her missed Ramadan). Shall I fast on her behalf?” The Prophet replied in the affirmative and said, “Allah's debts have more right to be paid.” In another narration a woman is reported to have said, “My sister died...”

she had vowed to fast but she didn't fast.“ In another narration Ibn 'Abbas is reported to have said, ”A woman said to the Prophet, “My mother died while she ought to have fasted for fifteen days.”


## Hadith 3:175

_Narrated Umar bin Al-Khattab:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When night falls from this side and the day vanishes from this side and the sun sets, then the fasting person should break his fast.”


## Hadith 3:176

_Narrated Abdullah bin Abi Aufa:_

We were in the company of the Prophet on a journey and he was fasting, and when the sun set, he addressed somebody, “O so-and-so, get up and mix Sawiq with water for us.” He replied, “O Allah's Apostle! (Will you wait) till it is evening?” The Prophet said, “Get down and mix Sawiq with water for us.” He replied, “O Allah's Apostle! (If you wait) till it is evening.” The Prophet said again, “Get down and mix Sawiq with water for us.” He replied, “It is still daytime.”(1) The Prophet said again, “Get down and mix Sawiq with water for us.” He got down and mixed Sawiq for them. The Prophet drank it and then said, “When you see night falling from this side, the fasting person should break his fast.”


## Hadith 3:177

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa"_

We were traveling with Allah's Apostle and he was fasting, and when the sun set, he said to (someone), “Get down and mix Sawiq with water for us.” He replied, “O Allah's Apostle! (Will you wait) till it is evening?” The Prophet again said, “Get down and mix Sawiq with water for us.” He replied, “O Allah's Apostle! It is still daytime.” The Prophet said again, “Get down and mix Sawiq with water for us.” So, he got down and carried out that order. The Prophet then said, “When you see night falling from this side, the fasting person should break his fast,” and he beckoned with his finger towards the east.


## Hadith 3:178

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The people will remain on the right path as long as they hasten the breaking of the fast.”


## Hadith 3:179

_Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:_

I was with the Prophet on a journey, and he observed the fast till evening. The Prophet said to a man, “Get down and mix Sawiq with water for me.” He replied, “Will you wait till it is evening?” The Prophet said, “Get down and mix Sawiq with water for me; when you see night falling from this side, the fasting person should break his fast.”


## Hadith 3:180

_Narrated Abu Usama from Hisham bin 'Ursa from Fatima:_

Asma bint Abi Bakr said, “We broke our fast during the lifetime of the Prophet on a cloudy day and then the sun appeared.” Hisham was asked, “Were they ordered to fast in lieu of that day?” He replied, “It had to be made up for.” Ma'mar said, “I heard Hisham saying, ”I don't know whether they fasted in lieu of that day or not."


## Hadith 3:181

_Narrated Ar-Rubi' bint Mu'awadh:_

“The Prophet sent a messenger to the village of the Ansar in the morning of the day of 'Ashura' (10th of Muharram) to announce: 'Whoever has eaten something should not eat but complete the fast, and whoever is observing the fast should complete it.' ”She further said, “Since then we used to fast on that day regularly and also make our boys fast. We used to make toys of wool for the boys and if anyone of them cried for, he was given those toys till it was the time of the breaking of the fast.”


## Hadith 3:182

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “Do not practice Al-Wisal (fasting continuously without breaking one's fast in the evening or eating before the following dawn).” The people said to the Prophet, “But you practice Al-Wisal?” The Prophet replied, “I am not like any of you, for I am given food and drink (by Allah) during the night.”


## Hadith 3:183

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal. The people said (to him), “But you practice it?” He said, “I am not like you, for I am given food and drink by Allah.”


## Hadith 3:184

_Narrated Abu Sa'id:_

That he had heard the Prophet saying, “Do not fast continuously (practise Al-Wisal), and if you intend to lengthen your fast, then carry it on only till the Suhur (before the following dawn).” The people said to him, “But you practice (Al-Wisal), O Allah's Apostle!” He replied, “I am not similar to you, for during my sleep I have One Who makes me eat and drink.”


## Hadith 3:185

_Narrated Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal out of mercy to them. They said to him, “But you practice Al-Wisal?” He said, “I am not similar to you, for my Lord gives me food and drink. ”


## Hadith 3:186

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Wisal in fasting. So, one of the Muslims said to him, “But you practice Al-Wisal. O Allah's Apostle!” The Prophet replied, “Who amongst you is similar to me? I am given food and drink during my sleep by my Lord.” So, when the people refused to stop Al-Wisal (fasting continuously), the Prophet fasted day and night continuously along with them for a day and then another day and then they saw the crescent moon (of the month of Shawwal). The Prophet said to them (angrily), “If It (the crescent) had not appeared, I would have made you fast for a longer period.” That was as a punishment for them when they refused to stop (practising Al-Wisal).


## Hadith 3:187

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said twice, “(O you people) Be cautious! Do not practice Al-Wisal.” The people said to him, “But you practice Al-Wisal?” The Prophet replied, “My Lord gives me food and drink during my sleep. Do that much of deeds which is within your ability.”


## Hadith 3:188

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Do not fast continuously day and night (practise Al-Wisal) and if anyone of you intends to fast continuously day and night, he should continue till the Suhur time.” They said, “But you practise Al-Wisal, O Allah's Apostle!” The Prophet said, “I am not similar to you;. during my sleep I have One Who makes me eat and drink.”


## Hadith 3:189

_Narrated Abu Juhaifa:_

The Prophet made a bond of brotherhood between Salman and Abu Ad-Darda.' Salman paid a visit to Abu Ad-Darda' and found Um Ad-Darda' dressed in shabby clothes and asked her why she was in that state. She replied, “Your brother Abu Ad-Darda' is not interested in (the luxuries of) this world.” In the meantime Abu Ad-Darda' came and prepared a meal for Salman. Salman requested Abu Ad-Darda' to eat (with him), but Abu Ad-Darda' said, “I am fasting.” Salman said, “I am not going to eat unless you eat.” So, Abu Ad-Darda' ate(with Salman). When it was night and (a part of the night passed), Abu Ad-Darda' got up (to offer the night prayer), but Salman told him to sleep and Abu Ad-Darda' slept. After sometime Abu Ad-Darda' again got up but Salman told him to sleep. When it was the last hours of the night, Salman told him to get up then, and both of them offered the prayer. Salman told Abu Ad-Darda', “Your Lord has a right on you, your soul has a right on you, and your family has a right on you; so you should give the rights of all those who has a right on you.” Abu Ad-Darda' came to the Prophet and narrated the whole story. The Prophet said, “Salman has spoken the truth.”


## Hadith 3:190

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to fast till one would say that he would never stop fasting, and he would abandon fasting till one would say that he would never fast. I never saw Allah's Apostle fasting for a whole month except the month of Ramadan, and did not see him fasting in any month more than in the month of Sha'ban.


## Hadith 3:191

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet never fasted in any month more than in the month of Sha'ban. He used to say, “Do those deeds which you can do easily, as Allah will not get tired (of giving rewards) till you get bored and tired (of performing religious deeds).” The most beloved prayer to the Prophet was the one that was done regularly (throughout the life) even if it were little. And whenever the Prophet offered a prayer he used to offer it regularly .


## Hadith 3:192

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet never fasted a full month except the month of Ramadan, and he used to fast till one could say, “By Allah, he will never stop fasting,” and he would abandon fasting till one would say, “By Allah, he will never fast.”


## Hadith 3:193

_Narrated Anas:_

Allah's Apostle used to leave fasting in a certain month till we thought that he would not fast in that month, and he used to fast in another month till we thought he would not stop fasting at all in that month. And if one wanted to see him praying at night, one could see him (in that condition), and if one wanted to see him sleeping at night, one could see him (in that condition) too.


## Hadith 3:194

_Narrated Humaid:_

I asked Anas about the fasting of the Prophet. He said “Whenever I liked to see the Prophet fasting in any month, I could see that, and whenever I liked to see him not fasting, I could see that too, and if I liked to see him praying in any night, I could see that, and if I liked to see him sleeping, I could see that, too.” Anas further said, “I never touched silk or velvet softer than the hand of Allah's Apostle and never smelled musk or perfumed smoke more pleasant than the smell of Allah's Apostle.”


## Hadith 3:195

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:_

“Once Allah's Apostle came to me,” and then he narrated the whole narration, i.e. your guest has a right on you, and your wife has a right on you. I then asked about the fasting of David. The Prophet replied, “Half of the year,” (i.e. he used to fast on every alternate day).


## Hadith 3:196

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:_

Allah's Apostle said to me, “O 'Abdullah! Have I not been informed that you fast during the day and offer prayers all the night.” 'Abdullah replied, “Yes, O Allah's Apostle!” The Prophet said, “Don't do that; fast for few days and then give it up for few days, offer prayers and also sleep at night, as your body has a right on you, and your wife has a right on you, and your guest has a right on you. And it is sufficient for you to fast three days in a month, as the reward of a good deed is multiplied ten times, so it will be like fasting throughout the year.” I insisted (on fasting) and so I was given a hard instruction. I said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have power.” The Prophet said, “Fast like the fasting of the Prophet David and do not fast more than that.” I said, “How was the fasting of the Prophet of Allah, David?” He said, “Half of the year,” (i.e. he used to fast on every alternate day).

Afterwards when 'Abdullah became old, he used to say, “It would have been better for me if I had accepted the permission of the Prophet (which he gave me i.e. to fast only three days a month).”


## Hadith 3:197

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:_

Allah's Apostle was informed that I had taken an oath to fast daily and to pray (every night) all the night throughout my life (so Allah's Apostle came to me and asked whether it was correct): I replied, “Let my parents be sacrificed for you! I said so.” The Prophet said, “You can not do that. So, fast for few days and give it up for few days, r ray and sleep. Fast three days a month as the reward of good deeds is multiplied ten times and that will be equal to one year of fasting.” I replied, “I can do better than that.” The Prophet said to me, “Fast one day and give up fasting for a day and that is the fasting of Prophet David and that is the best fasting.” I said, “I have the power to fast better (more) than that.” The Prophet said, “There is no better fasting than that.”


## Hadith 3:198

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:_

The news of my daily fasting and praying every night throughout the night reached the Prophet. So he sent for me or I met him, and he said, “I have been informed that you fast everyday and pray every night (all the night). Fast (for some days) and give up fasting (for some days); pray and sleep, for your eyes have a right on you, and your body and your family (i.e. wife) have a right on you.” I replied, “I have more power than that (fasting).” The Prophet said, “Then fast like the fasts of (the Prophet) David”. I said, “How?” He replied, “He used to fast on alternate days, and he used not to flee on meeting the enemy.” I said, “From where can I get that chance?” ('Ata' said, “I do not know how the expression of fasting daily throughout the life occurred.”) So, the Prophet said, twice, “Whoever fasts daily throughout his life is just as the one who does not fast at all.”


## Hadith 3:199

_Narrated Mujahid from 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:_

The Prophet said (to 'Abdullah), “Fast three days a month.” 'Abdullah said, (to the Prophet) “I am able to fast more than that.” They kept on arguing on this matter till the Prophet said, “Fast on alternate days, and recite the whole Qur'an once a month.” 'Abdullah said, “I can recite more (in a month),” and the argument went on till the Prophet said, “Recite the Qur'an once each three days.” (i.e. you must not recite the whole Qur'an in less than three days).


## Hadith 3:200

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As:_

The Prophet said to me, “You fast daily all the year and pray every night all the night?” I replied in the affirmative. The Prophet said, “If you keep on doing this, your eyes will become weak and your body will get tired. He who fasts all the year is as he who did not fast at all. The fasting of three days (a month) will be equal to the tasting of the whole year.” I replied, “I have the power for more than this.” The Prophet said, "Then fast like the fasting of David who used to fast on alternate days and would never flee from the battle field, on meeting the enemy.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:1 to 3:100</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_300">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:201 to 3:300</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
