---
title: "Hadith 3:201 to 3:300"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_200">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:101 to 3:200</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_400">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:301 to 3:400</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 3:201

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:_

Allah's Apostle was informed about my fasts, and he came to me and I spread for him a leather cushion stuffed with palm fires, but he sat on the ground and the cushion remained between me and him, and then he said, “Isn't it sufficient for you to fast three days a month?” I replied, “O Allah's Apostle! (I can fast more).” He said, “Five?” I replied, “O Allah's Apostle! (I can fast more).” He said, “Seven?” I replied, “O Allah's Apostle! (I can fast more).” He said, “Nine (days per month)?” I replied, “O Allah's Apostle! (I can fast more)” He said, “Eleven (days per month)?” And then the Prophet said, “There is no fast superior to that of the Prophet David it was for half of the year. So, fast on alternate days.”


## Hadith 3:202

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

My friend (the Prophet ) advised me to observe three things:

(1) to fast three days a month;

(2) to pray two Rakat of Duha prayer (fore-noon prayer); and

(3) to pray Witr before sleeping.


## Hadith 3:203

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet paid a visit to Um-Sulaim and she placed before him dates and ghee. The Prophet said, “Replace the ghee and dates in their respective containers for I am fasting.” Then he stood somewhere in her house and offered an optional prayer and then he invoked good on Um-Sulaim and her family. Then Um-Sulaim said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have a special request (today).” He said, “What is it?” She replied, “(Please invoke for) your servant Anas.” So Allah's Apostle did not leave anything good in the world or the Hereafter which he did not invoke (Allah to bestow) on me and said, “O Allah! Give him (i.e. Anas) property and children and bless him.” Thus I am one of the richest among the Ansar and my daughter Umaina told me that when A-Hajjaj came to Basra, more than 120 of my offspring had been buried.


## Hadith 3:204

_Narrated Mutarrif from 'Imran Ibn Husain:_

That the Prophet asked him (Imran) or asked a man and Imran was listening, “O Abu so-and-so! Have you fasted the last days of this month?” (The narrator thought that he said, “the month of Ramadan”). The man replied, “No, O Allah's Apostle!” The Prophet said to him, “When you finish your fasting (of Ramadan) fast two days (in Shawwal).” Through another series of narrators 'Imran said, “The Prophet said, '(Have you fasted) the last days of Sha'ban?”


## Hadith 3:205

_Narrated Muhammad bin 'Abbas:_

I asked Jabir “Did the Prophet forbid fasting on Fridays?” He replied, “Yes.” (Other narrators added, “If he intends to fast only that day.”)


## Hadith 3:206

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “None of you should fast on Friday unless he fasts a day before or after it.”


## Hadith 3:207

_Narrated Abu Aiyub from Juwairiya bint Al-Harith:_

The Prophet visited her (Juwairiya) on a Friday and she was fasting. He asked her, “Did you fast yesterday?” She said, “No.” He said, “Do you intend to fast tomorrow?” She said, “No.” He said, “Then break your fast.” Through another series of narrators, Abu Aiyub is reported to have said, “He ordered her and she broke her fast.”


## Hadith 3:208

_Narrated Alqama:_

I asked 'Aisha “Did Allah s Apostle, use to choose some special days (for fasting)?” She replied, “No, but he used to be regular (constant) (in his service of worshipping). Who amongst you can endure what Allah's Apostle used to endure?”


## Hadith 3:209

_Narrated Um Al-Fadl bint Al-Harith:_

“While the people were with me on the day of 'Arafat they differed as to whether the Prophet was fasting or not; some said that he was fasting while others said that he was not fasting. So, I sent to him a bowl full of milk while he was riding over his camel and he drank it.”


## Hadith 3:210

_Narrated Maimuna:_

The people doubted whether the Prophet was fasting on the day of 'Arafat or not, so I sent milk while he was standing at 'Arafat, he drank it and the people were looking at him.


## Hadith 3:211

_Narrated Abu 'Ubaid:_

(the slave of Ibn Azhar) I witnessed the 'Id with 'Umar bin Al-Kattab who said, Allah's Apostle has forbidden people to fast on the day on which you break fasting (the fasts of Ramadan) and the day on which you eat the meat of your sacrifices (the first day of 'Id ul Fitr and 'Id ul-Adha).


## Hadith 3:212

_Narrated Abu Sa'id:_

The Prophet forbade the fasting of 'Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha (two feast days) and also the wearing of As-Samma' (a single garment covering the whole body), and sitting with one's leg drawn up while being wrapped in one garment. He also forbade the prayers after the Fajr (morning) and the 'Asr (afternoon) prayers.


## Hadith 3:213

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Two fasts and two kinds of sale are forbidden: fasting on the day of 'Id ul Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha and the kinds of sale called Mulamasa and Munabadha. (These two kinds of sale used to be practiced in the days of Pre-lslamic period of ignorance; Mulamasa means when you touch something displayed for sale you have to buy it; Munabadha means when the seller throws something to you, you have to buy it.)


## Hadith 3:214

_Narrated Ziyad bin Jubair:_

A man went to Ibn 'Umar I. and said, “A man vowed to fast one day (the sub-narrator thinks that he said that the day was Monday), and that day happened to be 'Id day.” Ibn 'Umar said, “Allah orders vows to be fulfilled and the Prophet forbade the fasting on this day (i.e. Id).”


## Hadith 3:215

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

(who fought in twelve Ghazawat in the company of the Prophet). I heard four things from the Prophet and they won my admiration. He said;

1\. "No lady should travel on a journey of two days except with her husband or a Dhi-Mahram;

2\. "No fasting is permissible on the two days of Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Adha;

3\. "No prayer (may be offered) after the morning compulsory prayer until the sun rises; and no prayer after the 'Asr prayer till the sun sets;

4\. “One should travel only for visiting three Masajid (Mosques): Masjid-ul-Haram (Mecca), Masjid-ul-Aqsa (Jerusalem), and this (my) Mosque (at Medina).”


## Hadith 3:216

_Narrated 'Aisha and Ibn 'Umar:_

Nobody was allowed to fast on the days of Tashrlq except those who could not afford the Hadi (Sacrifice).


## Hadith 3:217

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Fasting for those who perform ,Hajj-at-Tamattu' (in lieu of the Hadi which they cannot afford) may be performed up to the day of 'Arafat. And if one does not get a Hadi and has not fasted (before the 'Id) then one should fast of the days of Mina. (11, 12 and 13th of Dhul Hajja).


## Hadith 3:218

_Narrated Salim's father:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever wishes may fast on the day of ‘Ashura’.”


## Hadith 3:219

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle ordered (the Muslims) to fast on the day of 'Ashura', and when fasting in the month of Ramadan was prescribed, it became optional for one to fast on that day ('Ashura') or not.


## Hadith 3:220

_Narrated Aisha:_

Quraish used to fast on the day of ‘Ashura’ in the Pre-lslamic period, and Allah's Apostle too, used to fast on that day. When he came to Medina, he fasted on that day and ordered others to fast, too. Later when the fasting of the month of Ramadan was prescribed, he gave up fasting on the day of 'Ashura' and it became optional for one to fast on it or not.


## Hadith 3:221

_Narrated Humaid bin 'Abdur Rahman:_

That he heard Muawiya bin Abi Sufyan on the day of ‘Ashura’ during the year he performed the Hajj, saying on the pulpit, “O the people of Medina! Where are your Religious Scholars? I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'This is the day of ‘Ashura’. Allah has not enjoined its fasting on you but I am fasting it. You have the choice either to fast or not to fast (on this day).' ”


## Hadith 3:222

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet came to Medina and saw the Jews fasting on the day of Ashura. He asked them about that. They replied, “This is a good day, the day on which Allah rescued Bani Israel from their enemy. So, Moses fasted this day.” The Prophet said, “We have more claim over Moses than you.” So, the Prophet fasted on that day and ordered (the Muslims) to fast (on that day).


## Hadith 3:223

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

The day of ‘Ashura’ was considered as 'Id day by the Jews. So the Prophet ordered, “I recommend you (Muslims) to fast on this day.”


## Hadith 3:224

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

I never saw the Prophet seeking to fast on a day more (preferable to him) than this day, the day of ‘Ashura’, or this month, i.e. the month of Ramadan.


## Hadith 3:225

_Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:_

The Prophet ordered a man from the tribe of Bani Aslam to announce amongst the people that whoever had eaten should fast the rest of the day, and whoever had not eaten should continue his fast, as that day was the day of ‘Ashura’ .


## Hadith 3:226

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying regarding Ramadan, “Whoever prayed at night in it (the month of Ramadan) out of sincere Faith and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his previous sins will be forgiven.”


## Hadith 3:227

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever prayed at night the whole month of Ramadan out of sincere Faith and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his previous sins will be forgiven.” Ibn Shihab (a sub-narrator) said, “Allah's Apostle died and the people continued observing that (i.e. Nawafil offered individually, not in congregation), and it remained as it was during the Caliphate of Abu Bakr and in the early days of ‘Umar’s Caliphate.” 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Abdul Qari said, “I went out in the company of 'Umar bin Al-Khattab one night in Ramadan to the mosque and found the people praying in different groups. A man praying alone or a man praying with a little group behind him. So, 'Umar said, 'In my opinion I would better collect these (people) under the leadership of one Qari (Reciter) (i.e. let them pray in congregation!)'. So, he made up his mind to congregate them behind Ubai bin Ka'b. Then on another night I went again in his company and the people were praying behind their reciter. On that, 'Umar remarked, 'What an excellent Bid'a (i.e. innovation in religion) this is; but the prayer which they do not perform, but sleep at its time is better than the one they are offering.' He meant the prayer in the last part of the night. (In those days) people used to pray in the early part of the night.”


## Hadith 3:228

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to pray (at night) in Ramadan.


## Hadith 3:229

_Narrated 'Ursa:_

That he was informed by 'Aisha, “Allah's Apostle went out in the middle of the night and prayed in the mosque and some men prayed behind him. In the morning, the people spoke about it and then a large number of them gathered and prayed behind him (on the second night). In the next morning the people again talked about it and on the third night the mosque was full with a large number of people. Allah's Apostle came out and the people prayed behind him. On the fourth night the Mosque was overwhelmed with people and could not accommodate them, but the Prophet came out (only) for the morning prayer. When the morning prayer was finished he recited Tashah-hud and (addressing the people) said, ”Amma ba'du, your presence was not hidden from me but I was afraid lest the night prayer (Qiyam) should be enjoined on you and you might not be able to carry it on.“ So, Allah's Apostle died and the situation remained like that (i.e. people prayed individually). ”


## Hadith 3:230

_Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur Rahman:_

that he asked 'Aisha “How was the prayer of Allah's Apostle in Ramadan?” She replied, “He did not pray more than eleven Rakat in Ramadan or in any other month. He used to pray four Rakat —— let alone their beauty and length——and then he would pray four ——let alone their beauty and length ——and then he would pray three Rakat (Witr).” She added, “I asked, 'O Allah's Apostle! Do you sleep before praying the Witr?' He replied, 'O 'Aisha! My eyes sleep but my heart does not sleep.”


## Hadith 3:231

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever fasted the month of Ramadan out of sincere Faith (i.e. belief) and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his past sins will be forgiven, and whoever stood for the prayers in the night of Qadr out of sincere Faith and hoping for a reward from Allah, then all his previous sins will be forgiven .”


## Hadith 3:232

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Some men amongst the companions of the Prophet were shown in their dreams that the night of Qadr was in the last seven nights of Ramadan. Allah's Apostle said, “It seems that all your dreams agree that (the Night of Qadr) is in the last seven nights, and whoever wants to search for it (i.e. the Night of Qadr) should search in the last seven (nights of Ramadan).”


## Hadith 3:233

_Narrated Abu Salama:_

I asked Abu Sa'id, and he was a friend of mine, (about the Night of Qadr) and he said, “We practiced Itikaf (seclusion in the mosque) in the middle third of the month of Ramadan with the Prophet . In the morning of the 20th of Ramadan, the Prophet came and addressed us and said, 'I was informed of (the date of the Night of Qadr) but I was caused to forget it; so search for it in the odd nights of the last ten nights of the month of Ramadan. (In the dream) I saw myself prostrating in mud and water (as a sign). So, whoever was in l'tikaf with me should return to it with me (for another 10-day's period)', and we returned. At that time there was no sign of clouds in the sky but suddenly a cloud came and it rained till rain-water started leaking through the roof of the mosque which was made of date-palm leaf stalks. Then the prayer was established and I saw Allah's Apostle prostrating in mud and water and I saw the traces of mud on his forehead.”


## Hadith 3:234

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Search for the Night of Qadr in the odd nights of the last ten days of Ramadan.”


## Hadith 3:235

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf (in the mosque) in the middle third of Ramadan and after passing the twenty nights he used to go back to his house on the 21st, and the people who were in Itikaf with him also used to go back to their houses. Once in Ramadan, in which he practiced Itikaf, he established the night prayers at the night in which he used to return home, and then he addressed the people and ordered them whatever Allah wished him to order and said, “I used to practice Itikaf for these ten days (i.e. the middle 113rd but now I intend to stay in Itikaf for the last ten days (of the month); so whoever was in Itikaf with me should stay at his place of seclusion. I have verily been shown (the date of) this Night (of Qadr) but I have forgotten it. So search for it in the odd nights of the last ten days (of this month). I also saw myself (in the dream) prostrating in mud and water.” On the night of the 21st, the sky was covered with clouds and it rained, and the rain-water started leaking through the roof of the mosque at the praying place of the Prophet . I saw with my own eyes the Prophet at the completion of the morning prayer leaving with his face covered with mud and water.


## Hadith 3:236

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “Look for (the Night of Qadr).”


## Hadith 3:237

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf in the last ten nights of Ramadan and used to say, “Look for the Night of Qadr in the last ten nights of the month of Ramadan ,”


## Hadith 3:238

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “Look for the Night of Qadr in the last ten nights of Ramadan ,' on the night when nine or seven or five nights remain out of the last ten nights of Ramadan (i.e. 21, 23, 25, respectively).”


## Hadith 3:239

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The Night of Qadr is in the last ten nights of the month (Ramadan), either on the first nine or in the last (remaining) seven nights (of Ramadan).” Ibn 'Abbas added, “Search for it on the twenty-fourth (of Ramadan).”


## Hadith 3:240

_Narrated 'Ubada bin As-Samit:_

The Prophet came out to inform us about the Night of Qadr but two Muslims were quarreling with each other. So, the Prophet said, "I came out to inform you about the Night of Qadr but such-and-such persons were quarreling, so the news about it had been taken away; yet that might be for your own good, so search for it on the 29th, 27th and 25th (of Ramadan).


## Hadith 3:241

_Narrated Aisha:_

With the start of the last ten days of Ramadan, the Prophet used to tighten his waist belt (i.e. work hard) and used to pray all the night, and used to keep his family awake for the prayers.


## Hadith 3:242

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle used to practise Itikaf in the last ten days of the month of Ramadan.


## Hadith 3:243

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) The Prophet used to practice Itikaf in the last ten days of Ramadan till he died and then his wives used to practice Itikaf after him.


## Hadith 3:244

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf in the middle ten days of Ramadan and once he stayed in Itikaf till the night of the twenty-first and it was the night in the morning of which he used to come out of his Itikaf. The Prophet said, “Whoever was in Itikaf with me should stay in Itikaf for the last ten days, for I was informed (of the date) of the Night (of Qadr) but I have been caused to forget it. (In the dream) I saw myself prostrating in mud and water in the morning of that night. So, look for it in the last ten nights and in the odd ones of them.” It rained that night and the roof of the mosque dribbled as it was made of leaf stalks of date-palms. I saw with my own eyes the mark of mud and water on the forehead of the Prophet (i.e. in the morning of the twenty-first).


## Hadith 3:245

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to (put) bend his head (out) to me while he was in Itikaf in the mosque during my monthly periods and I would comb and oil his hair.


## Hadith 3:246

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle used to let his head in (the house) while he was in the mosque and I would comb and oil his hair. When in Itikaf he used not to enter the house except for a need.


## Hadith 3:247

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet used to embrace me during my menses. He also used to put his head out of the mosque while he was in Itikaf, and I would wash it during my menses.


## Hadith 3:248

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Umar asked the Prophet “I vowed in the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance to stay in Itikaf for one night in Al-Masjid al-Haram.” The Prophet said to him, “Fulfill your vow.”


## Hadith 3:249

_Narrated 'Amra:_

Aisha said, “the Prophet used to practice Itikaf in the last ten days of Ramadan and I used to pitch a tent for him, and after offering the morning prayer, he used to enter the tent.” Hafsa asked the permission of 'Aisha to pitch a tent for her and she allowed her and she pitched her tent. When Zainab bint Jahsh saw it, she pitched another tent. In the morning the Prophet noticed the tents. He said, 'What is this?“ He was told of the whole situation. Then the Prophet said, ”Do you think that they intended to do righteousness by doing this?“ He therefore abandoned the Itikaf in that month and practiced Itikaf for ten days in the month of Shawwal.”


## Hadith 3:250

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet intended to practice Itikaf and when he reached the place where he intended to perform Itikaf, he saw some tents, the tents of 'Aisha, Hafsa and Zainab. So, he said, “Do you consider that they intended to do righteousness by doing this?” And then he went away and did not perform Itikaf (in Ramadan) but performed it in the month of Shawwal for ten days.


## Hadith 3:251

_Narrated Ali bin Al-Husain:_

Safiya, the wife of the Prophet told me that she went to Allah's Apostle to visit him in the mosque while he was in Itikaf in the last ten days of Ramadan. She had a talk with him for a while, then she got up in order to return home. The Prophet accompanied her. When they reached the gate of the mosque, opposite the door of Um-Salama, two Ansari men were passing by and they greeted Allah's Apostle . He told them: Do not run away! And said, “She is (my wife) Safiya bint Huyai.” Both of them said, “Subhan Allah, (How dare we think of any evil) O Allah's Apostle!” And they felt it. The Prophet said (to them), “Satan reaches everywhere in the human body as blood reaches in it, (everywhere in one's body). I was afraid lest Satan might insert an evil thought in your minds.”


## Hadith 3:252

_Narrated Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman:_

I asked Abu Said Al-Khudri, “Did you hear Allah's Apostle talking about the Night of Qadr?” He replied in the affirmative and said, "Once we were in Itikaf with Allah's Apostle in the middle ten days of (Ramadan) and we came out of it in the morning of the twentieth, and Allah's Apostle- delivered a sermon on the 20th (of Ramadan) and said, 'I was informed (of the date) of the Night of Qadr (in my dream) but had forgotten it. So, look for it in the odd nights of the last ten nights of the month of Ramadan. I saw myself prostrating in mud and water on that night (as a sign of the Night of Qadr). So, whoever had been in Itikaf with Allah's Apostle should return for it.' The people returned to the mosque (for Itikaf). There was no trace of clouds in the sky. But all of a sudden a cloud came and it rained. Then the prayer was established (they stood for the prayer) and Allah's Apostle prostrated in mud and water and I saw mud over the forehead and the nose of the Prophet.


## Hadith 3:253

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

One of the wives of Allah's Apostle practiced Itikaf with him while she ad bleeding in between her periods and she would see red (blood) or yellowish traces, and sometimes we put a tray beneath her when she offered the prayer.


## Hadith 3:254

_Narrated 'Ali bin Al-Husain (from Safiya, the Prophet's wife):_

The wives of the Prophet were with him in the mosque (while he was in Itikaf) and then they departed and the Prophet said to Safiya bint Huyai, “Don't hurry up, for I shall accompany you,” (and her dwelling was in the house of Usama). The Prophet went out and in the meantime two Ansari men met him and they looked at the Prophet and passed by. The Prophet said to them, “Come here. She is (my wife) Safiya bint Huyai.” They replied, “Subhan Allah, (How dare we think of evil) O Allah's Apostle! (we never expect anything bad from you).” The Prophet replied, “Satan circulates in the human being as blood circulates in the body, and I was afraid lest Satan might insert an evil thought in your minds.”


## Hadith 3:255

_Narrated 'Ali bin Al-Husain from Safiya:_

Safiya went to the Prophet while he was in Itikaf. When she returned, the Prophet accompanied her walking. An Ansari man saw him. When the Prophet noticed him, he called him and said, “Come here. She is Safiya. (Sufyan a sub-narrator perhaps said that the Prophet had said, ”This is Safiya“). And Satan circulates in the body of Adam's offspring as his blood circulates in it.”

(A sub-narrator asked Sufyan, “Did Safiya visit him at night?” He said, “Of course, at night.”)


## Hadith 3:256

_Narrated Abu Said:_

We practiced Itikaf with Allah's Apostle in the middle ten days (of Ramadan). In the morning of the twentieth (of Ramadan) we shifted our baggage, but Allah's Apostle came to us and said, “Whoever was m Itikaf should return to his place of Itikaf, for I saw (i.e. was informed about the date of) this Night (of Qadr) and saw myself prostrating in mud and water.” When I returned to my place the sky was overcast with clouds and it rained. By Him Who sent Muhammad with the Truth, the sky was covered with clouds from the end of that day, and the mosque which was roofed with leaf-stalks of date palm trees (leaked with rain) and I saw the trace of mud and water over the nose of the Prophet and its tip.


## Hadith 3:257

_Narrated 'Amra bint 'Abdur-Rahman from 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf every year in the month of Ramadan. And after offering the morning prayer, he used to enter the place of his Itikaf. 'Aisha asked his permission to let her practice Itikaf and he allowed her, and so she pitched a tent in the mosque. When Hafsa heard of that, she also pitched a tent (for herself), and when Zainab heard of that, she too pitched another tent. When, in the morning, Allah's Apostle had finished the morning prayer, he saw four tents and asked, “What is this?” He was informed about it. He then said, “What made them do this? Is it righteousness? Remove the tents, for I do not want to see them.” So, the tents were removed. The Prophet did not perform Itikaf that year in the month of Ramadan, but did it in the last ten days of Shawwal.


## Hadith 3:258

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, “O Allah's Apostle! I vowed in the Pre-lslamic period to perform Itikaf in Al-Masjid-al-Haram for one night.” The Prophet said, “Fulfill your vow.” So, he performed Itikaf for one night.


## Hadith 3:259

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

that 'Umar had vowed in the Pre-lslamic period to perform Itikaf in Al-Masjid-al-Haram. (A sub-narrator thinks that 'Umar vowed to perform Itikaf for one night.) Allah's Apostle said to 'Umar, “Fulfill your vow.”


## Hadith 3:260

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet used to perform Itikaf every year in the month of Ramadan for ten days, and when it was the year of his death, he stayed in Itikaf for twenty days.


## Hadith 3:261

_Narrated 'Amra bint 'AbdurRahman from 'Aisha: Allah's Apostle_

mentioned that he would practice Itikaf in the last ten days of Ramadan. 'Aisha asked his permission to perform Itikaf and he permitted her. Hafsa asked 'Aisha to take his permission for


## Hadith 3:262

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

Aisha during her menses used to comb and oil the hair of the Prophet while he used to be in Itikaf in the mosque. He would stretch out his head towards her while she was in her chamber.


## Hadith 3:263

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

You people say that Abu Huraira tells many narrations from Allah's Apostle and you also wonder why the emigrants and Ansar do not narrate from Allah's Apostle as Abu Huraira does. My emigrant brothers were busy in the market while I used to stick to Allah's Apostle content with what fills my stomach; so I used to be present when they were absent and I used to remember when they used to forget, and my Ansari brothers used to be busy with their properties and I was one of the poor men of Suffa. I used to remember the narrations when they used to forget. No doubt, Allah's Apostle once said, “Whoever spreads his garment till I have finished my present speech and then gathers it to himself, will remember whatever I will say.” So, I spread my colored garment which I was wearing till Allah's Apostle had finished his saying, and then I gathered it to my chest. So, I did not forget any of that narrations.


## Hadith 3:264

_Narrated Ibrahim bin Sad from his father from his grand-father:_

Abdur Rahman bin Auf said, “When we came to Medina as emigrants, Allah's Apostle established a bond of brotherhood between me and Sad bin Ar-Rabi'. Sad bin Ar-Rabi' said (to me), 'I am the richest among the Ansar, so I will give you half of my wealth and you may look at my two wives and whichever of the two you may choose I will divorce her, and when she has completed the prescribed period (before marriage) you may marry her.' Abdur-Rahman replied, ”I am not in need of all that. Is there any market-place where trade is practiced?' He replied, “The market of Qainuqa.” Abdur-Rahman went to that market the following day and brought some dried butter-milk (yogurt) and butter, and then he continued going there regularly. Few days later, 'AbdurRahman came having traces of yellow (scent) on his body. Allah's Apostle asked him whether he had got married. He replied in the affirmative. The Prophet said, 'Whom have you married?' He replied, 'A woman from the Ansar.' Then the Prophet asked, 'How much did you pay her?' He replied, '(I gave her) a gold piece equal in weigh to a date stone (or a date stone of gold)! The Prophet said, 'Give a Walima (wedding banquet) even if with one sheep .' "


## Hadith 3:265

_Narrated Anas:_

When Abdur-Rahman bin Auf came to Medina, the Prophet established a bond of brotherhood between him and Sad bin Ar-Rabi al-Ansari. Sad was a rich man, so he said to 'Abdur-Rahman, “I will give you half of my property and will help you marry.” 'Abdur-Rahman said (to him), “May Allah bless you in your family and property. Show me the market.” So 'Abdur-Rahman did not return from the market) till he gained some dried buttermilk (yoghurt) and butter (through trading). He brought that to his house-hold. We stayed for some-time (or as long as Allah wished), and then Abdur-Rahman came, scented with yellowish perfume. The Prophet said (to him) “What is this?” He replied, “I got married to an Ansari woman.” The Prophet asked, “What did you pay her?” He replied, “A gold stone or gold equal to the weight of a date stone.” The Prophet said (to him), “Give a wedding banquet even if with one sheep.”


## Hadith 3:266

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

'Ukaz, Majanna and Dhul-Majaz were market-places in the Pre-lslamic period of ignorance. When Islam came, Muslims felt that marketing there might be a sin. So, the Divine Inspiration came: “There is no harm for you to seek the bounty of your Lord (in the seasons of Hajj).” (2.198) Ibn 'Abbas recited the Verse in this way.


## Hadith 3:267

_Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:_

The Prophet said “Both legal and illegal things are obvious, and in between them are (suspicious) doubtful matters. So who-ever forsakes those doubtful things lest he may commit a sin, will definitely avoid what is clearly illegal; and who-ever indulges in these (suspicious) doubtful things bravely, is likely to commit what is clearly illegal. Sins are Allah's Hima (i.e. private pasture) and whoever pastures (his sheep) near it, is likely to get in it at any moment.”


## Hadith 3:268

_Narrated Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika:_

y the same woman)?" His wife was the daughter of Abu Ihab-al-Tamimi.


## Hadith 3:269

_Narrated Aisha:_

Utba bin Abu Waqqas took a firm promise from his brother Sad bin Abu Waqqas to take the son of the slave-girl of Zam'a into his custody as he was his (i.e. 'Utba's) son. In the year of the Conquest (of Mecca) Sad bin Abu Waqqas took him, and said that he was his brother's son, and his brother took a promise from him to that effect. 'Abu bin Zam'a got up and said, “He is my brother and the son of the slave-girl of my father and was born on my father's bed.” Then they both went to the Prophet Sad said, “O Allah's Apostle! He is the son of my brother and he has taken a promise from me that I will take him.” 'Abu bin Zam'a said, “(He is) my brother and the son of my father's slave-girl and was born on my father's bed.” Allah's Apostle said, “The boy is for you. O 'Abu bin Zam'a.” Then the Prophet said, “The son is for the bed (i.e the man on whose bed he was born) and stones (disappointment and deprivation) for the one who has done illegal sexual intercourse.” The Prophet told his wife Sauda bint Zam'a to screen herself from that boy as he noticed a similarity between the boy and 'Utba. So, the boy did not see her till he died.


## Hadith 3:270

_Narrated 'Adi bin Hatim:_

I asked Allah's Apostle about Al Mirad (i.e. a sharp-edged piece of wood or a piece of wood provided with a piece of iron used for hunting). He replied, “If the game is hit by its sharp edge, eat it, and if it is hit by its broad side, do not eat it, for it has been beaten to death.” I asked, “O Allah's Apostle! I release my dog by the name of Allah and find with it at the game, another dog on which I have not mentioned the name of Allah, and I do not know which one of them caught the game.” Allah's Apostle said (to him), 'Don't eat it as you have mentioned the name of Allah on your dog and not on the other dog."


## Hadith 3:271

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet passed by a fallen date and said, “Were it not for my doubt that this might have been given in charity, I would have eaten it.” And narrated Abu Huraira the Prophet said, “I found a date-fruit fallen on my bed.”


## Hadith 3:272

_Narrated 'Abbas bin Tamim:_

that his uncle said: “The Prophet was asked: If a person feels something during his prayer; should one interrupt his prayer?” The Prophet said: No! You should not give it up unless you hear a sound or need of repeating ablution unless you detect a smell or hear a sound."


## Hadith 3:273

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Some people said, “O Allah's Apostle! Meat is brought to us by some people and we are not sure whether the name of Allah has been mentioned on it or not (at the time of slaughtering the animals).” Allah's Apostle said (to them), “Mention the name of Allah and eat it.”


## Hadith 3:274

_Narrated Jabir:_

While we were offering the prayer with the Prophet a caravan carrying food came from Sham. The people looked towards the caravan (and went to it) and only twelve persons remained with the Prophet. So, the Divine Inspiration came; “But when they see some bargain or some amusement, they disperse headlong to it.” (62.11)


## Hadith 3:275

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “A time will come when one will not care how one gains one's money, legally or illegally.”


## Hadith 3:276

_Narrated Abu Al-Minhal:_

I used to practice money exchange, and I asked Zaid bin 'Arqam about it, and he narrated what the Prophet said in the following: Abu Al-Minhal said, “I asked Al-Bara' bin 'Azib and Zaid bin Arqam about practicing money exchange. They replied, 'We were traders in the time of Allah's Apostle and I asked Allah's Apostle about money exchange. He replied, 'If it is from hand to hand, there is no harm in it; otherwise it is not permissible.”


## Hadith 3:277

_Narrated 'Ubai bin 'Umar:_

Abu Musa asked Umar to admit him but he was not admitted as 'Umar was busy, so Abu Musa went back. When 'Umar finished his job he said, “Didn't I hear the voice of 'Abdullah bin Qais? Let him come in.” 'Umar was told that he had left. So, he sent for him and on his arrival, he (Abu Musa) said, “We were ordered to do so (i.e. to leave if not admitted after asking permission thrice). 'Umar told him, ”Bring witness in proof of your statement.“ Abu Musa went to the Ansar's meeting places and asked them. They said, ”None amongst us will give this witness except the youngest of us, Abu Said Al-Khudri. Abu Musa then took Abu Said Al-Khudri (to 'Umar) and 'Umar said, surprisingly, “Has this order of Allah's Apostle been hidden from me?” (Then he added), “I used to be busy trading in markets.”


## Hadith 3:278

_Narrated Jabir:_

A caravan arrived (at Medina) while we were offering the Jumua prayer with the Prophet. The people left out for the caravan, with the exception of twelve persons. Then this Verse was revealed: 'But when they see some bargain or some amusement, they disperse headlong to it and leave you standing." (62.11)


## Hadith 3:279

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “If a woman gives in charity from her house meals without wasting (i.e. being extravagant), she will get the reward for her giving, and her husband will also get the reward for his earning and the storekeeper will also get a similar reward. The acquisition of the reward of none of them will reduce the reward of the others.”


## Hadith 3:280

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “If a woman gives something (i.e. in charity) from her husband's earnings without his permission, she will get half his reward.”


## Hadith 3:281

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “whoever desires an expansion in his sustenance and age, should keep good relations with his Kith and kin.”


## Hadith 3:282

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet purchased food grains from a Jew on credit and mortgaged his iron armor to him.


## Hadith 3:283

_Narrated Qatada:_

Anas went to the Prophet with barley bread having some dissolved fat on it. The Prophet had mortgaged his armor to a Jew in Medina and took from him some barley for his family. Anas heard him saying, “The household of Muhammad did not possess even a single Sa of wheat or food grains for the evening meal, although he has nine wives to look after.” (See Hadith No. 685)


## Hadith 3:284

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When Abu Bakr As-Siddiq was chosen Caliph, he said, “My people know that my profession was not incapable of providing substance to my family. And as I will be busy serving the Muslim nation, my family will eat from the National Treasury of Muslims, and I will practise the profession of serving the Muslims.”


## Hadith 3:285

_Narrated Aisha:_

The companions of Allah's Apostle used to practise manual labor, so their sweat used to smell, and they were advised to take a bath.


## Hadith 3:286

_Narrated Al-Miqdam:_

The Prophet said, “Nobody has ever eaten a better meal than that which one has earned by working with one's own hands. The Prophet of Allah, David used to eat from the earnings of his manual labor.”


## Hadith 3:287

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The Prophet David used not to eat except from the earnings of his manual labor.”


## Hadith 3:288

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “One would rather cut and carry a bundle of wood on his back than ask somebody who may or may not live him.”


## Hadith 3:289

_Narrated Az-Zubair bin Al-Awwam:_

The Prophet said, “One would rather take a rope and cut wood and carry it than ask others).”


## Hadith 3:290

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle said, “May Allah's mercy be on him who is lenient in his buying, selling, and in demanding back his money.”


## Hadith 3:291

_Narrated Hudhaifa:_

The Prophet said, “Before your time the angels received the soul of a man and asked him, 'Did you do any good deeds (in your life)?' He replied, 'I used to order my employees to grant time to the rich person to pay his debts at his convenience.' So Allah said to the angels; ”Excuse him." Rabi said that (the dead man said), ‘I used to be easy to the rich and grant time to the poor.’ Or, in another narration, ‘grant time to the well-off and forgive the needy,’ or, ‘accept from the well-off and forgive the needy.’


## Hadith 3:292

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “There was a merchant who used to lend the people, and whenever his debtor was in straitened circumstances, he would say to his employees, ‘Forgive him so that Allah may forgive us.’ So, Allah forgave him.”


## Hadith 3:293

_Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The seller and the buyer have the right to keep or return goods as long as they have not parted or till they part; and if both the parties spoke the truth and described the defects and qualities (of the goods), then they would be blessed in their transaction, and if they told lies or hid something, then the blessings of their transaction would be lost.”


## Hadith 3:294

_Narrated Abu Said:_

We used to be given mixed dates (from the booty) and used to sell (barter) two Sas of those dates) for one Sa (of good dates). The Prophet said (to us), “No (bartering of) two Sas for one Sa nor two Dirhams for one Dirham is permissible”, (as that is a kind of usury). (See Hadith No. 405).


## Hadith 3:295

_Narrated Abu Mas'ud:_

An Ansari man, called Abu Shu'aib, came and told his butcher slave, “Prepare meals sufficient for five persons, for I want to invite the Prophet along with four other persons as I saw signs of hunger on his face.” Abu Shu'aib invited them and another person came along with them. The Prophet said (to Abu Shu'aib), This man followed us, so if you allow him, he will join us, and if you want him to return, he will go back.“ Abu Shu'aib said, ”No, I have allowed him (i.e. he, too, is welcomed to the meal)."


## Hadith 3:296

_Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:_

The Prophet aid, “The buyer and the seller have the option to cancel or to confirm the deal, as long as they have not parted or till they part, and if they spoke the truth and told each other the defects of the things, then blessings would be in their deal, and if they hid something and told lies, the blessing of the deal would be lost.”


## Hadith 3:297

_Narrated Aisha:_

When the last Verses of Surat al- Baqara were revealed, the Prophet recited them in the mosque and proclaimed the trade of alcohol as illegal.


## Hadith 3:298

_Narrated Samura bin Jundab:_

The Prophet said, “This night I dreamt that two men came and took me to a Holy land whence we proceeded on till we reached a river of blood, where a man was standing, and on its bank was standing another man with stones in his hands. The man in the middle of the river tried to come out, but the other threw a stone in his mouth and forced him to go back to his original place. So, whenever he tried to come out, the other man would throw a stone in his mouth and force him to go back to his former place. I asked, ‘Who is this?’ I was told, 'The person in the river was a Riba-eater.”


## Hadith 3:299

_Narrated 'Aun bin Abu Juhaifa:_

My father bought a slave who practiced the profession of cupping. (My father broke the slave's instruments of cupping). I asked my father why he had done so. He replied, “The Prophet forbade the acceptance of the price of a dog or blood, and also forbade the profession of tattooing, getting tattooed and receiving or giving Riba, (usury), and cursed the picture-makers.”


## Hadith 3:300

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “The swearing (by the seller) may persuade the buyer to purchase the goods but that will be deprived of Allah's blessing.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_200">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:101 to 3:200</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_400">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:301 to 3:400</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
