---
title: "Hadith 3:301 to 3:400"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_300">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:201 to 3:300</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_500">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:401 to 3:500</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 3:301

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa:_

A man displayed some goods in the market and swore by Allah that he had been offered so much for that, that which was not offered, and he said so, so as to cheat a Muslim. On that occasion the following Verse was revealed: "Verily! Those who purchase a small gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and their oaths (They shall have no portion in the Hereafter ..etc.)' (3.77)


## Hadith 3:302

_Narrated 'Ali:_

I got an old she-camel as my share from the booty, and the Prophet had given me another from Al-Khumus. And when I intended to marry Fatima (daughter of the Prophet), I arranged that a goldsmith from the tribe of Bani Qainuqa' would accompany me in order to bring Idhkhir and then sell it to the goldsmiths and use its price for my marriage banquet.


## Hadith 3:303

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Allah made Mecca a sanctuary and it was neither permitted for anyone before, nor will it be permitted for anyone after me (to fight in it). And fighting in it was made legal for me for a few hours of a day only. None is allowed to uproot its thorny shrubs or to cut down its trees or to chase its game or to pick up its Luqata (fallen things) except by a person who would announce it publicly.” 'Abbas bin 'Abdul-Muttlib requested the Prophet, “Except Al-Idhkhir, for our goldsmiths and for the roofs of our houses.” The Prophet said, “Except Al-Idhkhir.” 'Ikrima said, “Do you know what is meant by chasing its game? It is to drive it out of the shade and sit in its place.” Khalid said, “('Abbas said: Al-Idhkhir) for our goldsmiths and our graves.”


## Hadith 3:304

_Narrated Khabbab:_

I was a blacksmith in the Pre-lslamic period, and 'Asi bin Wail owed me some money, so I went to him to demand it. He said (to me), “I will not pay you unless you disbelieve Muhammad.” I said, “I will not disbelieve till Allah kills you and then you get resurrected.” He said, “Leave me till I die and get resurrected, then I will be given wealth and children and I will pay you your debt.” On that occasion it was revealed to the Prophet:

'Have you seen him who disbelieved in Our signs and says: Surely I will be given wealth and children? Has he known the unseen, or has he taken a covenant from the Beneficent (Allah)? (19.77-78)


## Hadith 3:305

_Narrated Ishaq bin 'Abdullah bin Abu Talha:_

I heard Anas bin Malik saying, “A tailor invited Allah's Apostle to a meal which he had prepared. ” Anas bin Malik said, “I accompanied Allah's Apostle to that meal. He served the Prophet with bread and soup made with gourd and dried meat. I saw the Prophet taking the pieces of gourd from the dish.” Anas added, “Since that day I have continued to like gourd.”


## Hadith 3:306

_Narrated Abu Hazim:_

I heard Sahl bin Sad saying, “A woman brought a Burda (i.e. a square piece of cloth having edging). I asked, ‘Do you know what a Burda is?’ They replied in the affirmative and said, ”It is a cloth sheet with woven margins.“ Sahl went on, ”She addressed the Prophet and said, ‘I have woven it with my hands for you to wear.’ The Prophet took it as he was in need of it, and came to us wearing it as a waist sheet. One of us said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Give it to me to wear.' The Prophet agreed to give it to him. The Prophet sat with the people for a while and then returned (home), wrapped that waist sheet and sent it to him. The people said to that man, 'You haven't done well by asking him for it when you know that he never turns down anybody's request.' The man replied, 'By Allah, I have not asked him for it except to use it as my shroud when I die.“ Sahl added; ”Later it (i.e. that sheet) was his shroud."


## Hadith 3:307

_Narrated Abu Hazim:_

Some men came to Sahl bin Sad to ask him about the pulpit. He replied, "Allah's Apostle sent for a woman (Sahl named her) (this message): 'Order your slave carpenter to make pieces of wood (i.e. a pulpit) for me so that I may sit on it while addressing the people.' So, she ordered him to make it from the tamarisk of the forest. He brought it to her and she sent it to Allah's Apostle . Allah's Apostle ordered it to be placed in the mosque: so, it was put and he sat on it.


## Hadith 3:308

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah: An Ansari woman said to Allah's Apostle,_

“O Allah's Apostle! Shall I make something for you to sit on, as I have a slave who is a carpenter?” He replied, “If you wish.” So, she got a pulpit made for him. When it was Friday


## Hadith 3:309

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle bought food grains from a Jew on credit and mortgaged his armor to him.


## Hadith 3:310

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

I was with the Prophet in a Ghazwa (Military Expedition) and my camel was slow and exhausted. The Prophet came up to me and said, “O Jabir.” I replied, “Yes?” He said, “What is the matter with you?” I replied, “My camel is slow and tired, so I am left behind.” So, he got down and poked the camel with his stick and then ordered me to ride. I rode the camel and it became so fast that I had to hold it from going ahead of Allah's Apostle . He then asked me, have you got married?“ I replied in the affirmative. He asked, ”A virgin or a matron?“ I replied, ”I married a matron.“ The Prophet said, ”Why have you not married a virgin, so that you may play with her and she may play with you?“ Jabir replied, ”I have sisters (young in age) so I liked to marry a matron who could collect them all and comb their hair and look after them.“ The Prophet said, ”You will reach, so when you have arrived (at home), I advise you to associate with your wife (that you may have an intelligent son).“ Then he asked me, ”Would you like to sell your camel?“ I replied in the affirmative and the Prophet purchased it for one Uqiya of gold. Allah's Apostle reached before me and I reached in the morning, and when I went to the mosque, I found him at the door of the mosque. He asked me, ”Have you arrived just now?“ I replied in the affirmative. He said, ”Leave your camel and come into (the mosque) and pray two Rakat.“ I entered and offered the prayer. He told Bilal to weigh and give me one Uqiya of gold. So Bilal weighed for me fairly and I went away. The Prophet sent for me and I thought that he would return to me my camel which I hated more than anything else. But the Prophet said to me, ”Take your camel as well as its price."


## Hadith 3:311

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

'Ukaz, Majanna and Dhul-Majaz were markets in the Pre-lslamic period. When the people embraced Islam they considered it a sin to trade there. So, the following Holy Verse came:— 'There is no harm for you if you seek of the bounty of your Lord (Allah) in the Hajj season." (2.198) Ibn 'Abbas recited it like this.


## Hadith 3:312

_Narrated 'Amr:_

Here (i.e. in Mecca) there was a man called Nawwas and he had camels suffering from the disease of excessive and unquenchable thirst. Ibn 'Umar went to the partner of Nawwas and bought those camels. The man returned to Nawwas and told him that he had sold those camels. Nawwas asked him, “To whom have you sold them?” He replied, “To such and such Sheikh.” Nawwas said, “Woe to you; By Allah, that Sheikh was Ibn 'Umar.” Nawwas then went to Ibn 'Umar and said to him, “My partner sold you camels suffering from the disease of excessive thirst and he had not known you.” Ibn 'Umar told him to take them back. When Nawwas went to take them, Ibn 'Umar said to him, “Leave them there as I am happy with the decision of Allah's Apostle that there is no oppression . ”


## Hadith 3:313

_Narrated Abu Qatada:_

We set out with Allah's Apostle in the year of Hunain, (the Prophet gave me an armor). I sold that armor and bought a garden in the region of the tribe of Bani Salama and that was the first property I got after embracing Islam.


## Hadith 3:314

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The example of a good companion (who sits with you) in comparison with a bad one, is I like that of the musk seller and the blacksmith's bellows (or furnace); from the first you would either buy musk or enjoy its good smell while the bellows would either burn your clothes or your house, or you get a bad nasty smell thereof.”


## Hadith 3:315

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Abu Taiba cupped Allah's Apostle so he ordered that he be paid one Sa of dates and ordered his masters to reduce his tax (as he was a slave and had to pay a tax to them).


## Hadith 3:316

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Once the Prophet got his blood out (medically) and paid that person who had done it. If it had been illegal, the Prophet would not have paid him.


## Hadith 3:317

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:_

Once the Prophet sent to 'Umar a silken two-piece garment, and when he saw 'Umar wearing it, he said to him, “I have not sent it to you to wear. It is worn by him who has no share in the Hereafter, and I have sent it to you so that you could benefit by it (i.e. sell it).”


## Hadith 3:318

_Narrated Aisha:_

(mother of the faithful believers) I bought a cushion with pictures on it. When Allah's Apostle saw it, he kept standing at the door and did not enter the house. I noticed the sign of disgust on his face, so I said, “O Allah's Apostle! I repent to Allah and H is Apostle . (Please let me know) what sin I have done.” Allah's Apostle said, “What about this cushion?” I replied, “I bought it for you to sit and recline on.” Allah's Apostle said, “The painters (i.e. owners) of these pictures will be punished on the Day of Resurrection. It will be said to them, 'Put life in what you have created (i.e. painted).' ” The Prophet added, “The angels do not enter a house where there are pictures.”


## Hadith 3:319

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “O Bani Najjar! Suggest a price for your garden.” Part of it was a ruin and it contained some date palms.


## Hadith 3:320

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “The buyer and the seller have the option to cancel or confirm the bargain before they separate from each other or if the sale is optional.” Nafi said, “Ibn 'Umar used to separate quickly from the seller if he had bought a thing which he liked.”


## Hadith 3:321

_Narrated Haklm bin Hizam"_

The Prophet said, “The buyer and the seller have the option of cancelling or confirming the deal unless they separate.”


## Hadith 3:322

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The seller and the buyer have the option of cancelling or confirming the deal unless they separate, or one of them says to the other, 'Choose (i.e. decide to cancel or confirm the bargain now).” Perhaps he said, 'Or if it is an optional sale.' " Ibn Umar, Shuraih, Ash-Shabi, Tawus, Ata, and Ibn Abu Mulaika agree upon this judgment.


## Hadith 3:323

_Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:_

The Prophet said, “The buyer and the seller have the option of cancelling or confirming the bargain unless they separate, and if they spoke the truth and made clear the defects of the goods, them they would be blessed in their bargain, and if they told lies and hid some facts, their bargain would be deprived of Allah's blessings.”


## Hadith 3:324

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: Allah's Apostle said, "Both the buyer and_

the seller have the option of cancelling or confirming a bargain unless they separate, or the sale is optional." (See Hadith No.320).


## Hadith 3:325

_Narrated Ibn Umar: Allah's Apostle said, "Both the buyer and the_

seller have the option of cancelling or confirming the bargain, as long as they are still together, and unless they separate or one of them gives the other the option of keeping or re


## Hadith 3:326

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “No deal is settled and finalized unless the buyer and the seller separate, except if the deal is optional (whereby the validity of the bargain depends on the stipulations agreed upon).”


## Hadith 3:327

_Narrated Hakim bin Hizam:_

The Prophet said, “Both the buyer and the seller have the option of cancelling or confirming the bargain unless they separate.” The sub-narrator, Hammam said, “I found this in my book: 'Both the buyer and the seller give the option of either confirming or cancelling the bargain three times, and if they speak the truth and mention the defects, then their bargain will be blessed, and if they tell lies and conceal the defects, they might gain some financial gain but they will deprive their sale of (Allah's) blessings.”


## Hadith 3:328

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

A person came to the Prophet and told him that he was always betrayed in purchasing. The Prophet told him to say at the time of buying, “No cheating.”


## Hadith 3:329

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle said, “An army will invade the Ka'ba and when the invaders reach Al-Baida', all the ground will sink and swallow the whole army.” I said, “O Allah's Apostle! How will they sink into the ground while amongst them will be their markets (the people who worked in business and not invaders) and the people not belonging to them?” The Prophet replied, “all of those people will sink but they will be resurrected and judged according to their intentions.”


## Hadith 3:330

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The congregational prayer of anyone amongst you is more than twenty (five or twenty seven) times in reward than his prayer in the market or in his house, for if he performs ablution completely and then goes to the mosque with the sole intention of performing the prayer, and nothing urges him to proceed to the mosque except the prayer, then, on every step which he takes towards the mosque, he will be raised one degree or one of his sins will be forgiven. The angels will keep on asking Allah's forgiveness and blessings for everyone of you so long as he keeps sitting at his praying place. The angels will say, 'O Allah, bless him! O Allah, be merciful to him!' as long as he does not do Hadath or a thing which gives trouble to the other.” The Prophet further said, “One is regarded in prayer so long as one is waiting for the prayer.”


## Hadith 3:331

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

While the Prophet was in the market, somebody, called, “O Abu-l-Qasim.” The Prophet turned to him. The man said, “I have called to this (i.e. another man).” The Prophet said, “Name yourselves by my name but not by my Kuniya (name).” (In Arabic world it is the custom to call the man as the father of his eldest son, e.g. Abu-l-Qasim.)

(See Hadith No. 737, Vol. 4)


## Hadith 3:332

_Narrated Anas:_

A man at Al-Baqi' called, “O Abu-l-Qasim!” The Prophet turned to him and the man said (to the Prophet ), “I did not intend to call you.” The prophet said, “Name yourselves by my name but not by my kuniya (name).”


## Hadith 3:333

_Narrated Abu Huraira Ad-Dausi:_

Once the Prophet went out during the day. Neither did he talk to me nor I to him till he reached the market of Bani Qainuqa and then he sat in the compound of Fatima's house and asked about the small boy (his grandson Al-Hasan) but Fatima kept the boy in for a while. I thought she was either changing his clothes or giving the boy a bath. After a while the boy came out running and the Prophet embraced and kissed him and then said, 'O Allah! Love him, and love whoever loves him.'


## Hadith 3:334

_Narrated Nafi:_

Ibn 'Umar told us that the people used to buy food from the caravans in the lifetime of the Prophet. The Prophet used to forbid them to sell it at the very place where they had purchased it (but they were to wait) till they carried it to the market where foodstuff was sold. Ibn 'Umar said, 'The Prophet also forbade the reselling of foodstuff by somebody who had bought it unless he had received it with exact full measure'


## Hadith 3:335

_Narrated Ata bin Yasar:_

I met Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Al-'As and asked him, “Tell me about the description of Allah's Apostle which is mentioned in Torah (i.e. Old Testament.”) He replied, 'Yes. By Allah, he is described in Torah with some of the qualities attributed to him in the Quran as follows:

“O Prophet ! We have sent you as a witness (for Allah's True religion) And a giver of glad tidings (to the faithful believers), And a warner (to the unbelievers) And guardian of the illiterates. You are My slave and My messenger (i.e. Apostle). I have named you ”Al-Mutawakkil“ (who depends upon Allah). You are neither discourteous, harsh Nor a noise-maker in the markets And you do not do evil to those Who do evil to you, but you deal With them with forgiveness and kindness. Allah will not let him (the Prophet) Die till he makes straight the crooked people by making them say: ”None has the right to be worshipped but Allah,“ With which will be opened blind eyes And deaf ears and enveloped hearts.”


## Hadith 3:336

_Narrated Abdullah ibn Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, "He who buys foodstuff should not sell it till he is satisfied with the measure with which he has bought it.


## Hadith 3:337

_Narrated Jabir:_

Abdullah bin 'Amr bin Haram died and was in debt to others. I asked the Prophet to intercede with his creditors for some reduction in the debts. The Prophet requested them (to reduce the debts) but they refused. The Prophet said to me, “Go and put your dates (In heaps) according to their different kinds. The Ajwa on one side, the cluster of Ibn Zaid on another side, etc.. Then call me.” I did that and called the Prophet He came and sat at the head or in the middle of the heaps and ordered me. Measure (the dates) for the people (creditors).“ I measured for them till I paid all the debts. My dates remained as it nothing had been taken from them. In other narrations, Jabir said; The Prophet said, ”He (i.e. 'Abdullah) continued measuring for them till he paid all the debts.“ The Prophet said (to 'Abdullah), ”Cut (clusters) for him (i.e. one of the creditors) and measure for him fully."


## Hadith 3:338

_Narrated Al-Miqdam bin Ma'diyakrib:_

The Prophet said, “Measure your foodstuff and you will be blessed.”


## Hadith 3:339

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:_

The Prophet said, "The Prophet Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary, and asked for Allah's blessing in it. I made Medina a sanctuary as Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary and I asked for Allah's Blessing in its measures the Mudd and the Sa as Abraham did for Mecca.


## Hadith 3:340

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle said, “O Allah bestow your blessings on their measures, bless their Mudd and Sa.” The Prophet meant the people of Medina.


## Hadith 3:341

_Narrated Salim:_

that his father said. “I saw those, who used to buy foodstuff without measuring or weighing in the life time of the Prophet being punished if they sold it before carrying it to their own houses.”


## Hadith 3:342

_Narrated Tawus:_

Ibn 'Abbas said, “Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of foodstuff before its measuring and transferring into one's possession.” I asked Ibn 'Abbas, “How is that?” Ibn 'Abbas replied, “It will be just like selling money for money, as the foodstuff has not been handed over to the first purchaser who is the present seller.”


## Hadith 3:343

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

The Prophet said, “He who buys foodstuff should not sell it till he has received it.”


## Hadith 3:344

_Narrated Az-Zuhri from Malik bin Aus:_

that the latter said, “Who has change?” Talha said, “I (will have change) when our store-keeper comes from the forest.”

gold for silver is Riba, (usury), except if it is from hand to hand and equal in amount, and wheat grain for wheat grain is usury except if it is form hand to hand and equal in amount, and dates for dates is usury except if it is from hand to hand and equal in amount, and barley for barley is usury except if it is from hand to hand and equal in amount." (See Riba-Fadl in the glossary).


## Hadith 3:345

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet forbade the selling of foodstuff before receiving it. I consider that all types of sellings should be done similarly.


## Hadith 3:346

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “The buyer of foodstuff should not sell it before it has been measured for him.” Isma'il narrated instead, “He should not sell it before receiving it.”


## Hadith 3:347

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

I saw the people buy foodstuff randomly (i.e. blindly without measuring it) in the life-time of Allah's Apostle and they were punished (by beating), if they tried to sell it before carrying it to their own houses.


## Hadith 3:348

_Narrated Aisha:_

Rarely did the Prophet fail to visit Abu Bakr's house everyday, either in the morning or in the evening. When the permission for migration to Medina was granted, all of a sudden the Prophet came to us at noon and Abu Bakr was informed, who said, “Certainly the Prophet has come for some urgent matter.” The Prophet said to Abu Bark, when the latter entered “Let nobody stay in your home.” Abu Bakr said, “O Allah's Apostle! There are only my two daughters (namely 'Aisha and Asma') present.” The Prophet said, “I feel (am informed) that I have been granted the permission for migration.” Abu Bakr said, “I will accompany you, O Allah's Apostle!” The Prophet said, “You will accompany me.” Abu Bakr then said “O Allah's Apostle! I have two she-camels I have prepared specially for migration, so I offer you one of them. The Prophet said, ”I have accepted it on the condition that I will pay its price."


## Hadith 3:349

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Do not urge somebody to return what he has already bought (i.e. in optional sale) from another seller so as to sell him your own goods.”


## Hadith 3:350

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of things by a town dweller on behalf of a desert dweller; and similarly Najsh was forbidden. And one should not urge somebody to return the goods to the seller so as to sell him his own goods; nor should one demand the hand of a girl who has already been engaged to someone else; and a woman should not try to cause some other woman to be divorced in order to take her place.


## Hadith 3:351

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:_

A man decided that a slave of his would be manumitted after his death and later on he was in need of money, so the Prophet took the slave and said, “Who will buy this slave from me?” Nu'aim bin 'Abdullah bought him for such and such price and the Prophet gave him the slave.


## Hadith 3:352

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle forbade Najsh.


## Hadith 3:353

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the sale called 'Habal-al-Habala which was a kind of sale practiced in the Pre-lslamic Period of ignorance. One would pay the price of a she-camel which was not born yet would be born by the immediate offspring of an extant she-camel.


## Hadith 3:354

_Narrated Abu Said:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the selling by Munabadha, i.e. to sell one's garment by casting it to the buyer not allowing him to examine or see it. Similarly he forbade the selling by Mulamasa. Mulamasa is to buy a garment, for example, by merely touching it, not looking at it.


## Hadith 3:355

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet forbade two kinds of dressing; (one of them) is to sit with one's legs drawn up while wrapped in one garment. (The other) is to lift that garment on one's shoulders. And also forbade two kinds of sale: Al-Limas and An-Nibadh.


## Hadith 3:356

_Narrated Abu Huraira :_

Allah's Apostle forbade selling by Mulamasa and Munabadha.


## Hadith 3:357

_Narrated Abu Said:_

The Prophet forbade two kinds of dresses and two kinds of sale, i.e., Mulamasa and Munabadha.


## Hadith 3:358

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Don't keep camels and sheep unmilked for a long time, for whoever buys such an animal has the option to milk it and then either to keep it or return it to the owner along with one Sa of dates.” Some narrated from Ibn Sirin (that the Prophet had said), “One Sa of wheat, and he has the option for three days.” And some narrated from Ibn Sirin, “ ... a Sa of dates,” not mentioning the option for three days. But a Sa of dates is mentioned in most narrations.


## Hadith 3:359

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:_

Whoever buys a sheep which has not been milked for a long time, has the option of returning it along with one Sa of dates; and the Prophet forbade going to meet the seller on the way (as he has no knowledge of the market price and he may sell his goods at a low price).


## Hadith 3:360

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, "Do not go forward to meet the caravan (to buy from it on the way before it reaches the town). And do not urge buyers to cancel their purchases to sell them (your own goods) yourselves, and do not practice Najsh. A town dweller should not sell the goods for the desert dweller. Do not leave sheep unmilked for a long time, when they are on sale, and whoever buys such an animal has the option of returning it, after milking it, along with a Sa of dates or keeping it. it has been kept unmilked for a long period by the seller (to deceive others).


## Hadith 3:361

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever buys a sheep which has been kept unmilked for a long period, and milks it, can keep it if he is satisfied, and if he is not satisfied, he can return it, but he should pay one Sa of dates for the milk.”


## Hadith 3:362

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “If a slave-girl commits illegal sexual intercourse and it is proved beyond doubt, then her owner should lash her and should not blame her after the legal punishment. And then if she repeats the illegal sexual intercourse he should lash her again and should not blame her after the legal punishment, and if she commits it a third time, then he should sell her even for a hair rope.”


## Hadith 3:363

_Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid:_

Allah's Apostle was asked about the slave-girl, if she was a virgin and committed illegal sexual intercourse. The Prophet said, “If she committed illegal sexual intercourse, lash her, and if she did it a second time, then lash her again, and if she repeated the third time, then sell her even for a hair rope.” Ibn Shihab said, “I don't know whether to sell her after the third or fourth offense.”


## Hadith 3:364

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle came to me and I told him about the slave-girl (Buraira) Allah's Apostle said, “Buy and manumit her, for the Wala is for the one who manumits.” In the evening the Prophet got up and glorified Allah as He deserved and then said, “Why do some people impose conditions which are not present in Allah's Book (Laws)? Whoever imposes such a condition as is not in Allah's Laws, then that condition is invalid even if he imposes one hundred conditions, for Allah's conditions are more binding and reliable.”


## Hadith 3:365

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

Aisha wanted to buy Buraira and he (the Prophet ) went out for the prayer. When he returned, she told him that they (her masters) refused to sell her except on the condition that her Wala' would go to them. The Prophet replied, 'The Wala' would go to him who manumits.' " Hammam asked Nafi' whether her (Buraira's) husband was a free man or a slave. He replied that he did not know.


## Hadith 3:366

_Narrated Jarir:_

I have given a pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle for to testify that None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and Muhammad is His Apostle, to offer prayers perfectly, to pay Zakat, to listen to and obey (Allah's and His Prophet's orders), and to give good advice to every Muslim.


## Hadith 3:367

_Narrated Tawus:_

Ibn 'Abbas said, “Allah's Apostle said, 'Do not go to meet the caravans on the way (for buying their goods without letting them know the market price); a town dweller should not sell the goods of a desert dweller on behalf of the latter.' I asked Ibn 'Abbas, 'What does he mean by not selling the goods of a desert dweller by a town dweller?' He said, 'He should not become his broker.' ”


## Hadith 3:368

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of the goods of a desert dweller by a town person.


## Hadith 3:369

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “A buyer should not urge a seller to restore a purchase so as to buy it himself, and do not practice Najsh; and a town dweller should not sell goods of a desert dweller.”


## Hadith 3:370

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

We were forbidden that a town dweller should sell goods of a desert dweller.


## Hadith 3:371

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet forbade the meeting (of caravans) on the way and the selling of goods by an inhabitant of the town on behalf of a desert dweller.


## Hadith 3:372

_Narrated Tawus:_

I asked Ibn 'Abbas, “What is the meaning of, 'No town dweller should sell (or buy) for a desert dweller'?” Ibn 'Abbas said, “It means he should not become his broker.”


## Hadith 3:373

_Narrated Abdullah:_

Whoever buys an animal which has been kept unmilked for a long time, could return it, but has to pay a Sa of dates along with it. And the Prophet forbade meeting the owners of goods on the way away from the market.


## Hadith 3:374

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “You should not try to cancel the purchases of one another (to get a benefit thereof), and do not go ahead to meet the caravan (for buying the goods) (but wait) till it reaches the market.”


## Hadith 3:375

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

We used to go ahead to meet the caravan and used to buy foodstuff from them. The Prophet forbade us to sell it till it was carried to the market.


## Hadith 3:376

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

Some people used to buy foodstuff at the head of the market and used to sell it on the spot. Allah's Apostle forbade them to sell it till they brought it to (their) places.


## Hadith 3:377

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

Aisha said, “Buraira came to me and said, 'I have agreed with my masters to pay them nine Uqiyas (of gold) (in installments) one Uqiya per year; please help me.' I said, 'I am ready to pay the whole amount now provided your masters agree that your Wala will be for me.' So, Buraira went to her masters and told them about that offer but they refused to accept it. She returned, and at that time, Allah's Apostle was sitting (present). Buraira said, 'I told them of the offer but they did not accept it and insisted on having the Wala.'.' The Prophet heard that.” 'Aisha narrated the whole story to the Prophet . He said to her, “Buy her and stipulate that her Wala' would be yours as the Wala' is for the manumitted.” 'Aisha did so. Then Allah's Apostle stood up in front of the people, and after glorifying Allah he said, “Amma Badu (i.e. then after)! What about the people who impose conditions which are not in Allah's Book (Laws)? Any condition that is not in Allah's Book (Laws) is invalid even if they were one hundred conditions, for Allah's decisions are the right ones and His conditions are the strong ones (firmer) and the Wala' will be for the manumitted.”


## Hadith 3:378

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Aisha, (mother of the faithful believers) wanted to buy a slave girl and manumit her, but her masters said that they would sell her only on the condition that her Wala' would be for them. 'Aisha told Allah's Apostle of that. He said, “What they stipulate should not hinder you from buying her, as the Wala' is for the manumitted.”


## Hadith 3:379

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, "The selling of wheat for wheat is Riba (usury) except if it is handed from hand to hand and equal in amount. Similarly the selling of barley for barley, is Riba except if it is from hand to hand and equal in amount, and dates for dates is usury except if it is from hand to hand and equal in amount. (See Riba-Fadl in the glossary).


## Hadith 3:380

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle forbade Muzabana; and Muzabana is the selling of fresh dates for dried old dates by measure, and the selling of fresh grapes for dried grapes by measure.


## Hadith 3:381

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet forbade Muzabana; and Muzabana is the selling of fresh fruit (without measuring it) for something by measure on the basis that if that thing turns to be more than the fruit, the increase would be for the seller of the fruit, and if it turns to be less, that would be of his lot.

selling of the fruits on the trees after estimation (when they are ripe).


## Hadith 3:382

_Narrated Ibn Shihab:_

that Malik bin Aus said, “I was in need of change for one-hundred Dinars. Talha bin 'Ubaid-Ullah called me and we discussed the matter, and he agreed to change (my Dinars). He took the gold pieces in his hands and fidgeted with them, and then said, ”Wait till my storekeeper comes from the forest.“ 'Umar was listening to that and said, ”By Allah! You should not separate from Talha till you get the money from him, for Allah's Apostle said, 'The selling of gold for gold is Riba (usury) except if the exchange is from hand to hand and equal in amount, and similarly, the selling of wheat for wheat is Riba (usury) unless it is from hand to hand and equal in amount, and the selling of barley for barley is usury unless it is from hand to hand and equal in amount, and dates for dates, is usury unless it is from hand to hand and equal in amount"


## Hadith 3:383

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Don't sell gold for gold unless equal in weight, nor silver for silver unless equal in weight, but you could sell gold for silver or silver for gold as you like.”


## Hadith 3:384

_Narrated Abu Said:_

(Concerning exchange) that he heard Allah's Apostle saying, “Do not sell gold for gold unless equal in weight, and do not sell silver unless equal in weight.”


## Hadith 3:385

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Allah's Apostle said, "Do not sell gold for gold unless equivalent in weight, and do not sell less amount for greater amount or vice versa; and do not sell silver for silver unless equivalent in weight, and do not sell less amount for greater amount or vice versa and do not sell gold or silver that is not present at the moment of exchange for gold or silver that is present.


## Hadith 3:386

_Narrated Abu Salih Az-Zaiyat:_

I heard Abu Said Al-Khudri saying, “The selling of a Dinar for a Dinar, and a Dirham for a Dirham (is permissible).” I said to him, “Ibn 'Abbas does not say the same.” Abu Said replied, “I asked Ibn 'Abbas whether he had heard it from the Prophet s or seen it in the Holy Book. Ibn 'Abbas replied, ”I do not claim that, and you know Allah's Apostle better than I, but Usama informed me that the Prophet had said, 'There is no Riba (in money exchange) except when it is not done from hand to hand (i.e. when there is delay in payment).' "


## Hadith 3:387

_Narrated Abu Al-Minhal:_

I asked Al-Bara' bin 'Azib and Zaid bin Arqam about money exchanges. Each of them said, “This is better than I,” and both of them said, “Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of silver for gold on credit. ”


## Hadith 3:388

_Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakra:_

that his father said, “The Prophet forbade the selling of gold for gold and silver for silver except if they are equivalent in weight, and allowed us to sell gold for silver and vice versa as we wished.”


## Hadith 3:389

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Do not sell fruits of dates until they become free from all the dangers of being spoilt or blighted; and do not sell fresh dates for dry dates.”

Apostle permitted the selling of ripe fruits on trees for fresh dates or dried dates in Bai'-l-'Araya, and did not allow it for any other kind of sale."


## Hadith 3:390

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle forbade Muzabana; and Muzabana means the selling of fresh dates (on the trees) for dried dates by measure and also the selling of fresh grapes for dried grapes by measure.


## Hadith 3:391

_Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:_

Allah's Apostle forbade Muzabana and Muhaqala; and Muzabana means the selling of ripe dates for dates still on the trees.


## Hadith 3:392

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet forbade Muzabana and Muhaqala.


## Hadith 3:393

_Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:_

Allah's Apostle al lowed the owner of 'Araya to sell the fruits on the trees by means of estimation.


## Hadith 3:394

_Narrated Jabir:_

The Prophet forbade the selling of fruits unless they get ripe, and none of them should be sold except for Dinar or Dirham (i.e. money), except the 'Araya trees (the dates of which could be sold for dates).


## Hadith 3:395

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet allowed the sale of the dates of 'Araya provided they were about five Awsuq (singular: Wasaq which means sixty Sa's) or less (in amount).


## Hadith 3:396

_Narrated Sahl bin Abu Hathma:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the selling of fruits (fresh dates) for dried dates but allowed the sale of fruits on the 'Araya by estimation and their new owners might eat their dates fresh. Sufyan (in another narration) said, “I told Yahya (a sub-narrator) when I was a mere boy, 'Meccans say that the Prophet allowed them the sale of the fruits on 'Araya by estimation.' Yahya asked, 'How do the Meccans know about it?' I replied, 'They narrated it (from the Prophet ) through Jabir.' On that, Yahya kept quiet.” Sufyan said, “I meant that Jabir belonged to Medina.” Sufyan was asked whether in Jabir's narration there was any prohibition of selling fruits before their benefit is evident (i.e. no dangers of being spoilt or blighted). He replied that there was none.


## Hadith 3:397

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar from Zaid bin Thabit:_

Allah's Apostle allowed the sale of 'Araya by estimating the dates on them for measured amounts of dried dates. Musa bin 'Uqba said, “Al- 'Araya were distinguished date palms; one could come and buy them (i.e. their fruits).”


## Hadith 3:398

_Narrated Zaid:_

Same as above (Hadith 397).


## Hadith 3:399

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of fruits till their benefit is evident. He forbade both the seller and the buyer (such sale).


## Hadith 3:400

_Narrated Anas:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of date fruits till they were ripe. Abu 'Abdullah (Al-Bukhari) said, “That means till they were red (can be eaten).”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_300">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:201 to 3:300</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_500">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:401 to 3:500</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
