---
title: "Hadith 3:401 to 3:500"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_400">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:301 to 3:400</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_600">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:501 to 3:600</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>




## Hadith 3:401

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet forbade the s of (date) fruits till they were red or yellow and fit for eating.


## Hadith 3:402

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet forbade the sale of fruits till their benefit is evident; and the sale of date palms till the dates are almost ripe. He was asked what 'are almost ripe' meant. He replied, “Got red and yellow.”


## Hadith 3:403

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of fruits till they are almost ripe. He was asked what is meant by 'are almost ripe.' He replied, “Till they become red.” Allah's Apostle further said, “If Allah spoiled the fruits, what right would one have to take the money of one's brother (i.e. other people)?”

is evident and then the fruits were spoiled with blights, the loss would be suffered by the owner (not the buyer).

not sell or buy fruits before their benefit was evident and do not sell fresh fruits (dates) for dried dates."


## Hadith 3:404

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet bought some foodstuff from a Jew on credit and mortgaged his armor to him.


## Hadith 3:405

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle appointed somebody as a governor of Khaibar. That governor brought to him an excellent kind of dates (from Khaibar). The Prophet asked, “Are all the dates of Khaibar like this?” He replied, “By Allah, no, O Allah's Apostle! But we barter one Sa of this (type of dates) for two Sas of dates of ours and two Sas of it for three of ours.” Allah's Apostle said, “Do not do so (as that is a kind of usury) but sell the mixed dates (of inferior quality) for money, and then buy good dates with that money.”


## Hadith 3:406

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If somebody sells pollinated date palms, the fruits will be for the seller unless the buyer stipulates that they will be for himself (and the seller agrees).”


## Hadith 3:407

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle forbade Al-Muzabana, i.e. to sell ungathered dates of one's garden for measured dried dates or fresh ungathered grapes for measured dried grapes; or standing crops for measured quantity of foodstuff. He forbade all such bargains.


## Hadith 3:408

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever pollinates date palms and then sells them, the fruits will belong to him unless the buyer stipulates that the fruits should belong to him (and the seller agrees).”


## Hadith 3:409

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle forbade Muhaqala, Mukhadara, Mulamasa, Munabadha and Muzabana. (See glossary and previous Hadiths for the meanings of these terms.)


## Hadith 3:410

_Narrated Humaid:_

Anas said, “The Prophet forbade the selling of dates till they were almost ripe.” We asked Anas, “What does 'almost ripe' mean?” He replied, “They get red and yellow. The Prophet added, 'If Allah destroyed the fruits present on the trees, what right would the seller have to take the money of his brother (somebody else)?' ”


## Hadith 3:411

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

I was with the Prophet while he was eating spadix. He said, “From the trees there is a tree which resembles a faithful believer.” I wanted to say that it was the date palm, but I was the youngest among them (so I kept quiet). He added, “It is the date palm.” Shuraih told the weavers, “You are permitted to follow your own conventions to solve your problems (it is legal for you to stick to your traditions in bargain) . ”

selling for eleven what you buy for ten, and you are allowed to take a profit for expenses . "

The Prophet told Hind, “Take what is reasonable and sufficient for you and your sons.” Allah says: Whoever is poor, can eat (from the orphan's property) reasonably (according to his labors).

Al-Hasan hired a donkey from 'Abdullah bin Mirdas and asked him about the hire. The latter replied that it was for two Daniqs (a Daniq equals 116th Dirham). So Al-Hasan rode away. Another time, Al-Hasan came to 'Abdullah bin Mirdas and asked him to hire the donkey to him and rode away without asking him about the hire, but he sent him half a Dirham.


## Hadith 3:412

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Abu Taiba cupped Allah's Apostle and so Allah's Apostle ordered that a Sa of dates be paid to him and ordered his masters (for he was a slave) to reduce his tax.


## Hadith 3:413

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Hind, the mother of Mu'awiya said to Allah's Apostle, “Abu Sufyan (her husband) is a miser. Am I allowed to take from his money secretly?” The Prophet said to her, “You and your sons may take what is sufficient reasonably and fairly.”


## Hadith 3:414

_Narrated Hisham bin 'Urwa from his father:_

who heard Aisha saying, “The Holy Verse; 'Whoever amongst the guardians is rich, he should take no wages (from the property of the orphans) but If he is poor, let him have for himself what is just and reasonable (according to his labors)' (4.6) was revealed concerning the guardian of the orphans who looks after them and manages favorably their financial affairs; If the guardian Is poor, he could have from It what Is just and reasonable, (according to his labors).”


## Hadith 3:415

_Narrated Jabir:_

Allah's Apostle gave pre-emption (to the partner) in every joint property, but if the boundaries of the property were demarcated or the ways and streets were fixed, then there was no pre-emption.


## Hadith 3:416

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle decided the validity of pre-emption in every joint undivided property, but if the boundaries were well marked or the ways and streets were fixed, then there was no pre-emption.


## Hadith 3:417

_Narrated Mussaddad from 'Abdul Wahid:_

the same as above but said, “... in every joint undivided thing...” property... "


## Hadith 3:418

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “While three persons were walking, rain began to fall and they had to enter a cave in a mountain. A big rock rolled over and blocked the mouth of the cave. They said to each other, 'Invoke Allah with the best deed you have performed (so Allah might remove the rock)'. One of them said, 'O Allah! My parents were old and I used to go out for grazing (my animals). On my return I would milk (the animals) and take the milk in a vessel to my parents to drink. After they had drunk from it, I would give it to my children, family and wife. One day I was delayed and on my return I found my parents sleeping, and I disliked to wake them up. The children were crying at my feet (because of hunger). That state of affairs continued till it was dawn. O Allah! If You regard that I did it for Your sake, then please remove this rock so that we may see the sky.' So, the rock was moved a bit. The second said, 'O Allah! You know that I was in love with a cousin of mine, like the deepest love a man may have for a woman, and she told me that I would not get my desire fulfilled unless I paid her one-hundred Dinars (gold pieces). So, I struggled for it till I gathered the desired amount, and when I sat in between her legs, she told me to be afraid of Allah, and asked me not to deflower her except rightfully (by marriage). So, I got up and left her. O Allah! If You regard that I did if for Your sake, kindly remove this rock.' So, two-thirds of the rock was removed. Then the third man said, 'O Allah! No doubt You know that once I employed a worker for one Faraq (three Sa's) of millet, and when I wanted to pay him, he refused to take it, so I sowed it and from its yield I bought cows and a shepherd. After a time that man came and demanded his money. I said to him: Go to those cows and the shepherd and take them for they are for you. He asked me whether I was joking with him. I told him that I was not joking with him, and all that belonged to him. O Allah! If You regard that I did it sincerely for Your sake, then please remove the rock.' So, the rock was removed completely from the mouth of the cave.”


## Hadith 3:419

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr:_

We were with the Prophet when a tall pagan with long matted unkempt hair came driving his sheep. The Prophet asked him, “Are those sheep for sale or for gifts?” The pagan replied, “They are for sale.” The Prophet bought one sheep from him.


## Hadith 3:420

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The Prophet Abraham emigrated with Sarah and entered a village where there was a king or a tyrant. (The king) was told that Abraham had entered (the village) accompanied by a woman who was one of the most charming women. So, the king sent for Abraham and asked, 'O Abraham! Who is this lady accompanying you?' Abraham replied, 'She is my sister (i.e. in religion).' Then Abraham returned to her and said, 'Do not contradict my statement, for I have informed them that you are my sister. By Allah, there are no true believers on this land except you and 1.' Then Abraham sent her to the king. When the king got to her, she got up and performed ablution, prayed and said, 'O Allah! If I have believed in You and Your Apostle, and have saved my private parts from everybody except my husband, then please do not let this pagan overpower me.' On that the king fell in a mood of agitation and started moving his legs. Seeing the condition of the king, Sarah said, 'O Allah! If he should die, the people will say that I have killed him.' The king regained his power, and proceeded towards her but she got up again and performed ablution, prayed and said, 'O Allah! If I have believed in You and Your Apostle and have kept my private parts safe from all except my husband, then please do not let this pagan overpower me.' The king again fell in a mood of agitation and started moving his legs. On seeing that state of the king, Sarah said, 'O Allah! If he should die, the people will say that I have killed him.' The king got either two or three attacks, and after recovering from the last attack he said, 'By Allah! You have sent a satan to me. Take her to Abraham and give her Ajar.' So she came back to Abraham and said, 'Allah humiliated the pagan and gave us a slavegirl for service.”


## Hadith 3:421

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Sad bin Abi Waqqas and 'Abu bin Zam'a quarreled over a boy. Sad said, “O Allah's Apostle! This boy is the son of my brother ('Utba bin Abi Waqqas) who took a promise from me that I would take him as he was his (illegal) son. Look at him and see whom he resembles.” 'Abu bin Zam'a said, “O Allah's Apostle! This is my brother and was born on my father's bed from his slave-girl.” Allah's Apostle cast a look at the boy and found definite resemblance to 'Utba and then said, “The boy is for you, O 'Abu bin Zam'a. The child goes to the owner of the bed and the adulterer gets nothing but the stones (despair, i.e. to be stoned to death). Then the Prophet said, ”O Sauda bint Zama! Screen yourself from this boy." So, Sauda never saw him again.


## Hadith 3:422

_Narrated Sad that his father said:_

Abdur-Rahman bin Auf said to Suhaib, 'Fear Allah and do not ascribe yourself to somebody other than your father.' Suhaib replied, 'I would not like to say it even if I were given large amounts of money, but I say I was kidnapped in my childhood.' "


## Hadith 3:423

_Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:_

Hakim bin Hizam said, “O Allah's Apostle! I used to do good deeds in the Pre-lslamic period of Ignorance, e.g., keeping good relations with my Kith and kin, manumitting slaves and giving alms. Shall I receive a reward for all that?” Allah's Apostle replied, “You embraced Islam with all the good deeds which you did in the past.”


## Hadith 3:424

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

Once Allah's Apostle passed by a dead sheep and said to the people, “Wouldn't you benefit by its skin?” The people replied that it was dead. The Prophet said, “But its eating only is illegal.”


## Hadith 3:425

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, "By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, son of Mary (Jesus) will shortly descend amongst you people (Muslims) as a just ruler and will break the Cross and kill the pig and abolish the Jizya (a tax taken from the non-Muslims, who are in the protection, of the Muslim government). Then there will be abundance of money and no-body will accept charitable gifts.


## Hadith 3:426

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Once 'Umar was informed that a certain man sold alcohol. 'Umar said, “May Allah curse him! Doesn't he know that Allah's Apostle said, 'May Allah curse the Jews, for Allah had forbidden them to eat the fat of animals but they melted it and sold it.”


## Hadith 3:427

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “May Allah curse the Jews, because Allah made fat illegal for them but they sold it and ate its price. ”


## Hadith 3:428

_Narrated Said bin Abu Al-Hasan:_

While I was with Ibn 'Abbas a man came and said, “O father of 'Abbas! My sustenance is from my manual profession and I make these pictures.” Ibn 'Abbas said, “I will tell you only what I heard from Allah's Apostle . I heard him saying, 'Whoever makes a picture will be punished by Allah till he puts life in it, and he will never be able to put life in it.' ” Hearing this, that man heaved a sigh and his face turned pale. Ibn 'Abbas said to him, “What a pity! If you insist on making pictures I advise you to make pictures of trees and any other unanimated objects.”


## Hadith 3:429

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When the last verses of Surat-al-Baqara were revealed, the Prophet went out (of his house to the Mosque) and said, “The trade of alcohol has become illegal.”


## Hadith 3:430

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, "Allah says, 'I will be against three persons on the Day of Resurrection:

1\. One who makes a covenant in My Name, but he proves treacherous.

2\. One who sells a free person (as a slave) and eats the price,

3\. And one who employs a laborer and gets the full work done by him but does not pay him his wages.' "


## Hadith 3:431

_Narrated Anas:_

Amongst the captives was Safiya. First she was given to Dihya Al-Kalbi and then to the Prophet.


## Hadith 3:432

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

that while he was sitting with Allah's Apostle he said, “O Allah's Apostle! We get female captives as our share of booty, and we are interested in their prices, what is your opinion about coitus interrupt us?” The Prophet said, "Do you really do that? It is better for you not to do it. No soul that which Allah has destined to exist, but will surely come into existence.


## Hadith 3:433

_Narrated Jabir:_

The Prophet sold a Mudabbar (on behalf of his master who was still living and in need of money).


## Hadith 3:434

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle sold a Mudabbar.


## Hadith 3:435

_Narrated Zaid bin Khalid and Abu Huraira:_

that Allah's Apostle was asked about an unmarried slave-girl who committed illegal sexual intercourse. They heard him saying, “Flog her, and if she commits illegal sexual intercourse after that, flog her again, and on the third (or the fourth) offense, sell her.”


## Hadith 3:436

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “If a slave-girl of yours commits illegal sexual intercourse and her illegal sexual intercourse is proved, she should be lashed, and after that nobody should blame her, and if she commits illegal sexual intercourse the second time, she should be lashed and nobody should blame her after that, and if she does the offense for the third time and her illegal sexual intercourse is proved, she should be sold even for a hair rope.”


## Hadith 3:437

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet came to Khaibar and when Allah made him victorious and he conquered the town by breaking the enemy's defense, the beauty of Safiya bint Huyai bin Akhtab was mentioned to him and her husband had been killed while she was a bride. Allah's Apostle selected her for himself and he set out in her company till he reached Sadd-ar-Rawha' where her menses were over and he married her. Then Hais (a kind of meal) was prepared and served on a small leather sheet (used for serving meals). Allah's Apostle then said to me, “Inform those who are around you (about the wedding banquet).” So that was the marriage banquet given by Allah's Apostle for (his marriage with) Safiya. After that we proceeded to Medina and I saw that Allah's Apostle was covering her with a cloak while she was behind him. Then he would sit beside his camel and let Safiya put her feet on his knees to ride (the camel).


## Hadith 3:438

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

I heard Allah's Apostle, in the year of the Conquest of Mecca, saying, “Allah and His Apostle made illegal the trade of alcohol, dead animals, pigs and idols.” The people asked, “O Allah's Apostle! What about the fat of dead animals, for it was used for greasing the boats and the hides; and people use it for lights?” He said, “No, it is illegal.” Allah's Apostle further said, “May Allah curse the Jews, for Allah made the fat (of animals) illegal for them, yet they melted the fat and sold it and ate its price.”


## Hadith 3:439

_Narrated Abu Mas'ud Al-Ansari:_

Allah's Apostle forbade taking the price of a dog, money earned by prostitution and the earnings of a soothsayer.


## Hadith 3:440

_Narrated Aun bin Abu Juhaifa:_

I saw my father buying a slave whose profession was cupping, and ordered that his instruments (of cupping) be broken. I asked him the reason for doing so. He replied, “Allah's Apostle prohibited taking money for blood, the price of a dog, and the earnings of a slave-girl by prostitution; he cursed her who tattoos and her who gets tattooed, the eater of Riba (usury), and the maker of pictures.”


## Hadith 3:441

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle came to Medina and the people used to pay in advance the price of fruits to be delivered within one or two years. (The sub-narrator is in doubt whether it was one to two years or two to three years.) The Prophet said, “Whoever pays money in advance for dates (to be delivered later) should pay it for known specified weight and measure (of the dates).”


## Hadith 3:442

_Narrated Ibn Abi Najih:_

as above, mentioning only specific measure.


## Hadith 3:443

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet came to Medina and the people used to pay in advance the price of dates to be delivered within two or three years. He said (to them), “Whoever pays in advance the price of a thing to be delivered later should pay it for a specified measure at specified weight for a specified period.”


## Hadith 3:444

_Narrated Ibn Abi Najih:_

as above, saying, “He should pay the price in advance for a specified measure and for a specified period.”


## Hadith 3:445

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet came (to Medina) and he told the people (regarding the payment of money in advance that they should pay it) for a known specified measure and a known specified weight and a known specified period.


## Hadith 3:446

_Narrated Shu'ba:_

Muhammad or 'Abdullah bin Abu Al-Mujalid said, “Abdullah bin Shaddad and Abu Burda differed regarding As-Salam, so they sent me to Ibn Abi Aufa and I asked him about it. He replied, 'In the life-time of Allah's Apostle, Abu Bakr and 'Umar, we used to pay in advance the prices of wheat, barley, dried grapes and dates to be delivered later. I also asked Ibn Abza and he, too, replied as above.' ”


## Hadith 3:447

_Narrated Muhammad bin Al-Majalid:_

Abdullah bin Shaddad and Abu Burda sent me to 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa and told me to ask 'Abdullah whether the people in the life-time of the Prophet used to pay in advance for wheat (to be delivered later). Abdullah replied, “We used to pay in advance to the peasants of Sham for wheat, barley and olive oil of a known specified measure to be delivered in a specified period.” I asked (him), “Was the price paid (in advance) to those who had the things to be delivered later?” Abdullah bin Aufa replied, “We did not use to ask them about that.” Then they sent me to 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza and I asked him. He replied, “The companions of the Prophet used to practice Salam in the life-time of the Prophet; and we did not use to ask them whether they had standing crops or not.”


## Hadith 3:448

_Narrated Muhammad bin Abi Al-Mujalid:_

as above (446) and said, “We used to pay them in advance for wheat and oil.”


## Hadith 3:449

_Narrated Ash-Shaibani:_

who said “We used to pay in advance for wheat barley and dried grapes.”


## Hadith 3:450

_Narrated Abu Bakhtari At-Tai:_

I asked Ibn 'Abbas about Salam for (the fruits of) date-palms. He replied “The Prophet forbade the sale a dates on the trees till they became fit for eating and could be weighed.” A man asked what to be weighed (as the dates were still on the trees). Another man sitting Abu Al-Bakhtari: I heard Ibn Abbas (saying) that the Prophet forbade ... etc. as above.


## Hadith 3:451

_Narrated Abu Al-Bakhtari:_

I asked Ibn Umar about Salam (the fruits of) date-palms. He replied, “The Prophet forbade the sale of dates till their benefit becomes evident and fit for eating and also the sale of silver (for gold) on credit.” I asked Ibn 'Abbas about Salam for dates and he replied, “The Prophet forbade the sale of dates till they were fit for eating and could be estimated.”


## Hadith 3:452

_Narrated Abu Al-Bakhtari:_

I asked Ibn 'Umar about Salam for dates. Ibn 'Umar replied, “The Prophet forbade the sale (the fruits) of datepalms until they were fit for eating and also forbade the sale of silver for gold on credit.” I also asked Ibn 'Abbas about it. Ibn 'Abbas replied, “The Prophet forbade the sale of dates till they were fit for eating, and could be weighed.” I asked him, “What is to be weighed (as the dates are on the trees)?” A man sitting by Ibn 'Abbas said, “It means till they are cut and stored.”


## Hadith 3:453

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle bought some foodstuff (barley) from a Jew on credit and mortgaged his iron armor to him (the armor stands for a guarantor).


## Hadith 3:454

_Narrated Al-A'mash:_

We argued at Ibrahim's dwelling place about mortgaging in Salam. He said, “Aisha said, 'The Prophet bought some foodstuff from a Jew on credit and the payment was to be made by a definite period, and he mortgaged his iron armor to him.”


## Hadith 3:455

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet came to Medina and the people used to pay in advance the prices of fruits to be delivered within two to three years. The Prophet said (to them), “Buy fruits by paying their prices in advance on condition that the fruits are to be delivered to you according to a fixed specified measure within a fixed specified period.” Ibn Najih said, “ ... by specified measure and specified weight.”


## Hadith 3:456

_Narrated Muhammad bin Abi Al-Mujalid:_

Abu Burda and 'Abdullah bin Shaddad sent me to 'Abdur Rahman bin Abza and 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa to ask them about the Salaf (Salam). They said, “We used to get war booty while we were with Allah's Apostle and when the peasants of Sham came to us we used to pay them in advance for wheat, barley, and oil to be delivered within a fixed period.” I asked them, “Did the peasants own standing crops or not?” They replied, “We never asked them about it.”


## Hadith 3:457

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The people used to sell camels on the basis of Habal-al-Habala. The Prophet forbade such sale. Nafi' explained Habalal-Habala by saying. “The camel is to be delivered to the buyer after the she-camel gives birth.”


## Hadith 3:458

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle gave a verdict regarding Shuf'a in every undivided joint thing (property). But if the limits are defined (or demarcated) or the ways and streets are fixed, then there is no pre-emption.


## Hadith 3:459

_Narrated 'Amr bin Ash-Sharid:_

While I was standing with Sad bin Abi Waqqas, Al-Miswar bin Makhrama came and put his hand on my shoulder. Meanwhile Abu Rafi', the freed slave of the Prophet came and asked Sad to buy from him the (two) dwellings which were in his house. Sad said, “By Allah I will not buy them.” Al-Miswar said, “By Allah, you shall buy them.” Sad replied, “By Allah, I will not pay more than four thousand (Dirhams) by installments.” Abu Rafi' said, “I have been offered five hundred Dinars (for it) and had I not heard the Prophet saying, 'The neighbor has more right than anyone else because of his nearness, I would not give them to you for four-thousand (Dirhams) while I am offered five-hundred Dinars (one Dinar equals ten Dirhams) for them.” So, he sold it to Sad.


## Hadith 3:460

_Narrated Aisha:_

I said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have two neighbors and would like to know to which of them I should give presents.” He replied, “To the one whose door is nearer to you.”


## Hadith 3:461

_Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:_

The Prophet said, “The honest treasurer who gives willingly what he is ordered to give, is one of the two charitable persons, (the second being the owner).”


## Hadith 3:462

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

I went to the Prophet with two men from Ash-ari tribe. I said (to the Prophet), “I do not know that they want employment.” The Prophet said, “No, we do not appoint for our jobs anybody who demands it earnestly.”


## Hadith 3:463

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Allah did not send any prophet but shepherded sheep.” His companions asked him, “Did you do the same?” The Prophet replied, “Yes, I used to shepherd the sheep of the people of Mecca for some Qirats.”


## Hadith 3:464

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet and Abu Bakr employed a (pagan) man from the tribe of Bani Ad-Dail and the tribe of Bani 'Abu bin 'Adi as a guide. He was an expert guide and he broke the oath contract which he had to abide by with the tribe of Al-'Asi bin Wail and he was on the religion of Quraish pagans. The Prophet and Abu Bakr had confidence in him and gave him their riding camels and told him to bring them to the Cave of Thaur after three days. So, he brought them their two riding camels after three days and both of them (The Prophet and Abu Bakr) set out accompanied by 'Amir bin Fuhaira and the Dili guide who guided them below Mecca along the road leading to the sea-shore.


## Hadith 3:465

_Narrated Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle and Abu Bakr hired a man from the tribe of Bani-Ad-Dil as an expert guide who was a pagan (follower of the religion of the pagans of Quraish). The Prophet and Abu Bakr gave him their two riding camels and took a promise from him to bring their riding camels in the morning of the third day to the Cave of Thaur.


## Hadith 3:466

_Narrated Ya'la bin Umaya:_

I fought in Jaish-al-Usra (Ghazwa of Tabuk) along with the Prophet and in my opinion that was the best of my deeds. Then I had an employee, who quarrel led with someone and one of the them bit and cut the other's finger and caused his own tooth to fall out. He then went to the Prophet (with a complaint) but the Prophet cancelled the suit and said to the complainant, “Did you expect him to let his finger in your mouth so that you might snap and cut it (as does a stallion camel)?”

a similar story: A man bit the hand of another man and caused his own tooth to fall out, but Abu Bakr judged that he had no right for compensation (for the broken tooth).


## Hadith 3:467

_Narrated Ubai bin Ka'b:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Both of them (Moses and Al-Khadir) proceeded on till they reached a wall which was about to fall.” Sa'd said, “(Al-Khadir pointed) with his hands (towards the wall) and then raised his hands and the wall became straightened up.” Ya'la said, “I think Said said, 'He (Khadir) passed his hand over it and it was straightened up.” (Moses said to him), “if you had wanted, you could have taken wages for it.” Said said, “Wages with which to buy food . ”


## Hadith 3:468

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, "Your example and the example of the people of the two Scriptures (i.e. Jews and Christians) is like the example of a man who employed some laborers and asked them, 'Who will work for me from morning till midday for one Qirat?' The Jews accepted and carried out the work. He then asked, Who will work for me from midday up to the 'Asr prayer for one Qirat?' The Christians accepted and fulfilled the work. He then said, 'Who will work for me from the 'Asr till sunset for two Qirats?' You, Muslims have accepted the offer. The Jews and the Christians got angry and said, 'Why should we work more and get lesser wages?' (Allah) said, 'Have I with-held part of your right?' They replied in the negative. He said, 'It is My Blessing, I bestow upon whomever I wish .'


## Hadith 3:469

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Your example and the example of Jews and Christians is like the example of a man who employed some laborers to whom he said, 'Who will work for me up to midday for one Qirat each?' The Jews carried out the work for one Qirat each; and then the Christians carried out the work up to the 'Asr prayer for one Qirat each; and now you Muslims are working from the 'Asr prayer up to sunset for two Qirats each. The Jews and Christians got angry and said, 'We work more and are paid less.' The employer (Allah) asked them, 'Have I usurped some of your right?' They replied in the negative. He said, 'That is My Blessing, I bestow upon whomever I wish.' ”


## Hadith 3:470

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, "Allah said, 'I will be an opponent to three types of people on the Day of Resurrection:

1\. One who makes a covenant in My Name, but proves treacherous;

2\. One who sells a free person and eats his price; and

3\. One who employs a laborer and takes full work from him but does not pay him for his lab our.' "


## Hadith 3:471

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

The Prophet said, “The example of Muslims, Jews and Christians is like the example of a man who employed laborers to work for him from morning till night for specific wages. They worked till midday and then said, 'We do not need your money which you have fixed for us and let whatever we have done be annulled.' The man said to them, 'Don't quit the work, but complete the rest of it and take your full wages.' But they refused and went away. The man employed another batch after them and said to them, 'Complete the rest of the day and yours will be the wages I had fixed for the first batch.' So, they worked till the time of 'Asr prayer. Then they said, ”Let what we have done be annulled and keep the wages you have promised us for yourself.' The man said to them, 'Complete the rest of the work, as only a little of the day remains,' but they refused. Thereafter he employed another batch to work for the rest of the day and they worked for the rest of the day till the sunset, and they received the wages of the two former batches. So, that was the example of those people (Muslims) and the example of this light (guidance) which they have accepted willingly.


## Hadith 3:472

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “Three men from among those who were before you, set out together till they reached a cave at night and entered it. A big rock rolled down the mountain and closed the mouth of the cave. They said (to each other), Nothing could save you Tom this rock but to invoke Allah by giving referenda to the righteous deed which you have done (for Allah's sake only).' So, one of them said, 'O Allah! I had old parents and I never provided my family (wife, children etc.) with milk before them. One day, by chance I was delayed, and I came late (at night) while they had slept. I milked the sheep for them and took the milk to them, but I found them sleeping. I disliked to provide my family with the milk before them. I waited for them and the bowl of milk was in my hand and I kept on waiting for them to get up till the day dawned. Then they got up and drank the milk. O Allah! If I did that for Your Sake only, please relieve us from our critical situation caused by this rock.' So, the rock shifted a little but they could not get out.”

The Prophet added, “The second man said, 'O Allah! I had a cousin who was the dearest of all people to me and I wanted to have sexual relations with her but she refused. Later she had a hard time in a famine year and she came to me and I gave her one-hundred-and-twenty Dinars on the condition that she would not resist my desire, and she agreed. When I was about to fulfill my desire, she said: It is illegal for you to outrage my chastity except by legitimate marriage. So, I thought it a sin to have sexual intercourse with her and left her though she was the dearest of all the people to me, and also I left the gold I had given her. O Allah! If I did that for Your Sake only, please relieve us from the present calamity.' So, the rock shifted a little more but still they could not get out from there.”

The Prophet added, "Then the third man said, 'O Allah! I employed few laborers and I paid them their wages with the exception of one man who did not take his wages and went away. I invested his wages and I got much property thereby. (Then after some time) he came and said to me: O Allah's slave! Pay me my wages. I said to him: All the camels, cows, sheep and slaves you see, are yours. He said: O Allah's slave! Don't mock at me. I said: I am not mocking at you. So, he took all the herd and drove them away and left nothing. O Allah! If I did that for Your Sake only, please relieve us from the present suffering.' So, that rock shifted completely and they got out walking.


## Hadith 3:473

_Narrated Abu May' id Al-Ansari:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle ordered us to give in charity we would go to the market and work as porters to earn a Mudd (two hand-fulls) (of foodstuff) but now some of us have one-hundred thousand Dirhams or Diners. (The sub-narrator) Shaqiq said, "I think Abu Mas'ud meant himself by saying (some of us) .


## Hadith 3:474

_Narrated Tawus:_

Ibn 'Abbas said, “The Prophet forbade the meeting of caravans (on the way) and ordained that no townsman is permitted to sell things on behalf of a bedouin.” I asked Ibn 'Abbas, “What is the meaning of his saying, 'No townsman is permitted to sell things on behalf of a bedouin.' ” He replied, “He should not work as a broker for him.”


## Hadith 3:475

_Narrated Khabbab:_

I was a blacksmith and did some work for Al-'As bin Wail. When he owed me some money for my work, I went to him to ask for that amount. He said, “I will not pay you unless you disbelieve in Muhammad.” I said, “By Allah! I will never do that till you die and be resurrected.” He said, “Will I be dead and then resurrected after my death?” I said, “Yes.” He said, “There I will have property and offspring and then I will pay you your due.” Then Allah revealed. 'Have you seen him who disbelieved in Our signs, and yet says: I will be given property and offspring?' (19.77)


## Hadith 3:476

_Narrated Abu Said:_

Some of the companions of the Prophet went on a journey till they reached some of the 'Arab tribes (at night). They asked the latter to treat them as their guests but they refused. The chief of that tribe was then bitten by a snake (or stung by a scorpion) and they tried their best to cure him but in vain. Some of them said (to the others), “Nothing has benefited him, will you go to the people who resided here at night, it may be that some of them might possess something (as treatment),” They went to the group of the companions (of the Prophet ) and said, “Our chief has been bitten by a snake (or stung by a scorpion) and we have tried everything but he has not benefitted. Have you got anything (useful)?” One of them replied, “Yes, by Allah! I can recite a Ruqya, but as you have refused to accept us as your guests, I will not recite the Ruqya for you unless you fix for us some wages for it.” They agrees to pay them a flock of sheep. One of them then went and recited (Suratul-Fatiha): 'All the praises are for the Lord of the Worlds' and puffed over the chief who became all right as if he was released from a chain, and got up and started walking, showing no signs of sickness.

They paid them what they agreed to pay. Some of them (i.e. the companions) then suggested to divide their earnings among themselves, but the one who performed the recitation said, “Do not divide them till we go to the Prophet and narrate the whole story to him, and wait for his order.” So, they went to Allah's Apostle and narrated the story. Allah's Apostle asked, “How did you come to know that Surat-ul-Fatiha was recited as Ruqya?” Then he added, “You have done the right thing. Divide (what you have earned) and assign a share for me as well.” The Prophet smiled thereupon.


## Hadith 3:477

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

When Abu Taiba cupped the Prophet and the Prophet ordered that he be paid one or two Sas of foodstuff and he interceded with his masters to reduce his taxes.


## Hadith 3:478

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

When the Prophet was cupped, he paid the man who cupped him his wages.


## Hadith 3:479

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

When the Prophet was cupped, he paid the man who cupped him his wages. If it had been undesirable he would not have paid him.


## Hadith 3:480

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet used to get cupped and would never withhold the wages of any person .


## Hadith 3:481

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet sent for a slave who had the profession of cupping, and he cupped him. The Prophet ordered that he be paid one or two Sas, or one or two Mudds of foodstuff, and appealed to his masters to reduce his taxes:


## Hadith 3:482

_Narrated Abu Masud Al-Ansari:_

Allah's Apostle regarded illegal the price of a dog, the earnings of a prostitute, and the charges taken by a soothsayer.


## Hadith 3:483

_Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet prohibited the earnings of slave_

girls (through prostitution).


## Hadith 3:484

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet forbade taking a price for animal copulation.


## Hadith 3:485

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

“Allah's Apostle gave the land of Khaibar to the Jews to work on and cultivate and take half of its yield. Ibn 'Umar added, ”The land used to be rented for a certain portion (of its yield).“ Nafi mentioned the amount of the portion but I forgot it. Rafi' bin Khadij said, ”The 'Umar said: (The contract of Khaibar continued) till 'Umar evacuated the Jews (from Khaibar).


## Hadith 3:486

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Procrastination (delay) in paying debts by a wealthy man is injustice. So, if your debt is transferred from your debtor to a rich debtor, you should agree.”


## Hadith 3:487

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Procrastination (delay) in paying debts by a wealthy person is injustice. So, if your debt is transferred from your debtor to a rich debtor, you should agree.”


## Hadith 3:488

_Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:_

Once, while we were sitting in the company of Prophet, a dead man was brought. The Prophet was requested to lead the funeral prayer for the deceased. He said, “Is he in debt?” The people replied in the negative. He said, “Has he left any wealth?” They said, “No.” So, he led his funeral prayer. Another dead man was brought and the people said, “O Allah's Apostle! Lead his funeral prayer.” The Prophet said, “Is he in debt?” They said, “Yes.” He said, “Has he left any wealth?” They said, ''Three Dinars.“ So, he led the prayer. Then a third dead man was brought and the people said (to the Prophet ), Please lead his funeral prayer.” He said, “Has he left any wealth?” They said, “No.” He asked, “Is he in debt?” They said, (“Yes! He has to pay) three Diners.', He (refused to pray and) said, ”Then pray for your (dead) companion.“ Abu Qatada said, ”O Allah's Apostle! Lead his funeral prayer, and I will pay his debt." So, he led the prayer.


## Hadith 3:488

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, "An Israeli man asked another Israeli to lend him one thousand Dinars. The second man required witnesses. The former replied, 'Allah is sufficient as a witness.' The second said, 'I want a surety.' The former replied, 'Allah is sufficient as a surety.' The second said, 'You are right,' and lent him the money for a certain period. The debtor went across the sea. When he finished his job, he searched for a conveyance so that he might reach in time for the repayment of the debt, but he could not find any. So, he took a piece of wood and made a hole in it, inserted in it one thousand Dinars and a letter to the lender and then closed (i.e. sealed) the hole tightly. He took the piece of wood to the sea and said. 'O Allah! You know well that I took a loan of one thousand Dinars from so-and-so. He demanded a surety from me but I told him that Allah's Guarantee was sufficient and he accepted Your guarantee. He then asked for a witness and I told him that Allah was sufficient as a Witness, and he accepted You as a Witness. No doubt, I tried hard to find a conveyance so that I could pay his money but could not find, so I hand over this money to You.' Saying that, he threw the piece of wood into the sea till it went out far into it, and then he went away. Meanwhile he started searching for a conveyance in order to reach the creditor's country.

One day the lender came out of his house to see whether a ship had arrived bringing his money, and all of a sudden he saw the piece of wood in which his money had been deposited. He took it home to use for fire. When he sawed it, he found his money and the letter inside it. Shortly after that, the debtor came bringing one thousand Dinars to him and said, 'By Allah, I had been trying hard to get a boat so that I could bring you your money, but failed to get one before the one I have come by.' The lender asked, 'Have you sent something to me?' The debtor replied, 'I have told you I could not get a boat other than the one I have come by.' The lender said, 'Allah has delivered on your behalf the money you sent in the piece of wood. So, you may keep your one thousand Dinars and depart guided on the right path.' "


## Hadith 3:489

_Narrated Said bin Jubair:_

Ibn Abbas said, “In the verse: To every one We have appointed ' (Muwaliya Mawaliya means one's) heirs (4.33).' (And regarding the verse) 'And those with whom your right hands have made a pledge.' Ibn 'Abbas said, ”When the emigrants came to the Prophet in Medina, the emigrant would inherit the Ansari while the latter's relatives would not inherit him because of the bond of brotherhood which the Prophet established between them (i.e. the emigrants and the Ansar). When the verse: 'And to everyone We have appointed heirs' (4.33) was revealed, it cancelled (the bond (the pledge) of brotherhood regarding inheritance).“ Then he said, ”The verse: To those also to whom your right hands have pledged, remained valid regarding co-operation and mutual advice, while the matter of inheritance was excluded and it became permissible to assign something in one's testament to the person who had the right of inheriting before.


## Hadith 3:490

_Narrated Anas:_

Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf came to us and Allah's Apostle established a bond of brotherhood between him and Sad bin Rabi'a.


## Hadith 3:491

_Narrated Asim:_

I heard Anas bin Malik, “Have you ever heard that the Prophet said, 'There is no alliance in Islam?' ” He replied, “The Prophet made alliance between Quarish and the Ansar in my house.”


## Hadith 3:492

_Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:_

A dead person was brought to the Prophet so that he might lead the funeral prayer for him. He asked, “Is he in debt?” When the people replied in the negative, he led the funeral prayer. Another dead person was brought and he asked, “Is he in debt?” They said, “Yes.” He (refused to lead the prayer and) said, “Lead the prayer of your friend.” Abu Qatada said, “O Allah's Apostle! I undertake to pay his debt.” Allah's Apostle then led his funeral prayer.


## Hadith 3:493

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Once the Prophet said (to me), “If the money of Bahrain comes, I will give you a certain amount of it.” The Prophet had breathed his last before the money of Bahrain arrived. When the money of Bahrain reached, Abu Bakr announced, “Whoever was promised by the Prophet should come to us.” I went to Abu Bakr and said, “The Prophet promised me so and so.” Abu Bakr gave me a handful of coins and when I counted them, they were five-hundred in number. Abu Bakr then said, “Take twice the amount you have taken (besides).”


## Hadith 3:494

_Narrated Aisha:_

(wife of the Prophet) Since I reached the age when I could remember things, I have seen my parents worshipping according to the right faith of Islam. Not a single day passed but Allah's Apostle visited us both in the morning and in the evening. When the Muslims were persecuted, Abu Bakr set out for Ethiopia as an emigrant. When he reached a place called Bark-al-Ghimad, he met Ibn Ad-Daghna, the chief of the Qara tribe, who asked Abu Bakr, “Where are you going?” Abu Bakr said, “My people have turned me out of the country and I would like to tour the world and worship my Lord.” Ibn Ad-Daghna said, “A man like you will not go out, nor will he be turned out as you help the poor earn their living, keep good relation with your Kith and kin, help the disabled (or the dependents), provide guests with food and shelter, and help people during their troubles. I am your protector. So, go back and worship your Lord at your home.” Ibn Ad-Daghna went along with Abu Bakr and took him to the chiefs of Quraish saying to them, “A man like Abu Bakr will not go out, nor will he be turned out. Do you turn out a man who helps the poor earn their living, keeps good relations with Kith and kin, helps the disabled, provides guests with food and shelter, and helps the people during their troubles?”

So, Quraish allowed Ibn Ad-Daghna's guarantee of protection and told Abu- Bakr that he was secure, and said to Ibn Ad-Daghna, “Advise Abu Bakr to worship his Lord in his house and to pray and read what he liked and not to hurt us and not to do these things publicly, for we fear that our sons and women may follow him.” Ibn Ad-Daghna told Abu Bakr of all that, so Abu- Bakr continued worshipping his Lord in his house and did not pray or recite Qur'an aloud except in his house. Later on Abu Bakr had an idea of building a mosque in the court yard of his house. He fulfilled that idea and started praying and reciting Qur'an there publicly. The women and the offspring of the pagans started gathering around him and looking at him astonishingly. Abu Bakr was a softhearted person and could not help weeping while reciting Qur'an. This horrified the pagan chiefs of Quraish. They sent for Ibn Ad-Daghna and when he came, they said, “We have given Abu Bakr protection on condition that he will worship his Lord in his house, but he has transgressed that condition and has built a mosque in the court yard of his house and offered his prayer and recited Qur'an in public. We are afraid lest he mislead our women and offspring. So, go to him and tell him that if he wishes he can worship his Lord in his house only, and if not, then tell him to return your pledge of protection as we do not like to betray you by revoking your pledge, nor can we tolerate Abu Bakr's public declaration of Islam (his worshipping).”

'Aisha added: Ibn Ad-Daghna came to Abu Bakr and said, “You know the conditions on which I gave you protection, so you should either abide by those conditions or revoke my protection, as I do not like to hear the 'Arabs saying that Ibn Ad-Daghna gave the pledge of protection to a person and his people did not respect it.” Abu Bakr said, “I revoke your pledge of protection and am satisfied with Allah's protection.” At that time Allah's Apostle was still in Mecca and he said to his companions, “Your place of emigration has been shown to me. I have seen salty land, planted with date-palms and situated between two mountains which are the two ,Harras.” So, when the Prophet told it, some of the companions migrated to Medina, and some of those who had migrated to Ethiopia returned to Medina. When Abu Bakr prepared for emigration, Allah's Apostle said to him, “Wait, for I expect to be permitted to emigrate.” Abu Bakr asked, “May my father be sacrificed for your sake, do you really expect that?” Allah's Apostle replied in the affirmative. So, Abu Bakr postponed his departure in order to accompany Allah's Apostle and fed two camels which he had, with the leaves of Samor trees for four months.


## Hadith 3:495

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Whenever a dead man in debt was brought to Allah's Apostle he would ask, “Has he left anything to repay his debt?” If he was informed that he had left something to repay his debts, he would offer his funeral prayer, otherwise he would tell the Muslims to offer their friend's funeral prayer. When Allah made the Prophet wealthy through conquests, he said, “I am more rightful than other believers to be the guardian of the believers, so if a Muslim dies while in debt, I am responsible for the repayment of his debt, and whoever leaves wealth (after his death) it will belong to his heirs. ”


## Hadith 3:496

_Narrated 'Ali: Allah's Apostle ordered me to distribute the saddles_

and skins of the Budn which had slaughtered.


## Hadith 3:497

_Narrated 'Uqba bin Amir:_

that the Prophet had given him sheep to distribute among his companions and a male kid was left (after the distribution). When he informed the Prophet of it, he said (to him), “Offer it as a sacrifice on your behalf.”


## Hadith 3:498

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:_

I got an agreement written between me and Umaiya bin Khalaf that Umaiya would look after my property (or family) in Mecca and I would look after his in Medina. When I mentioned the word ‘Ar-Rahman’ in the documents, Umaiya said, “I do not know ‘Ar-Rahman.’ Write down to me your name, (with which you called yourself) in the Pre-lslamic Period of Ignorance.” So, I wrote my name ' 'Abdu 'Amr'. On the day (of the battle) of Badr, when all the people went to sleep, I went up the hill to protect him. Bilal(1) saw him (i.e. Umaiya) and went to a gathering of Ansar and said, “(Here is) Umaiya bin Khalaf! Woe to me if he escapes!” So, a group of Ansar went out with Bilal to follow us ('Abdur-Rahman and Umaiya). Being afraid that they would catch us, I left Umaiya's son for them to keep them busy but the Ansar killed the son and insisted on following us. Umaiya was a fat man, and when they approached us, I told him to kneel down, and he knelt, and I laid myself on him to protect him, but the Ansar killed him by passing their swords underneath me, and one of them injured my foot with his sword. (The sub narrator said, “ 'Abdur-Rahman used to show us the trace of the wound on the back of his foot.”)


## Hadith 3:499

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri and Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle employed someone as a governor at Khaibar. When the man came to Medina, he brought with him dates called Janib. The Prophet asked him, “Are all the dates of Khaibar of this kind?” The man replied, “(No), we exchange two Sa's of bad dates for one Sa of this kind of dates (i.e. Janib), or exchange three Sa's for two.” On that, the Prophet said, “Don't do so, as it is a kind of usury (Riba) but sell the dates of inferior quality for money, and then buy Janib with the money”. The Prophet said the same thing about dates sold by weight. (See Hadith No. 506).


## Hadith 3:500

_Narrated Ibn Ka'b bin Malik from his father:_

We had some sheep which used to graze at Sala'. One of our slavegirls saw a sheep dying and she broke a stone and slaughtered the sheep with it. My father said to the people, “Don't eat it till I ask the Prophet about it (or till I send somebody to ask the Prophet).” So, he asked or sent somebody to ask the Prophet, and the Prophet permitted him to eat it. 'Ubaidullah (a sub-narrator) said, “I admire that girl, for though she was a slave-girl, she dared to slaughter the sheep . ”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_400">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:301 to 3:400</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_600">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:501 to 3:600</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
