---
title: "Hadith 3:501 to 3:600"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_500">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:401 to 3:500</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_700">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:601 to 3:700</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 3:501

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet owed somebody a camel of a certain age. When he came to demand it back, the Prophet said (to some people), “Give him (his due).” When the people searched for a camel of that age, they found none, but found a camel one year older. The Prophet said, “Give (it to) him.” On that, the man remarked, “You have given me my right in full. May Allah give you in full.” The Prophet said, “The best amongst you is the one who pays the rights of others generously.”


## Hadith 3:502

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A man came to the Prophet demanding his debts and behaved rudely. The companions of the Prophet intended to harm him, but Allah's Apostle said (to them), “Leave him, for the creditor (i.e. owner of a right) has the right to speak.” Allah's Apostle then said, “Give him a camel of the same age as that of his.” The people said, “O Allah's Apostle! There is only a camel that is older than his.” Allah's Apostle said, “Give (it to) him, for the best amongst you is he who pays the rights of others handsomely.”


## Hadith 3:503

_Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:_

When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin after embracing Islam, came to Allah's Apostle, he got up. They appealed to him to return their properties and their captives. Allah's Apostle said to them, “The most beloved statement to me is the true one. So, you have the option of restoring your properties or your captives, for I have delayed distributing them.” The narrator added, Allah's Apostle c had been waiting for them for more than ten days on his return from Taif. When they realized that Allah's Apostle would return to them only one of two things, they said, “We choose our captives.” So, Allah's Apostle got up in the gathering of the Muslims, praised Allah as He deserved, and said, “Then after! These brethren of yours have come to you with repentance and I see it proper to return their captives to them. So, whoever amongst you likes to do that as a favor, then he can do it, and whoever of you wants to stick to his share till we pay him from the very first booty which Allah will give us then he can do so.” The people replied, “We agree to give up our shares willingly as a favor for Allah's Apostle.” Then Allah's Apostle said, “We don't know who amongst you has agreed and who hasn't. Go back and your chiefs may tell us your opinion.” So, all of them returned and their chiefs discussed the matter with them and then they (i.e. their chiefs) came to Allah's Apostle to tell him that they (i.e. the people) had given up their shares gladly and willingly.


## Hadith 3:504

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

I was accompanying the Prophet on a journey and was riding a slow camel that was lagging behind the others. The Prophet passed by me and asked, “Who is this?” I replied, “Jabir bin 'Abdullah.” He asked, “What is the matter, (why are you late)?” I replied, “I am riding a slow camel.” He asked, “Do you have a stick?” I replied in the affirmative. He said, “Give it to me.” When I gave it to him, he beat the camel and rebuked it. Then that camel surpassed the others thenceforth. The Prophet said, “Sell it to me.” I replied, “It is (a gift) for you, O Allah's Apostle.” He said, “Sell it to me. I have bought it for four Dinars (gold pieces) and you can keep on riding it till Medina.” When we approached Medina, I started going (towards my house). The Prophet said, “Where are you going?” I Sad, “I have married a widow.” He said, “Why have you not married a virgin to fondle with each other?” I said, “My father died and left daughters, so I decided to marry a widow (an experienced woman) (to look after them).” He said, “Well done.” When we reached Medina, Allah's Apostle said, “O Bilal, pay him (the price of the camel) and give him extra money.” Bilal gave me four Dinars and one Qirat extra. (A sub-narrator said): Jabir added, “The extra Qirat of Allah's Apostle never parted from me.” The Qirat was always in Jabir bin 'Abdullah's purse.


## Hadith 3:505

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! I want to give up myself to you.” A man said, “Marry her to me.” The Prophet said, “We agree to marry her to you with what you know of the Qur'an by heart.”


## Hadith 3:505

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle deputed me to keep Sadaqat (al-Fitr) of Ramadan. A comer came and started taking handfuls of the foodstuff (of the Sadaqa) (stealthily). I took hold of him and said, “By Allah, I will take you to Allah's Apostle .” He said, “I am needy and have many dependents, and I am in great need.” I released him, and in the morning Allah's Apostle asked me, “What did your prisoner do yesterday?” I said, “O Allah's Apostle! The person complained of being needy and of having many dependents, so, I pitied him and let him go.” Allah's Apostle said, “Indeed, he told you a lie and he will be coming again.” I believed that he would show up again as Allah's Apostle had told me that he would return. So, I waited for him watchfully. When he (showed up and) started stealing handfuls of foodstuff, I caught hold of him again and said, “I will definitely take you to Allah's Apostle. He said, ”Leave me, for I am very needy and have many dependents. I promise I will not come back again." I pitied him and let him go.

In the morning Allah's Apostle asked me, “What did your prisoner do.” I replied, “O Allah's Apostle! He complained of his great need and of too many dependents, so I took pity on him and set him free.” Allah's Apostle said, “Verily, he told you a lie and he will return.” I waited for him attentively for the third time, and when he (came and) started stealing handfuls of the foodstuff, I caught hold of him and said, “I will surely take you to Allah's Apostle as it is the third time you promise not to return, yet you break your promise and come.” He said, “(Forgive me and) I will teach you some words with which Allah will benefit you.” I asked, “What are they?” He replied, “Whenever you go to bed, recite ”Ayat-al-Kursi“— 'Allahu la ilaha illa huwa-l-Haiy-ul Qaiyum' till you finish the whole verse. (If you do so), Allah will appoint a guard for you who will stay with you and no satan will come near you till morning. ” So, I released him. In the morning, Allah's Apostle asked, “What did your prisoner do yesterday?” I replied, “He claimed that he would teach me some words by which Allah will benefit me, so I let him go.” Allah's Apostle asked, “What are they?” I replied, “He said to me, 'Whenever you go to bed, recite Ayat-al-Kursi from the beginning to the end —— Allahu la ilaha illa huwa-lHaiy-ul-Qaiyum——.' He further said to me, '(If you do so), Allah will appoint a guard for you who will stay with you, and no satan will come near you till morning.' (Abu Huraira or another sub-narrator) added that they (the companions) were very keen to do good deeds. The Prophet said, ”He really spoke the truth, although he is an absolute liar. Do you know whom you were talking to, these three nights, O Abu Huraira?“ Abu Huraira said, ”No.“ He said, ”It was Satan."


## Hadith 3:506

_Narrated Abu Said al-Khudri:_

Once Bilal brought Barni (i.e. a kind of dates) to the Prophet and the Prophet asked him, “From where have you brought these?” Bilal replied, “I had some inferior type of dates and exchanged two Sas of it for one Sa of Barni dates in order to give it to the Prophet; to eat.” Thereupon the Prophet said, “Beware! Beware! This is definitely Riba (usury)! This is definitely Riba (Usury)! Don't do so, but if you want to buy (a superior kind of dates) sell the inferior dates for money and then buy the superior kind of dates with that money.”


## Hadith 3:507

_Narrated 'Amr:_

Concerning the Waqf of 'Umar: It was not sinful of the trustee (of the Waqf) to eat or provide his friends from it, provided the trustee had no intention of collecting fortune (for himself). Ibn 'Umar was the manager of the trust of 'Umar and he used to give presents from it to those with whom he used to stay at Mecca.


## Hadith 3:508

_Narrated Zaid bin Khalid and Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “O Unais! Go to the wife of this (man) and if she confesses (that she has committed illegal sexual intercourse), then stone her to death.”


## Hadith 3:509

_Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:_

When An-Nuaman or his son was brought in a state of drunkenness, Allah's Apostle ordered all those who were present in the house to beat him. I was one of those who beat him. We beat him with shoes and palm-leaf stalks.


## Hadith 3:510

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I twisted the garlands of the Hadis (i.e. animals for sacrifice) of Allah's Apostle with my own hands. Then Allah's Apostle put them around their necks with his own hands, and sent them with my father (to Mecca). Nothing legal was regarded illegal for Allah's Apostle till the animals were slaughtered.


## Hadith 3:511

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Abu Talha was the richest man in Medina amongst the Ansar and Beeruha' (garden) was the most beloved of his property, and it was situated opposite the mosque (of the Prophet.). Allah's Apostle used to enter it and drink from its sweet water. When the following Divine Verse were revealed: 'you will not attain righteousness till you spend in charity of the things you love' (3.93), Abu Talha got up in front of Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Allah says in His Book, 'You will not attain righteousness unless you spend (in charity) that which you love,' and verily, the most beloved to me of my property is Beeruha (garden), so I give it in charity and hope for its reward from Allah. O Allah's Apostle! Spend it wherever you like.” Allah's Apostle appreciated that and said, “That is perishable wealth, that is perishable wealth. I have heard what you have said; I suggest you to distribute it among your relatives.” Abu Talha said, “I will do so, O Allah's Apostle.” So, Abu Talha distributed it among his relatives and cousins. The sub-narrator (Malik) said: The Prophet said: “That is a profitable wealth,” instead of “perishable wealth”.


## Hadith 3:512

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

The Prophet said, “An honest treasurer who gives what he is ordered to give fully, perfectly and willingly to the person to whom he is ordered to give, is regarded as one of the two charitable persons.”


## Hadith 3:513

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle said, “There is none amongst the Muslims who plants a tree or sows seeds, and then a bird, or a person or an animal eats from it, but is regarded as a charitable gift for him.”


## Hadith 3:514

_Narrated Abu Umama al-Bahili:_

I saw some agricultural equipments and said: “I heard the Prophet saying: ”There is no house in which these equipment enters except that Allah will cause humiliation to enter it."


## Hadith 3:515

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever keeps a dog, one Qirat of the reward of his good deeds is deducted daily, unless the dog is used for guarding a farm or cattle.” Abu Huraira (in another narration) said from the Prophet, “unless it is used for guarding sheep or farms, or for dog for guarding cattle or for hunting.”


## Hadith 3:516

_Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:_

Abu Sufyan bin Abu Zuhair, a man from Azd Shanu'a and one of the companions of the Prophet said, “I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'If one keeps a dog which is meant for guarding neither a farm nor cattle, one Qirat of the reward of his good deeds is deducted daily.” I said, “Did you hear this from Allah's Apostle?” He said, “Yes, by the Lord of this Mosque.”


## Hadith 3:517

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “While a man was riding a cow, it turned towards him and said, 'I have not been created for this purpose (i.e. carrying), I have been created for sloughing.” The Prophet added, “I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar believe in the story.” The Prophet went on, “A wolf caught a sheep, and when the shepherd chased it, the wolf said, 'Who will be its guard on the day of wild beasts, when there will be no shepherd for it except me?' ”After narrating it, the Prophet said, “I, Abu Bakr and 'Umar too believe it.” Abu Salama (a sub-narrator) said, “Abu Bakr and 'Umar were not present then.” (It has been written that a wolf also spoke to one of the companions of the Prophet near Medina as narrated in Fatah-al-Bari:

Suddenly a wolf caught a sheep and I shouted at it. The wolf sat on its tail and addressed me, saying, 'Who will look after it (i.e. the sheep) when you will be busy and not able to look after it? Do you forbid me the provision which Allah has provided me?' “ Ahban added, ”I clapped my hands and said, 'By Allah, I have never seen anything more curious and wonderful than this!' On that the wolf said, 'There is something (more curious) and wonderful than this; that is, Allah's Apostle in those palm trees, inviting people to Allah (i.e. Islam).' “Unais bin 'Amr further said, ”Then Ahban went to Allah's Apostle and informed him what happened and embraced Islam.)“ palm trees or other trees and share the fruits with me.”


## Hadith 3:518

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Ansar said to the Prophet “Distribute the date palm trees between us and our emigrant brothers.” He replied, “No.” The Ansar said (to the emigrants), “Look after the trees (water and watch them) and share the fruits with us.” The emigrants said, “We listen and obey.”


## Hadith 3:519

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet got the date palm trees of the tribe of Bani-An-Nadir burnt and the trees cut down at a place called Al-Buwaira . Hassan bin Thabit said in a poetic verse: “The chiefs of Bani Lu'ai found it easy to watch fire spreading at Al-Buwaira.”


## Hadith 3:520

_Narrated Rafi' bin Khadij:_

We worked on farms more than anybody else in Medina. We used to rent the land at the yield of specific delimited portion of it to be given to the landlord. Sometimes the vegetation of that portion was affected by blights etc., while the rest remained safe and vice versa, so the Prophet forbade this practice. At that time gold or silver were not used (for renting the land). If they provided the seeds, they would get so-and-so much. Al-Hasan said, “There is no harm if the land belongs to one but both spend on it and the yield is divided between them.” Az-Zuhri had the same opinion. Al-Hasan said, “There is no harm if cotton is picked on the condition of having half the yield.” Ibrahim, Ibn Siain, ‘Ata’, Al-Hakam, Az-Zuhri and Qatada said, “There is no harm in giving the yarn to the weaver to weave into cloth on the basis that one-third or one-fourth (or any other portion) of the cloth is given to the weaver for his labor.” Ma'am said, “There is no harm in hiring animals for a definite (fixed) period on the basis that one-third or one-fourth of the products carried by the animals is given to the owner of the animals.”


## Hadith 3:521

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

The Prophet concluded a contract with the people of Khaibar to utilize the land on the condition that half the products of fruits or vegetation would be their share. The Prophet used to give his wives one hundred Wasqs each, eighty Wasqs of dates and twenty Wasqs of barley. (When 'Umar became the Caliph) he gave the wives of the Prophet the option of either having the land and water as their shares, or carrying on the previous practice. Some of them chose the land and some chose the Wasqs, and 'Aisha chose the land.


## Hadith 3:522

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet made a deal with the people of Khaibar that they would have half the fruits and vegetation of the land they cultivated.


## Hadith 3:523

_Narrated 'Amr:_

I said to Tawus, “I wish you would give up Mukhabara (Share-cropping), for the people say that the Prophet forbade it.” On that Tawus replied, “O 'Amr! I give the land to share-croppers and help them. No doubt; the most learned man, namely Ibn 'Abbas told me that the Prophet had not forbidden it but said, 'It is more beneficial for one to give his land free to one's brother than to charge him a fixed rental.”


## Hadith 3:524

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle gave the land of Khaibar to the Jew's on the condition that they work on it and cultivate it, and be given half of its yield.


## Hadith 3:525

_Narrated Rafi:_

We worked on farms more than anybody else in Medina. We used to rent the land and say to the owner, “The yield of this portion is for us and the yield of that portion is for you (as the rent).” One of those portions might yield something and the other might not. So, the Prophet forbade us to do so.


## Hadith 3:526

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “While three men were walking, It started raining and they took shelter (refuge) in a cave in a mountain. A big rock rolled down from the mountain and closed the mouth of the cave. They said to each other, ”Think of good deeds which you did for Allah's sake only, and invoke Allah by giving reference to those deeds so that He may remove this rock from you.“ One of them said, 'O Allah! I had old parents and small children and I used to graze the sheep for them. On my return to them in the evening, I used to milk (the sheep) and start providing my parents first of all before my children. One day I was delayed and came late at night and found my parents sleeping. I milked (the sheep) as usual and stood by their heads. I hated to wake them up and disliked to give milk to my children before them, although my children were weeping (because of hunger) at my feet till the day dawned. O Allah! If I did this for Your sake only, kindly remove the rock so that we could see the sky through it.' So, Allah removed the rock a little and they saw the sky. The second man said, 'O Allah! I was in love with a cousin of mine like the deepest love a man may have for a woman. I wanted to outrage her chastity but she refused unless I gave her one hundred Dinars. So, I struggled to collect that amount. And when I sat between her legs, she said, 'O Allah's slave! Be afraid of Allah and do not deflower me except rightfully (by marriage).' So, I got up. O Allah! If I did it for Your sake only, please remove the rock.' The rock shifted a little more. Then the third man said, 'O Allah! I employed a laborer for a Faraq of rice and when he finished his job and demanded his right, I presented it to him, but he refused to take it. So, I sowed the rice many time till I gathered cows and their shepherd (from the yield). (Then after some time) He came and said to me, 'Fear Allah (and give me my right).” I said, 'Go and take those cows and the shepherd.' He said, 'Be afraid of Allah! Don't mock at me.' I said, 'I am not mocking at you. Take (all that).' So, he took all that. O Allah! If I did that for Your sake only, please remove the rest of the rock.' So, Allah removed the rock."


## Hadith 3:527

_Narrated Zaid bin Aslam from his father:_

Umar said, “But for the future Muslim generations, I would have distributed the land of the villages I conquer among the soldiers as the Prophet distributed the land of Khaibar.”


## Hadith 3:528

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “He who cultivates land that does not belong to anybody is more rightful (to own it).” 'Urwa said, “Umar gave the same verdict in his Caliphate.”


## Hadith 3:529

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

While the Prophet was passing the night at his place of rest in Dhul-Hulaifa in the bottom of the valley (of Aqiq), he saw a dream and it was said to him, “You are in a blessed valley.” Musa said, “Salim let our camels kneel at the place where 'Abdullah used to make his camel kneel, seeking the place where Allah's Apostle used to take a rest, which is situated below the mosque which is in the bottom of the valley; it is midway between the mosque and the road.”


## Hadith 3:530

_Narrated 'Umar:_

While the Prophet was in Al-'Aqiq he said, “Someone (meaning Gabriel) came to me from my Lord tonight (in my dream) and said, 'Offer the prayer in this blessed valley and say (I intend to perform) Umra along with Hajj (together).' ”


## Hadith 3:531

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Umar expelled the Jews and the Christians from Hijaz. When Allah's Apostle had conquered Khaibar, he wanted to expel the Jews from it as its land became the property of Allah, His Apostle, and the Muslims. Allah's Apostle intended to expel the Jews but they requested him to let them stay there on the condition that they would do the labor and get half of the fruits. Allah's Apostle told them, “We will let you stay on thus condition, as long as we wish.” So, they (i.e. Jews) kept on living there until 'Umar forced them to go towards Taima' and Ariha'.


## Hadith 3:532

_Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:_

My uncle Zuhair said, “Allah's Apostle forbade us to do a thing which was a source of help to us.” I said, “Whatever Allah's Apostle said was right.” He said, "Allah's Apostle sent for me and asked, 'What are you doing with your farms?' I replied, 'We give our farms on rent on the basis that we get the yield produced at the banks of the water streams (rivers) for the rent, or rent it for some Wasqs of barley and dates.' Allah's Apostle said, 'Do not do so, but cultivate (the land) yourselves or let it be cultivated by others gratis, or keep it uncultivated.' I said, 'We hear and obey.'


## Hadith 3:533

_Narrated Jabir:_

The people used to rent their land for cultivation for one-third, one-fourth or half its yield. The Prophet said, “Whoever has land should cultivate it himself or give it to his (Muslim) brother gratis; otherwise keep it uncultivated.”

cultivate it himself or give it to his (Muslim) brother gratis; otherwise he should keep it uncultivated."


## Hadith 3:534

_Narrated 'Amr:_

When I mentioned it (i.e. the narration of Rafi 'bin Khadij: no. 532) to Tawus, he said, “It is permissible to rent the land for cultivation, for Ibn 'Abbas said, 'The Prophet did not forbid that, but said: One had better give the land to one's brother gratis rather than charge a certain amount for it.' ”


## Hadith 3:535

_Narrated Nafi:_

Ibn 'Umar used to rent his farms in the time of Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, and in the early days of Muawiya. Then he was told the narration of Rafi 'bin Khadij that the Prophet had forbidden the renting of farms. Ibn 'Umar went to Rafi' and I accompanied him. He asked Rafi who replied that the Prophet had forbidden the renting of farms. Ibn 'Umar said, "You know that we used to rent our farms in the life-time of Allah's Apostle for the yield of the banks of the water streams (rivers) and for certain amount of figs.


## Hadith 3:536

_Narrated Salim:_

Abdullah bin 'Umar said, “I knew that the land was rented for cultivation in the life-time of Allah's Apostle .” Later on Ibn 'Umar was afraid that the Prophet had forbidden it, and he had no knowledge of it, so he gave up renting his land.


## Hadith 3:537

_Narrated Hanzla bin Qais:_

Rafi bin Khadij said, “My two uncles told me that they (i.e. the companions of the Prophet) used to rent the land in the life-time of the Prophet for the yield on the banks of water streams (rivers) or for a portion of the yield stipulated by the owner of the land. The Prophet forbade it.” I said to Rafi, “What about renting the land for Dinars and Dirhams?” He replied, “There is no harm in renting for Dinars-Dirhams. Al-Laith said, ”If those who have discernment for distinguishing what is legal from what is illegal looked into what has been forbidden concerning this matter they would not permit it, for it is surrounded with dangers."


## Hadith 3:538

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Once the Prophet was narrating (a story), while a bedouin was sitting with him. “One of the inhabitants of Paradise will ask Allah to allow him to cultivate the land. Allah will ask him, 'Are you not living in the pleasures you like?' He will say, 'Yes, but I like to cultivate the land.' ” The Prophet added, “When the man (will be permitted he) will sow the seeds and the plants will grow up and get ripe, ready for reaping and so on till it will be as huge as mountains within a wink. Allah will then say to him, 'O son of Adam! Take here you are, gather (the yield); nothing satisfies you.' ” On that, the bedouin said, “The man must be either from Quraish (i.e. an emigrant) or an Ansari, for they are farmers, whereas we are not farmers.” The Prophet smiled (at this).


## Hadith 3:539

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

We used to be very happy on Friday as an old lady used to cut some roots of the Silq, which we used to plant on the banks of our small water streams, and cook them in a pot of her's, adding to them, some grains of barley. (Ya'qub, the sub-narrator said, “I think the narrator mentioned that the food did not contain fat or melted fat (taken from meat).”) When we offered the Friday prayer we would go to her and she would serve us with the dish. So, we used to be happy on Fridays because of that. We used not to take our meals or the midday nap except after the Jumua prayer (i.e. Friday prayer) .


## Hadith 3:540

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The people say that Abu Huraira narrates too many narrations. In fact Allah knows whether I say the truth or not. They also ask, “Why do the emigrants and the Ansar not narrate as he does?” In fact, my emigrant brethren were busy trading in the markets, and my Ansar brethren were busy with their properties. I was a poor man keeping the company of Allah's Apostle and was satisfied with what filled my stomach. So, I used to be present while they (i.e. the emigrants and the Ansar) were absent, and I used to remember while they forgot (the Hadith). One day the Prophet said, “Whoever spreads his sheet till I finish this statement of mine and then gathers it on his chest, will never forget anything of my statement.” So, I spread my covering sheet which was the only garment I had, till the Prophet finished his statement and then I gathered it over my chest. By Him Who had sent him (i.e. Allah's Apostle) with the truth, since then I did not forget even a single word of that statement of his, until this day of mine. By Allah, but for two verses in Allah's Book, I would never have related any narration (from the Prophet). (These two verses are): "Verily! Those who conceal the clear signs and the guidance which we have sent down .....(up to) the Merciful.' (2.159-160)


## Hadith 3:541

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

A tumbler (full of milk or water) was brought to the Prophet who drank from it, while on his right side there was sitting a boy who was the youngest of those who were present and on his left side there were old men. The Prophet asked, “O boy, will you allow me to give it (i.e. the rest of the drink) to the old men?” The boy said, “O Allah's Apostle! I will not give preference to anyone over me to drink the rest of it from which you have drunk.” So, the Prophet gave it to him.


## Hadith 3:542

_Narrated Az-Zuhri:_

Anas bin Malik said, that once a domestic sheep was milked for Allah's Apostle while he was in the house of Anas bin Malik. The milk was mixed with water drawn from the well in Anas's house. A tumbler of it was presented to Allah's Apostle who drank from it. Then Abu Bakr was sitting on his left side and a bedouin on his right side. When the Prophet removed the tumbler from his mouth, 'Umar was afraid that the Prophet might give it to the bedouin, so he said. “O Allah's Apostle! Give it to Abu Bakr who is sitting by your side.” But the Prophet gave it to the bedouin, who was to his right and said, “You should start with the one on your right side.”


## Hadith 3:543

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Do not withhold the superfluous water, for that will prevent people from grazing their cattle.”


## Hadith 3:544

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

that Allah's Apostle said, “Do not withhold the superfluous water in order to withhold the superfluous grass.”


## Hadith 3:545

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “No bloodmoney will be charged if somebody dies in a mine or in a well or is killed by an animal; and if somebody finds a treasure in his land he has to give one-fifth of it to the Government.”


## Hadith 3:546

_Narrated 'Abdullah (bin Mas'ud):_

The Prophet said, “Whoever takes a false oath to deprive somebody of his property will meet Allah while He will be angry with him.” Allah revealed: 'Verily those who purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's covenant, and their oaths.' ........(3.77)

Al-Ash'ath came (to the place where 'Abdullah was narrating) and said, “What has Abu 'Abdur-Rahman (i.e. Abdullah) been telling you? This verse was revealed concerning me. I had a well in the land of a cousin of mine. The Prophet asked me to bring witnesses (to confirm my claim). I said, 'I don't have witnesses.' He said, 'Let the defendant take an oath then.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! He will take a (false) oath immediately.' Then the Prophet mentioned the above narration and Allah revealed the verse to confirm what he had said.” (See Hadith No. 692)


## Hadith 3:547

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, "There are three persons whom Allah will not look at on the Day of Resurrection, nor will he purify them and theirs shall be a severe punishment. They are:

1\. A man possessed superfluous water, on a way and he withheld it from travelers.

2\. A man who gave a pledge of allegiance to a ruler and he gave it only for worldly benefits. If the ruler gives him something he gets satisfied, and if the ruler withholds something from him, he gets dissatisfied.

3\. And man displayed his goods for sale after the 'Asr prayer and he said, 'By Allah, except Whom None has the right to be worshipped, I have been given so much for my goods,' and somebody believes him (and buys them)."

The Prophet then recited: “Verily! Those who purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's Covenant and their oaths.” (3.77)


## Hadith 3:548

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair:_

An Ansari man quarrelled with Az-Zubair in the presence of the Prophet about the Harra Canals which were used for irrigating the date-palms. The Ansari man said to Az-Zubair, “Let the water pass' but Az-Zubair refused to do so. So, the case was brought before the Prophet who said to Az-Zubair, ”O Zubair! Irrigate (your land) and then let the water pass to your neighbor.“ On that the Ansari got angry and said to the Prophet, ”Is it because he (i.e. Zubair) is your aunt's son?“ On that the color of the face of Allah's Apostle changed (because of anger) and he said, ”O Zubair! Irrigate (your land) and then withhold the water till it reaches the walls between the pits round the trees.“ Zubair said, ”By Allah, I think that the following verse was revealed on this occasion“: ”But no, by your Lord They can have No faith Until they make you judge In all disputes between them." (4.65)


## Hadith 3:549

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

When a man from the Ansar quarrelled with AzZubair, the Prophet said, “O Zubair! Irrigate (your land) first and then let the water flow (to the land of the others).” “On that the Ansari said, (to the Prophet), ”It is because he is your aunt's son.“ On that the Prophet said, ”O Zubair! Irrigate till the water reaches the walls between the pits around the trees and then stop (i.e. let the water go to the other's land).“ I think the following verse was revealed concerning this event: ”But no, by your Lord They can have No faith Until they make you judge In all disputes between them." (4.65)


## Hadith 3:550

_Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:_

An-Ansari man quarrelled with Az-Zubair about a canal in the Harra which was used for irrigating date-palms. Allah's Apostle, ordering Zubair to be moderate, said, “O Zubair! Irrigate (your land) first and then leave the water for your neighbor.” The Ansari said, “Is it because he is your aunt's son?” On that the color of the face of Allah's Apostle changed and he said, “O Zubair! Irrigate (your land) and withhold the water till it reaches the walls that are between the pits around the trees.” So, Allah's Apostle gave Zubair his full right. Zubair said, “By Allah, the following verse was revealed in that connection”: “But no, by your Lord They can have No faith Until they make you judge In all disputes between them.” (4.65)

(The sub-narrator,) Ibn Shihab said to Juraij (another sub-narrator), “The Ansar and the other people interpreted the saying of the Prophet, 'Irrigate (your land) and with-hold the water till it reaches the walls between the pits around the trees,' as meaning up to the ankles.”


## Hadith 3:551

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “While a man was walking he felt thirsty and went down a well and drank water from it. On coming out of it, he saw a dog panting and eating mud because of excessive thirst. The man said, 'This (dog) is suffering from the same problem as that of mine. So he (went down the well), filled his shoe with water, caught hold of it with his teeth and climbed up and watered the dog. Allah thanked him for his (good) deed and forgave him.” The people asked, “O Allah's Apostle! Is there a reward for us in serving (the) animals?” He replied, “Yes, there is a reward for serving any animate.”


## Hadith 3:552

_Narrated Asma' bint Abi Bakr:_

The Prophet prayed the eclipse prayer, and then said, “Hell was displayed so close that I said, 'O my Lord ! Am I going to be one of its inhabitants?”' Suddenly he saw a woman. I think he said, who was being scratched by a cat. He said, “What is wrong with her?” He was told, “She had imprisoned it (i.e. the cat) till it died of hunger.”


## Hadith 3:553

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “A woman was tortured and was put in Hell because of a cat which she had kept locked till it died of hunger.” Allah's Apostle further said, (Allah knows better) Allah said (to the woman), 'You neither fed it nor watered when you locked it up, nor did you set it free to eat the insects of the earth."


## Hadith 3:554

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

Once a tumbler (full of milk or water) was brought to Allah's Apostle who drank from it, while on his right side there was sitting a boy who was the youngest of those who were present, and on his left side there were old men. The Prophet asked, “O boy ! Do you allow me to give (the drink) to the elder people (first)?” The boy said, “I will not prefer anybody to have my share from you, O Allah's Apostle!” So, he gave it to the boy.


## Hadith 3:555

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, I will drive some people out from my (sacred) Fount on the Day of Resurrection as strange camels are expelled from a private trough.”


## Hadith 3:556

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “May Allah be merciful to the mother of Ishmael! If she had left the water of Zam-Zam (fountain) as it was, (without constructing a basin for keeping the water), (or said, ”If she had not taken handfuls of its water“), it would have been a flowing stream. Jurhum (an Arab tribe) came and asked her, 'May we settle at your dwelling?' She said, 'Yes, but you have no right to possess the water.' They agreed.”


## Hadith 3:557

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, "There are three types of people whom Allah will neither talk to, nor look at, on the Day of Resurrection. (They are):

1\. A man who takes an oath falsely that he has been offered for his goods so much more than what he is given,

2\. a man who takes a false oath after the 'Asr prayer in order to grab a Muslim's property, and

3\. a man who with-holds his superfluous water. Allah will say to him, “Today I will with-hold My Grace from you as you with-held the superfluity of what you had not created.”


## Hadith 3:558

_Narrated As-Sab bin Jaththama:_

Allah's Apostle said, No Hima except for Allah and His Apostle. We have been told that Allah's Apostle made a place called An-Naqi' as Hima, and 'Umar made Ash-Sharaf and Ar-Rabadha Hima (for grazing the animals of Zakat).


## Hadith 3:559

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Keeping horses may be a source of reward to some (man), a shelter to another (i.e. means of earning one's living), or a burden to a third. He to whom the horse will be a source of reward is the one who keeps it in Allah's Cause (prepare it for holy battles) and ties it by a long rope in a pasture (or a garden). He will get a reward equal to what its long rope allows it to eat in the pasture or the garden, and if that horse breaks its rope and crosses one or two hills, then all its foot-steps and its dung will be counted as good deeds for its owner; and if it passes by a river and drinks from it, then that will also be regarded as a good deed for its owner even if he has had no intention of watering it then. Horses are a shelter from poverty to the second person who keeps horses for earning his living so as not to ask others, and at the same time he gives Allah's right (i.e. Rakat) (from the wealth he earns through using them in trading etc.,) and does not overburden them. He who keeps horses just out of pride and for showing off and as a means of harming the Muslims, his horses will be a source of sins to him.” When Allah's Apostle was asked about donkeys, he replied, "Nothing particular was revealed to me regarding


## Hadith 3:560

_Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:_

A man came to Allah's Apostle and asked about Al-Luqata (a fallen thing). The Prophet said, “Recognize its container and its tying material and then make a public announcement about it for one year and if its owner shows up, give it to him; otherwise use it as you like.” The man said, “What about a lost sheep?” The Prophet said, “It is for you, your brother or the wolf.” The man said “What about a lost camel?” The Prophet said, “Why should you take it as it has got its water-container (its stomach) and its hooves and it can reach the places of water and can eat the trees till its owner finds it?”


## Hadith 3:561

_Narrated Az-Zubair bin Al 'Awwam:_

The Prophet said, “No doubt, one had better take a rope (and cut) and tie a bundle of wood and sell it whereby Allah will keep his face away (from Hell-fire) rather than ask others who may give him or not.”


## Hadith 3:562

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “No doubt, you had better gather a bundle of wood and carry it on your back (and earn your living thereby) rather than ask somebody who may give you or not.”


## Hadith 3:563

_Narrated Husain bin Ali:_

Ali bin Abi Talib said: “I got a she-camel as my share of the war booty on the day (of the battle) of Badr, and Allah's Apostle gave me another she-camel. I let both of them kneel at the door of one of the Ansar, intending to carry Idhkhir on them to sell it and use its price for my wedding banquet on marrying Fatima. A goldsmith from Bam Qainqa' was with me. Hamza bin 'Abdul-Muttalib was in that house drinking wine and a lady singer was reciting: ”O Hamza! (Kill) the (two) fat old she camels (and serve them to your guests)."

So Hamza took his sword and went towards the two she-camels and cut off their humps and opened their flanks and took a part of their livers.“ (I said to Ibn Shihab, ”Did he take part of the humps?“ He replied, ”He cut off their humps and carried them away.“) 'Ali further said, ”When I saw that dreadful sight, I went to the Prophet and told him the news. The Prophet came out in the company of Zaid bin Haritha who was with him then, and I too went with them. He went to Hamza and spoke harshly to him. Hamza looked up and said, 'Aren't you only the slaves of my forefathers?' The Prophet retreated and went out. This incident happened before the prohibition of drinking."


## Hadith 3:564

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet decided to grant a portion of (the uncultivated land of) Bahrain to the Ansar. The Ansar said, “(We will not accept it) till you give a similar portion to our emigrant brothers (from Quraish).” He said, "(O Ansar!) You will soon see people giving preference to others, so remain patient till you meet me (on the Day of Resurrection).


## Hadith 3:565

_Narrated Abu Huraira: The Prophet said, "One of the rights of a she_

camel is that it should be milked at a place of water."


## Hadith 3:566

_Narrated Zaid bin Thabit:_

The Prophet permitted selling the dates of the 'Araya for ready dates by estimating the amount of the former (as they are still on the trees).


## Hadith 3:567

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet forbade the sales called Al-Mukhabara, Al-Muhaqala and Al-Muzabana and the selling of fruits till they are free from blights. He forbade the selling of the fruits except for money, except the 'Araya.


## Hadith 3:568

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet allowed the sale of the dates of the 'Araya for ready dates by estimating the former which should be estimated as less than five Awsuq or five Awsuq. (Dawud, the sub-narrator is not sure as to the right amount.)


## Hadith 3:569

_Narrated Rafi 'bin Khadij and Sahl bin Al Hathma:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the sale of Muzabana, i.e. selling of fruits for fruits, except in the case of 'Araya; he allowed the owners of 'Araya such kind of sale.


## Hadith 3:570

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

While I was in the company of the Prophet in one of his Ghazawat, he asked, “What is wrong with your camel? Will you sell it?” I replied in the affirmative and sold it to him. When he reached Medina, I took the camel to him in the morning and he paid me its price.


## Hadith 3:571

_Narrated Al-Amash:_

When we were with Ibrahim, we talked about mortgaging in deals of Salam. Ibrahim narrated from Aswad that 'Aisha had said, “The Prophet bought some foodstuff on credit from a Jew and mortgaged an iron armor to him.”


## Hadith 3:572

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever takes the money of the people with the intention of repaying it, Allah will repay it on his behalf, and whoever takes it in order to spoil it, then Allah will spoil him.”


## Hadith 3:573

_Narrated Abu Dhar:_

Once, while I was in the company of the Prophet, he saw the mountain of Uhud and said, “I would not like to have this mountain turned into gold for me unless nothing of it, not even a single Dinar remains of it with me for more than three days (i.e. I will spend all of it in Allah's Cause), except that Dinar which I will keep for repaying debts.” Then he said, “Those who are rich in this world would have little reward in the Hereafter except those who spend their money here and there (in Allah's Cause), and they are few in number.” Then he ordered me to stay at my place and went not far away. I heard a voice and intended to go to him but I remembered his order, “Stay at your place till I return.” On his return I said, “O Allah's Apostle! (What was) that noise which I heard?” He said, “Did you hear anything?” I said, “Yes.” He said, “Gabriel came and said to me, 'Whoever amongst your followers dies, worshipping none along with Allah, will enter Paradise.' ” I said, “Even if he did such-and-such things (i.e. even if he stole or committed illegal sexual intercourse)” He said, “Yes.”


## Hadith 3:574

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If I had gold equal to the mountain of Uhud, it would not please me that it should remain with me for more than three days, except an amount which I would keep for repaying debts.”


## Hadith 3:575

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A man demanded his debts from Allah's Apostle in such a rude manner that the companions of the Prophet intended to harm him, but the Prophet said, “Leave him, no doubt, for he (the creditor) has the right to demand it (harshly). Buy a camel and give it to him.” They said, “The camel that is available is older than the camel he demands. ”The Prophet said, “Buy it and give it to him, for the best among you are those who repay their debts handsomely. ”


## Hadith 3:576

_Narrated Hudhaifa:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “Once a man died and was asked, 'What did you use to say (or do) (in your life time)?' He replied, 'I was a business-man and used to give time to the rich to repay his debt and (used to) deduct part of the debt of the poor.' So he was forgiven (his sins.)” Abu Masud said, “I heard the same (Hadith) from the Prophet.”


## Hadith 3:577

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A man came to the Prophet and demanded a camel (the Prophet owed him). Allah's Apostle told his companions to give him (a camel). They said, “We do not find except an older camel (than what he demands). (The Prophet ordered them to give him that camel). The man said, ”You have paid me in full and may Allah also pay you in full.“ Allah's Apostle said, ”Give him, for the best amongst the people is he who repays his debts in the most handsome manner."


## Hadith 3:578

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet owed a camel of a certain age to a man who came to demand it back. The Prophet ordered his companions to give him. They looked for a camel of the same age but found nothing but a camel one year older. The Prophet told them to give it to him. The man said, “You have paid me in full, and may Allah pay you in full.” The Prophet said, “The best amongst you is he who pays his debts in the most handsome manner.”


## Hadith 3:579

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:_

I went to the Prophet while he was in the Mosque. (Mis'ar thinks, that Jabir went in the forenoon.) After the Prophet told me to pray two Rakat, he repayed me the debt he owed me and gave me an extra amount.


## Hadith 3:580

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

My father was martyred on the day (of the battle) of Uhud, and he was in debt. His creditors demanded their rights persistently. I went to the Prophet (and informed him about it). He told them to take the fruits of my garden and exempt my father from the debts but they refused to do so. So, the Prophet did not give them my garden and told me that he would come to me the next morning. He came to us early in the morning and wandered among the datepalms and invoked Allah to bless their fruits. I then plucked the dates and paid the creditors, and there remained some of the dates for us.


## Hadith 3:581

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

When my father died he owed a Jew thirty Awsuq (of dates). I requested him to give me respite for repaying but he refused. I requested Allah's Apostle to intercede with the Jew. Allah's Apostle went to the Jew and asked him to accept the fruits of my trees in place of the debt but the Jew refused. Allah's Apostle entered the garden of the date-palms, wandering among the trees and ordered me (saying), “Pluck (the fruits) and give him his due.” So, I plucked the fruits for him after the departure of Allah's Apostle and gave his thirty Awsuq, and still had seventeen Awsuq extra for myself. Jabir said: I went to Allah's Apostle to inform of what had happened, but found him praying the 'Asr prayer. After the prayer I told him about the extra fruits which remained. Allah's Apostle told me to inform (Umar) Ibn Al-Khatab about it. When I went to 'Umar and told him about it, 'Umar said, “When Allah's Apostle walked in your garden, I was sure that Allah would definitely bless it.”


## Hadith 3:582

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle used to invoke Allah in the prayer saying, “O Allah, I seek refuge with you from all sins, and from being in debt.” Someone said, O Allah's Apostle! (I see you) very often you seek refuge with Allah from being in debt. He replied, “If a person is in debt, he tells lies when he speaks, and breaks his promises when he promises.”


## Hadith 3:583

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “If someone leaves some property, it will be for the inheritors, and if he leaves some weak offspring, it will be for us to support them.”


## Hadith 3:584

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “I am closer to the believers than their selves in this world and in the Hereafter, and if you like, you can read Allah's Statement: ”The Prophet is closer to the believers than their own selves.“ (33.6) So, if a true believer dies and leaves behind some property, it will be for his inheritors (from the father's side), and if he leaves behind some debt to be paid or needy offspring, then they should come to me as I am the guardian of the deceased.”


## Hadith 3:585

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Procrastination (delay) in repaying debts by a wealthy person is injustice.”


## Hadith 3:586

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A man came to the Prophet and demanded his debts and used harsh words. The companions of the Prophet wanted to harm him, but the Prophet said, “Leave him, as the creditor (owner of the right) has the right to speak.”


## Hadith 3:587

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If a man finds his very things with a bankrupt, he has more right to take them back than anyone else.”


## Hadith 3:588

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

A man pledged that his slave would be manumitted after his death. The Prophet asked, “Who will buy the slave from me?” No'aim bin 'Abdullah bought the slave and the Prophet took its price and gave it to the owner.


## Hadith 3:589

_Narrated Jabir:_

When 'Abdullah (my father) died, he left behind children and debts. I asked the lenders to put down some of his debt, but they refused, so I went to the Prophet to intercede with them, yet they refused. The Prophet said (to me), “Classify your dates into their different kinds: 'Adhq bin Zaid, Lean and 'Ajwa, each kind alone and call all the creditors and wait till I come to you.” I did so and the Prophet came and sat beside the dates and started measuring to each his due till he paid them fully, and the amount of dates remained as it was before, as if he had not touched them.

(On another occasion) I took part in one of Ghazawat among with the Prophet and I was riding one of our camels. The camel got tired and was lagging behind the others. The Prophet hit it on its back. He said, “Sell it to me, and you have the right to ride it till Medina.'' When we approached Medina, I took the permission from the Prophet to go to my house, saying, ”O Allah's Apostle! I have newly married.“ The Prophet asked, ”Have you married a virgin or a matron (a widow or divorcee)?“ I said, ”I have married a matron, as 'Abdullah (my father) died and left behind daughters small in their ages, so I married a matron who may teach them and bring them up with good manners.“ The Prophet then said (to me), ”Go to your family." When I went there and told my maternal uncle about the selling of the camel, he admonished me for it. On that I told him about its slowness and exhaustion and about what the Prophet had done to the camel and his hitting it. When the Prophet arrived, I went to him with the camel in the morning and he gave me its price, the camel itself, and my share from the war booty as he gave the other people.


## Hadith 3:590

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

A man came to the Prophet and said, “I am often betrayed in bargaining.” The Prophet advised him, “When you buy something, say (to the seller), 'No deception.” The man used to say so afterwards.


## Hadith 3:591

_Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:_

The Prophet said, "Allah has forbidden for you, (1) to be undutiful to your mothers, (2) to bury your daughters alive, (3) to not to pay the rights of the others (e.g. charity, etc.) and (4) to beg of men (begging). And Allah has hated for you (1) vain, useless talk, or that you talk too much about others, (2) to ask too many questions, (in disputed religious matters) and (3) to waste the wealth (by extravagance).


## Hadith 3:592

_Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “Everyone of you is a guardian, and responsible for what is in his custody. The ruler is a guardian of his subjects and responsible for them; a husband is a guardian of his family and is responsible for it; a lady is a guardian of her husband's house and is responsible for it, and a servant is a guardian of his master's property and is responsible for it.” I heard that from Allah's Apostle and I think that the Prophet also said, “A man is a guardian of is father's property and is responsible for it, so all of you are guardians and responsible for your wards and things under your care.”


## Hadith 3:593

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

I heard a man reciting a verse (of the Holy Qur'an) but I had heard the Prophet reciting it differently. So, I caught hold of the man by the hand and took him to Allah's Apostle who said, “Both of you are right.” Shu'ba, the sub-narrator said, “I think he said to them, ”Don't differ, for the nations before you differed and perished (because of their differences). "


## Hadith 3:594

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Two persons, a Muslim and a Jew, quarrelled. The Muslim said, “By Him Who gave Muhammad superiority over all the people! The Jew said, ”By Him Who gave Moses superiority over all the people!“ At that the Muslim raised his hand and slapped the Jew on the face. The Jew went to the Prophet and informed him of what had happened between him and the Muslim. The Prophet sent for the Muslim and asked him about it. The Muslim informed him of the event. The Prophet said, ”Do not give me superiority over Moses, for on the Day of Resurrection all the people will fall unconscious and I will be one of them, but I will. be the first to gain consciousness, and will see Moses standing and holding the side of the Throne (of Allah). I will not know whether (Moses) has also fallen unconscious and got up before me, or Allah has exempted him from that stroke."


## Hadith 3:595

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

While Allah's Apostle was sitting, a Jew came and said, “O Abul Qasim! One of your companions has slapped me on my face.” The Prophet asked who that was. He replied that he was one of the Ansar. The Prophet sent for him, and on his arrival, he asked him whether he had beaten the Jew. He (replied in the affirmative and) said, "I heard him taking an oath in the market saying, 'By Him Who gave Moses superiority over all the human beings.' I said, 'O wicked man! (Has Allah given Moses superiority) even over Muhammad I became furious

and slapped him over his face.“ The Prophet said, ”Do not give a prophet superiority over another, for on the Day of Resurrection all the people will fall unconscious and I will be the first to emerge from the earth, and will see Moses standing and holding one of the legs of the Throne. I will not know whether Moses has fallen unconscious or the first unconsciousness was sufficient for him."


## Hadith 3:596

_Narrated Anas:_

A Jew crushed the head of a girl between two stones. The girl was asked who had crushed her head, and some names were mentioned before her, and when the name of the Jew was mentioned, she nodded agreeing. The Jew was captured and when he confessed, the Prophet ordered that his head be crushed between two stones.


## Hadith 3:597

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

A man was often cheated in buying. The Prophet said to him, “When you buy something, say (to the seller), No cheating.” The man used to say so thenceforward .


## Hadith 3:598

_Narrated Jabir: A man manumitted a slave and he had no other property_

than that, so the Prophet cancelled the manumission (and sold the slave for him). No'aim bin Al-Nahham bought the slave from him.


## Hadith 3:599

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever takes a false oath so as to take the property of a Muslim (illegally) will meet Allah while He will be angry with him.” Al-Ash'ath said: By Allah, that saying concerned me. I had common land with a Jew, and the Jew later on denied my ownership, so I took him to the Prophet who asked me whether I had a proof of my ownership. When I replied in the negative, the Prophet asked the Jew to take an oath. I said, “O Allah's Apostle! He will take an oath and deprive me of my property.” So, Allah revealed the following verse: “Verily! Those who purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and their oaths.” (3.77)


## Hadith 3:600

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Ka'b bin Malik:_

Ka'b demanded his debt back from Ibn Abi Hadrad in the Mosque and their voices grew louder till Allah's Apostle heard them while he was in his house. He came out to them raising the curtain of his room and addressed Ka'b, “O Ka'b!” Ka'b replied, “Labaik, O Allah's Apostle.” (He said to him), “Reduce your debt to one half,” gesturing with his hand. Kab said, “I have done so, O Allah's Apostle!” On that the Prophet said to Ibn Abi Hadrad, “Get up and repay the debt, to him.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_500">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:401 to 3:500</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_700">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:601 to 3:700</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
