---
title: "Hadith 3:701 to 3:800"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_700">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:601 to 3:700</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_895">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:801 to 3:895</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 3:701

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “He who manumits his share of a slave and has money sufficient to free the remaining portion of that slave's price (justly estimated) then he should manumit him (by giving the rest of his price to the other co-owners).” Nafi' added, “Otherwise the slave is partially free.” Aiyub is not sure whether the last statement was said by Nafi' or it was a part of the Hadith.


## Hadith 3:702

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

That he used to give his verdict regarding the male or female slaves owned by more than one master, one of whom may manumit his share of the slave. Ibn 'Umar used to say in such a case, “The manumitted should manumit the slave completely if he has sufficient money to pay the rest of the price of that slave (which is to be justly estimated) and the other share-holders are to take the price of their shares and the slave is freed (released from slavery).” Ibn 'Umar narrated this verdict from the Prophet.


## Hadith 3:703

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

that the Prophet said, “Whoever frees his portion of a (common) slave.”


## Hadith 3:704

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever frees his portion of a common slave should free the slave completely by paying the rest of his price from his money if he has enough money; otherwise the price of the slave is to be estimated and the slave is to be helped to work without hardship till he pays the rest of his price.”


## Hadith 3:705

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Allah has accepted my invocation to forgive what whispers in the hearts of my followers, unless they put it to action or utter it.” (See Hadith No. 657 Vol. 8)


## Hadith 3:706

_Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:_

The Prophet said, “The (reward of) deeds depend on intentions, and every person will get the reward according to what he intends. So, whoever migrated for Allah and His Apostle, then his migration will be for Allah and His Apostle, and whoever migrated for worldly benefits or for marrying a woman, then his migration will be for what he migrated for.” (See Hadith No. 1, Vol. 1)


## Hadith 3:707

_Narrated Qais:_

When Abu Huraira accompanied by his slave set out intending to embrace Islam they lost each other on the way. The slave then came while Abu Huraira was sitting with the Prophet. The Prophet said, “O Abu Huraira! Your slave has come back.” Abu Huraira said, “Indeed, I would like you to witness that I have manumitted him.” That happened at the time when Abu Huraira recited (the following poetic verse):— 'What a long tedious tiresome night! Nevertheless, it has delivered us From the land of Kufr (disbelief).


## Hadith 3:708

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

On my way to the Prophet I was reciting:— 'What a long tedious tiresome night! Nevertheless, it has saved us From the land of Kufr (disbelief).' I had a slave who ran away from me on the way. When I went to the Prophet and gave the pledge of allegiance for embracing Islam, the slave showed up while I was still with the Prophet who remarked, “O Abu Huraira! Here is your slave!” I said, “I manumit him for Allah's Sake,” and so I freed him.


## Hadith 3:709

_Narrated Qais:_

When Abu Huraira accompanied by his slave came intending to embrace Islam, they lost each other on the way. (When the slave showed up) Abu Huraira said (to the Prophet), “I make you witness that the slave is free for Allah's Cause.”


## Hadith 3:710

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Utba bin Abi Waqqas authorized his brother Sad bin Abi Waqqas to take the son of the slave-girl of Zam'a into his custody, telling him that the boy was his own (illegal) son. When Allah's Apostle went (to Mecca) at the time of the Conquest, Sad took the son of the slavegirl of Zam'a to Allah's Apostle and also brought 'Abu bin Zam'a with him and said, “O Allah's Apostle! This is the son of my brother 'Utba who authorized me to take him into my custody.” 'Abu bin Zam'a said, “O Allah's Apostle! He is my brother, the son of Zam'a' slave-girl and he was born on his bed.” Allah's Apostle looked at the son of the slave-girl of Zam'a and noticed much resemblance (to 'Utba). Allah's Apostle said, “It is for you, O 'Abu bin Zam'a as he was born on the bed of your father.” Allah's Apostle then told Sauda bint Zam'a to observe veil in the presence of the boy as he noticed the boy's resemblance to 'Utba and Sauda was the wife of the Prophet .


## Hadith 3:711

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

A man amongst us declared that his slave would be freed after his death. The Prophet called for that slave and sold him. The slave died the same year.


## Hadith 3:712

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the selling or donating the Wala' of a freed slave.


## Hadith 3:713

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I bought Buraira but her masters put the condition that her Wala' would be for them. I told the Prophet about it. He said (to me), “Manumit her as her Wala' will be for the one who pays the price.” So, I manumitted her. The Prophet called Buraira and gave her the option of either staying with her husband or leaving him. She said, “Even if he gave me so much money, I would not stay with him,” and so she preferred her freedom to her husband.


## Hadith 3:714

_Narrated Anas:_

Some men of the Ansar asked for the permission of Allah's Apostle and said, “Allow us to give up the ransom from our nephew Al-'Abbas. The Prophet said (to them), ”Do not leave (even) a Dirham (of his ransom)."


## Hadith 3:715

_Narrated Hisham:_

My father told me that Hakim bin Hizam manumitted one-hundred slaves in the pre-lslamic period of ignorance and slaughtered one-hundred camels (and distributed them in charity). When he embraced Islam he again slaughtered one-hundred camels and manumitted one-hundred slaves. Hakim said, “I asked Allah's Apostle, 'O Allah's Apostle! What do you think about some good deeds I used to practice in the prelslamic period of ignorance regarding them as deeds of righteousness?' Allah's Apostle said, ”You have embraced Islam along with all those good deeds you did."


## Hadith 3:716

_Narrated Marwan and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:_

When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin came to the Prophet and they requested him to return their properties and captives. The Prophet stood up and said to them, “I have other people with me in this matter (as you see) and the most beloved statement to me is the true one; you may choose either the properties or the prisoners as I have delayed their distribution.” The Prophet had waited for them for more than ten days since his arrival from Ta'if. So, when it became evident to them that the Prophet was not going to return them except one of the two, they said, “We choose our prisoners.” The Prophet got up amongst the people and glorified and praised Allah as He deserved and said, “Then after, these brethren of yours have come to us with repentance, and I see it logical to return them the captives. So, whoever amongst you likes to do that as a favor, then he can do it, and whoever of you likes to stick to his share till we recompense him from the very first war booty which Allah will give us, then he can do so (i.e. give up the present captives).” The people unanimously said, “We do that (return the captives) willingly.” The Prophet said, “We do not know which of you has agreed to it and which have not, so go back and let your leaders forward us your decision.” So, all the people then went back and discussed the matter with their leaders who returned and informed the Prophet that all the people had willingly given their consent to return the captives. This is what has reached the Prophet, “I paid for my ransom and Aqil's ransom.”


## Hadith 3:717

_Narrated Ibn Aun:_

I wrote a letter to Nafi and Nafi wrote in reply to my letter that the Prophet had suddenly attacked Bani Mustaliq without warning while they were heedless and their cattle were being watered at the places of water. Their fighting men were killed and their women and children were taken as captives; the Prophet got Juwairiya on that day. Nafi said that Ibn 'Umar had told him the above narration and that Ibn 'Umar was in that army.


## Hadith 3:718

_Narrated Ibn Muhairiz:_

I saw Abu Said and asked him about coitus interruptus. Abu Said said, “We went with Allah's Apostle, in the Ghazwa of Barli Al-Mustaliq and we captured some of the 'Arabs as captives, and the long separation from our wives was pressing us hard and we wanted to practice coitus interruptus. We asked Allah's Apostle (whether it was permissible). He said, ”It is better for you not to do so. No soul, (that which Allah has) destined to exist, up to the Day of Resurrection, but will definitely come, into existence."


## Hadith 3:719

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I have loved the people of the tribe of Bani Tamim ever since I heard, three things, Allah's Apostle said about them. I heard him saying, These people (of the tribe of Bani Tamim) would stand firm against Ad-Dajjal.“ When the Sadaqat (gifts of charity) from that tribe came, Allah's Apostle said, ”These are the Sadaqat (i.e. charitable gifts) of our folk.“ 'Aisha had a slave-girl from that tribe, and the Prophet said to 'Aisha, ”Manumit her as she is a descendant of Ishmael (the Prophet)."


## Hadith 3:720

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

Allah's Apostle said, “He who has a slave-girl and educates and treats her nicely and then manumits and marries her, will get a double reward.”


## Hadith 3:721

_Narrated Al-Ma'rur bin Suwaid:_

I saw Abu Dhar Al-Ghifari wearing a cloak, and his slave, too, was wearing a cloak. We asked him about that (i.e. how both were wearing similar cloaks). He replied, “Once I abused a man and he complained of me to the Prophet . The Prophet asked me, 'Did you abuse him by slighting his mother?' He added, 'Your slaves are your brethren upon whom Allah has given you authority. So, if one has one's brethren under one's control, one should feed them with the like of what one eats and clothe them with the like of what one wears. You should not overburden them with what they cannot bear, and if you do so, help them (in their hard job).”


## Hadith 3:722

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If a slave is honest and faithful to his master and worships his Lord (Allah) in a perfect manner, he will get a double reward.”


## Hadith 3:723

_Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:_

The Prophet said, “He who has a slave-girl and teaches her good manners and improves her education and then manumits and marries her, will get a double reward; and any slave who observes Allah's right and his master's right will get a double reward.”


## Hadith 3:724

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “A pious slave gets a double reward.” Abu Huraira added: By Him in Whose Hands my soul is but for Jihad (i.e. holy battles), Hajj, and my duty to serve my mother, I would have loved to die as a slave.


## Hadith 3:725

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Goodness and comfort are for him who worships his Lord in a perfect manner and serves his master sincerely.”


## Hadith 3:726

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “If a slave serves his Saiyid (i.e. master) sincerely and worships his Lord (Allah) perfectly, he will get a double reward.”


## Hadith 3:727

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

The Prophet said, “The Mamluk (slave) who worships his Lord in a perfect manner, and is dutiful, sincere and obedient to his Saiyid (master), will get a double reward.”


## Hadith 3:728

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “You should not say, 'Feed your lord (Rabbaka), help your lord in performing ablution, or give water to your lord, but should say, 'my master (e.g. Feed your master instead of lord etc.) (Saiyidi), or my guardian (Maulai), and one should not say, my slave (Abdi), or my girl-slave (Amati), but should say, my lad (Fatai), my lass (Fatati), and 'my boy (Ghulami).”


## Hadith 3:729

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “If one manumits his share of a common slave (Abd), and he has money sufficient to free the remaining portion of the price of the slave (justly estimated), then he should free the slave completely by paying the rest of his price; otherwise the slave is freed partly. ”


## Hadith 3:730

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Everyone of you is a guardian and is responsible for his charges. The ruler who has authority over people, is a guardian and is responsible for them, a man is a guardian of his family and is responsible for them; a woman is a guardian of her husband's house and children and is responsible for them; a slave ('Abu) is a guardian of his master's property and is responsible for it; so all of you are guardians and are responsible for your charges.”


## Hadith 3:731

_Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid:_

The Prophet said, “If a slave-girl (Ama) commits illegal sexual intercourse, scourge her; if she does it again, scourge her again; if she repeats it, scourge her again.” The narrator added that on the third or the fourth offence, the Prophet said, “Sell her even for a hair rope.”


## Hadith 3:732

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “When your servant brings your meals to you then if he does not let him sit and share the meals, then he should at least give him a mouthful or two mouthfuls of that meal or a meal or two meals, as he has prepared it.”


## Hadith 3:733

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, “Everyone of you is a guardian and is responsible for his charge; the ruler is a guardian and is responsible for his subjects; the man is a guardian in his family and responsible for his charges; a woman is a guardian of her husband's house and responsible for her charges; and the servant is a guardian of his master's property and is responsible for his charge.” I definitely heard the above from the Prophet and think that the Prophet also said, “A man is a guardian of his father's property and responsible for his charges; so everyone of you is a guardian and responsible for his charges.”


## Hadith 3:734

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “If somebody fights (or beats somebody) then he should avoid the face.”


## Hadith 3:735

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

That 'Aisha told him that Buraira came to seek her help in her writing of emancipation (for a certain sum) and that time she had not paid anything of it. 'Aisha said to her, “Go back to your masters, and if they agree that I will pay the amount of your writing of emancipation and get your Wala', I will do so.” Buraira informed her masters of that but they refused and said, “If she (i.e. 'Aisha) is seeking Allah's reward, then she can do so, but your Wala' will be for us.” 'Aisha mentioned that to Allah's Apostle who said to her, “Buy and manumit her, as the Wala' is for the liberator.” Allah's Apostle then got up and said, “What about the people who stipulate conditions which are not present in Allah's Laws? Whoever imposes conditions which are not present in Allah's Laws, then those conditions will be invalid, even if he imposed these conditions a hundred times. Allah's conditions (Laws) are the truth and are more solid.”


## Hadith 3:736

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Aisha wanted to buy a slave-girl in order to manumit her. The girl's masters stipulated that her Wala' would be for them. Allah's Apostle said (to 'Aisha), “What they stipulate should not stop you, for the Wala' is for the liberator.”


## Hadith 3:737

_Narrated Aisha:_

Buraira came (to 'Aisha) and said, “I have made a contract of emancipation with my masters for nine Uqiyas (of gold) to be paid in yearly installments. Therefore, I seek your help.” 'Aisha said, “If your masters agree, I will pay them the sum at once and free you on condition that your Wala' will be for me.” Buraira went to her masters but they refused that offer. She (came back) and said, “I presented to them the offer but they refused, unless the Wala' was for them.” Allah's Apostle heard of that and asked me about it, and I told him about it. On that he said, “Buy and manumit her and stipulate that the Wala' should be for you, as Wala' is for the liberator.” 'Aisha added, “Allah's Apostle then got up amongst the people, Glorified and Praised Allah, and said, 'Then after: What about some people who impose conditions which are not present in Allah's Laws? So, any condition which is not present in Allah's Laws is invalid even if they were one-hundred conditions. Allah's ordinance is the truth, and Allah's condition is stronger and more solid. Why do some men from you say, O so-and-so! manumit the slave but the Wala will be for me? Verily, the Wala is for the liberator.”


## Hadith 3:738

_Narrated Amra bint 'AbdurRahman:_

Buraira went to Aisha, the mother of the faithful believers to seek her help in her emancipation Aisha said to her, “If your masters agree, I will pay them your price in a lump sum and manumit you.” Buraira mentioned that offer to her masters but they refused to sell her unless the Wala' was for them. 'Aisha told Allah's Apostle about it. He said, “Buy and manumit her as the Wala' is for the liberator.”


## Hadith 3:739

_Narrated 'Abdul Wahid bin Aiman:_

I went to 'Aisha and said, “I was the slave of Utba bin Abu Lahab. ”Utba died and his sons became my masters who sold me to Ibn Abu Amr who manumitted me. The sons of 'Utba stipulated that my Wala' should be for them.“ 'Aisha said, ”Buraira came to me and she was given the writing of emancipation by her masters and she asked me to buy and manumit her. I agreed to it, but Buraira told me that her masters would not sell her unless her Wala' was for them.“ 'Aisha said, ”I am not in need of that.“ When the Prophet heard that, or he was told about it, he asked 'Aisha about it. 'Aisha mentioned what Buraira had told her. The Prophet said, ”Buy and manumit her and let them stipulate whatever they like.“ So, 'Aisha bought and manumitted her and her masters stipulated that her Wala' should be for them.” The Prophet;, said, “The Wala' will be for the liberator even if they stipulated a hundred conditions.”


## Hadith 3:740

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “O Muslim women! None of you should look down upon the gift sent by her she-neighbour even if it were the trotters of the sheep (fleshless part of legs).”


## Hadith 3:741

_Narrated Urwa:_

Aisha said to me, “O my nephew! We used to see the crescent, and then the crescent and then the crescent in this way we saw three crescents in two months and no fire (for cooking) used to be made in the houses of Allah's Apostle. I said, ”O my aunt! Then what use to sustain you?“ 'Aisha said, ”The two black things: dates and water, our neighbors from Ansar had some Manarh and they used to present Allah's Apostle some of their milk and he used to make us drink."


## Hadith 3:742

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “I shall accept the invitation even if I were invited to a meal of a sheep's trotter, and I shall accept the gift even if it were an arm or a trotter of a sheep.”


## Hadith 3:743

_Narrated Sahl:_

The Prophet sent for a woman from the emigrants and she had a slave who was a carpenter. The Prophet said to her “Order your slave to prepare the wood (pieces) for the pulpit.” So, she ordered her slave who went and cut the wood from the tamarisk and prepared the pulpit, for the Prophet. When he finished the pulpit, the woman informed the Prophet that it had been finished. The Prophet asked her to send that pulpit to him, so they brought it. The Prophet lifted it and placed it at the place in which you see now."


## Hadith 3:744

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada Al-Aslami:_

That his father said, "One day I was sitting with some of the Prophet's companions on the way to Mecca. Allah's Apostle was ahead of us. All of my companions were in the state of Ihram while I was a non-Muhrim. They saw an onager while I was busy repairing my shoes, so they did not tell me about it but they wished I had seen it. By chance I looked up and saw it. So, I turned to the horse, saddled it and rode on it, forgetting to take the spear and the whip. I asked them if they could hand over to me the whip and the spear but they said, 'No, by Allah, we shall not help you in that in any way.' I became angry and got down from the horse, picked up both the things and rode the horse again. I attacked the onager and slaughtered it, and brought it (after it had been dead). They took it (cooked some of it) and started eating it, but they doubted whether it was allowed for them to eat it or not, as they were in the state of Ihram. So, we proceeded and I hid with me one of its fore-legs. When we met Allah's Apostle and asked him about the case, he asked, 'Do you have a portion of it with you?' I replied in the affirmative and gave him that fleshy fore-leg which he ate completely while he was in the state of Ihram .


## Hadith 3:745

_Narrated Anas:_

Once Allah's Apostle visited us in this house of ours and asked for something to drink. We milked one of our sheep and mixed it with water from this well of ours and gave it to him. Abu Bakr was sitting on his left side and 'Umar in front of him and a bedouin on his right side. When Allah's Apostle finished, 'Umar said to Allah's Apostle “Here is Abu Bakr.” But Allah's Apostle gave the remaining milk to the bedouin and said twice, “The (persons on the) right side! So, start from the right side.” Anas added, “It is a Sunna (the Prophet's traditions)” and repeated it thrice.


## Hadith 3:746

_Narrated Anas:_

We chased a rabbit at Mar-al-Zahran and the people ran after it but were exhausted. I overpowered and caught it, and gave it to Abu Talha who slaughtered it and sent its hip or two thighs to Allah's Apostle. (The narrator confirms that he sent two thighs). The Prophet accepted that. (The sub-narrator asked Anas, “Did the Prophet; eat from it?” Anas replied, “He ate from it.”)


## Hadith 3:747

_Narrated As-Sa'b bin Jaththama:_

An onager was presented to Allah's Apostle at the place called Al-Abwa' or Waddan, but Allah's Apostle rejected it. When the Prophet noticed the signs of sorrow on the giver's face he said, “We have not rejected your gift, but we are in the state of Ihram.” (i.e. if we were not in a state of Ihram we would have accepted your gift, Fateh-al-Bari page 130, Vol. 6)


## Hadith 3:748

_Narrated Aisha:_

The people used to look forward for the days of my ('Aisha's) turn to send gifts to Allah's Apostle in order to please him.


## Hadith 3:749

_Narrated Said bin Jubair:_

Ibn Abbas said: Um Hufaid, Ibn 'Abbas's aunt sent some dried yogurt (butter free), ghee (butter) and a mastigar to the Prophet as a gift. The Prophet ate the dried yogurt and butter but left the mastigar because he disliked it. Ibn 'Abbas said, “The mastigar was eaten at the table of Allah's Apostle and if it had been illegal to eat, it could not have been eaten at the table of Allah's Apostle.”


## Hadith 3:750

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Whenever a meal was brought to Allah's Apostle, he would ask whether it was a gift or Sadaqa (something given in charity). If he was told that it was Sadaqa, he would tell his companions to eat it, but if it was a gift, he would hurry to share it with them.


## Hadith 3:751

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Some meat was brought to the Prophet and it was said that the meat had been given in charity to Buraira. He said, “It was Sadaqa for Buraira but a gift for us.”


## Hadith 3:752

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I intended to buy Buraira but her masters stipulated that her Wala should be for them. When the Prophet was told about it, he said to me, “Buy and manumit her, as the Wala' is for the liberator.” Once Buraira was given some meat, and the Prophet asked, “What is this?” I said, “It has been given to Buraira in charity.” He said, “It is sadaqa for her but a gift for us.” Buraira was given the option (to stay with her husband or to part with him). AbdurRahman (a sub-narrator) wondered, “Was her husband a slave or a free man?” Shu'ba (another sub-narrator) said, “I asked 'Abdur-Rahman whether her husband was a slave or a free man. He replied that he did not know whether he was a slave or a free man.”


## Hadith 3:753

_Narrated Um 'Atiyya:_

Once the Prophet went to 'Aisha and asked her whether she had something (to eat). She said that she had nothing except the mutton which Um 'Atiyya had sent to (Buraira) in charity. The Prophet said that it had reached its destination (i.e. it is no longer an object of charity.)


## Hadith 3:754

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The people used to send gifts to the Prophet on the day of my turn. Um Salama said: "My companions (the wives of the Prophet Other than Aisha) gathered and they complained about it. So I informed the Prophet about it on their behalf, but he remained silent.


## Hadith 3:755

_Narrated 'Urwa from 'Aisha:_

The wives of Allah's Apostle were in two groups. One group consisted of 'Aisha, Hafsa, Safiyya and Sauda; and the other group consisted of Um Salama and the other wives of Allah's Apostle. The Muslims knew that Allah's Apostle loved 'Aisha, so if any of them had a gift and wished to give to Allah's Apostle, he would delay it, till Allah's Apostle had come to 'Aisha's home and then he would send his gift to Allah's Apostle in her home. The group of Um Salama discussed the matter together and decided that Um Salama should request Allah's Apostle to tell the people to send their gifts to him in whatever wife's house he was. Um Salama told Allah's Apostle of what they had said, but he did not reply. Then they (those wives) asked Um Salama about it. She said, “He did not say anything to me.” They asked her to talk to him again. She talked to him again when she met him on her day, but he gave no reply. When they asked her, she replied that he had given no reply. They said to her, “Talk to him till he gives you a reply.” When it was her turn, she talked to him again. He then said to her, “Do not hurt me regarding Aisha, as the Divine Inspirations do not come to me on any of the beds except that of Aisha.” On that Um Salama said, “I repent to Allah for hurting you.” Then the group of Um Salama called Fatima, the daughter of Allah's Apostle and sent her to Allah's Apostle to say to him, “Your wives request to treat them and the daughter of Abu Bakr on equal terms.” Then Fatima conveyed the message to him. The Prophet said, “O my daughter! Don't you love whom I love?” She replied in the affirmative and returned and told them of the situation. They requested her to go to him again but she refused. They then sent Zainab bint Jahsh who went to him and used harsh words saying, “Your wives request you to treat them and the daughter of Ibn Abu Quhafa on equal terms.” On that she raised her voice and abused 'Aisha to her face so much so that Allah's Apostle looked at 'Aisha to see whether she would retort. 'Aisha started replying to Zainab till she silenced her. The Prophet then looked at 'Aisha and said, “She is really the daughter of Abu Bakr.”


## Hadith 3:756

_Narrated 'Azra bin Thabit Al-Ansari:_

When I went to Thumama bin 'Abdullah, he gave me some perfume and said that Anas would not reject the gifts of perfume. Anas said: The Prophet used not to reject the gifts of perfume.


## Hadith 3:757

_Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and Marwan:_

When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin came to the Prophet he stood up amongst the people, Glorified and Praised Allah as He deserved, and said, “Then after: Your brethren have come to you with repentance and I see it logical to return to them their captives; so whoever amongst you likes to do that as a favor, then he can do it, and whoever of you like to stick to his share till we give him his right from the very first Fai (war booty) (1) which Allah will bestow on us, then (he can do so).” The people replied, “We do that (to return the captives) willingly as a favor for your sake.”


## Hadith 3:758

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostles used to accept gifts and used to give something in return.


## Hadith 3:759

_Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:_

that his father took him to Allah's Apostle and said, “I have given this son of mine a slave.” The Prophet asked, “Have you given all your sons the like?” He replied in the negative. The Prophet said, “Take back your gift then.”


## Hadith 3:760

_Narrated 'Amir:_

I heard An-Nu'man bin Bashir on the pulpit saying, “My father gave me a gift but 'Amra bint Rawaha (my mother) said that she would not agree to it unless he made Allah's Apostle as a witness to it. So, my father went to Allah's Apostle and said, 'I have given a gift to my son from 'Amra bint Rawaha, but she ordered me to make you as a witness to it, O Allah's Apostle!' Allah's Apostle asked, 'Have you given (the like of it) to everyone of your sons?' He replied in the negative. Allah's Apostle said, 'Be afraid of Allah, and be just to your children.' My father then returned and took back his gift.”


## Hadith 3:761

_Narrated Az-Zuhari:_

Ubaidullah bin 'Abdullah told me that 'Aisha had said, “When the Prophet became sick and his condition became serious, he requested his wives to allow him to be treated in my house, and they allowed him. He came out leaning on two men while his feet were dragging on the ground. He was walking between Al-'Abbas and another man.” 'Ubaidullah said, “When I informed Ibn 'Abbas of what 'Aisha had said, he asked me whether I knew who was the second man whom 'Aisha had not named. I replied in the negative. He said, 'He was 'Ali bin Abi Talib.”


## Hadith 3:762

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: The Prophet said, "One who takes back his gift_

(which he has already given) is like a dog that swallows its vomit."


## Hadith 3:763

_Narrated Asma:_

Once I said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have no property except what has been given to me by Az-Zubair (i.e. her husband). May I give in charity?” The Prophet said, “Give in charity and do not withhold it; otherwise Allah will withhold it back from you . ”


## Hadith 3:764

_Narrated Asma:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Give (in charity) and do not give reluctantly lest Allah should give you in a limited amount; and do not withhold your money lest Allah should withhold it from you.”


## Hadith 3:765

_Narrated Kurib:_

the freed slave of Ibn 'Abbas, that Maimuna bint Al-Harith told him that she manumitted a slave-girl without taking the permission of the Prophet. On the day when it was her turn to be with the Prophet, she said, “Do you know, O Allah's Apostle, that I have manumitted my slave-girl?” He said, “Have you really?” She replied in the affirmative. He said, “You would have got more reward if you had given her (i.e. the slave-girl) to one of your maternal uncles.”


## Hadith 3:766

_Narrated Aisha:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle wanted to go on a journey, he would draw lots as to which of his wives would accompany him. He would take her whose name came out. He used to fix for each of them a day and a night. But Sauda bint Zam'a gave up her (turn) day and night to 'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet in order to seek the pleasure of Allah's Apostle (by that action).


## Hadith 3:767

_Narrated Aisha:_

I said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have two neighbors; which of them should I give a gift to?” The Prophet said, “(Give) to the one whose door is nearer to you.”


## Hadith 3:768

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

That he heard As-Sa'b bin Jaththama Al-Laithi, who was one of the companions of the Prophet, saying that he gave the meat of an onager to Allah's Apostle while he was at a place called Al-Abwa' or Waddan, and was in a state of Ihram. The Prophet did not accept it. When the Prophet saw the signs of sorrow on As-Sa'b's face because of not accepting his present, he said (to him), “We are not returning your present, but we are in the state of Ihram.” (See Hadith No. 747)


## Hadith 3:769

_Narrated Abu Humaid Al-Sa'idi:_

The Prophet appointed a man from the tribe of Al-Azd, called Ibn 'Utbiyya for collecting the Zakat. When he returned he said, “This (i.e. the Zakat) is for you and this has been given to my as a present.” The Prophet said, “Why hadn't he stayed in his father's or mother's house to see whether he would be given presents or not? By Him in Whose Hands my life is, whoever takes something from the resources of the Zakat (unlawfully) will be carrying it on his neck on the Day of Resurrection; if it be a camel, it will be grunting; if a cow, it will be mooing; and if a sheep, it will be bleating.” The Prophet then raised his hands till we saw the whiteness of his armpits, and he said thrice, “O Allah! Haven't I conveyed Your Message (to them)?”


## Hadith 3:770

_Narrated Jabir:_

The Prophet said to me, “I will give you so much (the Prophet pointed thrice with his hands) when funds of Bahrain will come to me.” But the Prophet died before the money reached him. (When it came) Abu Bakr ordered an announcer to announce that whoever had a money claim on the Prophet or was promised to be given something, should come to Abu Bakr. I went to Abu Bakr and told him that the Prophet had promised to give me so much. On that Abu Bakr gave me three handfuls (of money).


## Hadith 3:771

_Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:_

Allah's Apostle distributed some cloaks but did not give anything thereof to Makhrama. Makhrama said (to me), “O son! accompany me to Allah's Apostle.” When I went with him, he said, “Call him to me.” I called him (i.e. the Prophet ) for my father. He came out wearing one of those cloaks and said, “We kept this (cloak) for you, (Makhrama).” Makhrama looked at the cloak and said, “Makhrama is pleased,” (or the Prophet said), “Is Makhrama pleased?”


## Hadith 3:772

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, “I am ruined.” The Prophet asked, “What do you mean?” He said, “I had a sexual intercourse with my wife during Ramadan (while fasting).” The Prophet asked him, “Can you manumit a slave?” He replied in the negative. He then asked him, “Can you fast for two successive months continuously” He replied in the negative. The Prophet then asked him, “Can you feed sixty poor persons?” He replied in the negative. In the meantime an Ansari came with a basket full of dates. The Prophet said to the man, “Take it and give it in charity (as an expiation of your sin).” The man said “Should I give it to some people who are poorer than we O Allah's Apostle? By Him Who has sent you with the Truth, there is no family between Medina's two mountains poorer than we.” Allah's Apostle told him to take it and provide his family with it."


## Hadith 3:773

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

My father was martyred on the day (of the battle) of Uhud and his creditors demanded the debt back in a harsh manner. So I went to Allah's Apostle and informed him of that, he asked them to accept the fruits of my garden and excuse my father, but they refused. So, Allah's Apostle did not give them the fruits, nor did he cut them and distribute them among them, but said, “I will come to you tomorrow morning.” So, he came to us the next morning and walked about in between the date-palms and invoked Allah to bless their fruits. I plucked the fruits and gave back all the rights of the creditors in full, and a lot of fruits were left for us. Then I went to Allah's Apostle, who was sitting, and informed him about what happened. Allah's Apostle told 'Umar, who was sitting there, to listen to the story. 'Umar said, “Don't we know that you are Allah's Apostle? By Allah! you are Allah's Apostle!”


## Hadith 3:774

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

A drink (milk mixed with water) was brought to the Prophet who drank some of it while a boy was sitting on his right and old men on his left. The Prophet said to the boy, “If you permit me, I'll give (the rest of the drink to) these old men first.” The boy said, “I will not give preference to any one over me as regards my share from you, O Allah's Apostle!” The Prophet then put that container in the boy's hand. (See Hadith No. 541).


## Hadith 3:775

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

I sold a camel to the Prophet on one of the journeys. When we reached Medina, he ordered me to go to the Mosque and offer two Rakat. Then he weighed for me (the price of the camel in gold) and gave an extra amount over it. A part of it remained with me till it was taken by the army of Sham on the day of Harra."


## Hadith 3:776

_Narrated Shal bin Sad:_

A drink (of milk and water) was brought to Allah's Apostle while a boy was sitting on his right side and old men were sitting on his left side. He asked the boy, “Will you allow me to give it to these (people)?” The boy said, “No, by Allah, I will not allow anyone to take my right from you.” Then the Prophet put the bowl in the boy's hand.


## Hadith 3:777

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle owed a man some debt (and that man demanded it very harshly). The companions of the Prophet wanted to harm him, but the Prophet said to them, “Leave him, as the creditor has the right to speak harshly.” He then added, “Buy (a camel) of the same age and give it to him.” They said, “We cannot get except a camel of an older age than that of his.” He said, "Buy it and give it to him, as the best amongst you is he who pays back his debt in the most handsome way.'


## Hadith 3:778

_Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakam and Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:_

When the delegates of the tribe of Hawazin came to the Prophet they requested him to return their property and their captives. He said to them, “This concerns also other people along with me as you see, and the best statement to me is the true one, so you may choose one of two alternatives; either the captives or the property and (I have not distributed the booty for) I have been waiting for you.”

When the Prophet had returned from Ta'if, he waited for them for more than ten nights. When they came to know that the Prophet would not return except one of the two, they chose their captives. The Prophet then stood up amongst the Muslims, Glorified and Praised Allah as He deserved, and then said, “Then after: These brothers of yours have come to you with repentance and I see it proper to return their captives, so whoever amongst you likes to do that as a favor, then he can do it, and whoever of you wants to stick to his share till we pay him from the very first Fai (i.e. war booty) which Allah will give us, then he can do so.” The people said, “We return (the captives) to them willingly as a favor, O Allah's Apostle!” The Prophet said, “I do not know who of you has given his consent and who has not; so go back and your leaders may present your decision to me.” The people went away, and their leaders discussed the matter with them, and then came to the Prophet to tell him that all of them had given their consent (to return the captives) willingly. (Az-Zuhn, the sub-narrator said, “This is what we know about the captives, of Hawazin.”)


## Hadith 3:779

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas: That the people sitting with that person will be_

his co-owners. But this report is not confirmed by an authentic narration. (Refer to Hadith 778)


## Hadith 3:780

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet took a camel of special age from somebody on credit. Its owner came and demanded it back (harshly). The Prophet said, “No doubt, he who has a right, can demand it.” Then the Prophet gave him an older camel than his camel and said, “The best amongst you is he who repays his debts in the most handsome way.”


## Hadith 3:781

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

That he was in the company of the Prophet on a journey, riding a troublesome camel belonging to 'Umar. The camel used to go ahead of the Prophet, so Ibn 'Umar's father would say, “O 'Abdullah! No one should go ahead of the Prophet.” The Prophet said to him, “Sell it to me.” 'Umar said to the Prophet “It is for you.” So, he bought it and said, “O 'Abdullah! It is for you, and you can do with it what you like.”


## Hadith 3:782

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Umar:_

Umar bin Al-Khattab saw a silken dress (cloak) being sold at the gate of the Mosque and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Would that you buy it and wear it on Fridays and when the delegates come to you!” Allah's Apostle said, “This is worn by the one who will have no share in the Hereafter.” Later on some silk dresses were brought and Allah's Apostle sent one of them to 'Umar. 'Umar said, “How do you give me this to wear while you said what you said about the dress of 'Utarid?” Allah's Apostle said, “I have not given it to you to wear.” So, 'Umar gave it to a pagan brother of his in Mecca.


## Hadith 3:783

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

Once the Prophet went to the house of Fatima but did not enter it. 'Ali came and she told him about that. When 'All asked the Prophet about it, he said, “I saw a (multi-colored) decorated curtain on her door. I am not interested in worldly things.” 'Ali went to Fatima and told her about it. Fatima said, “I am ready to dispense with it in the way he suggests.” The Prophet ordered her to send it to such-and-such needy people. "


## Hadith 3:784

_Narrated 'Ali:_

The Prophet gave me a silken dress as a gift and I wore it. When I saw the signs of anger on his face, I cut it into pieces and distributed it among my wives."


## Hadith 3:785

_Narrated Anas:_

A Jubba (i.e. cloak) made of thick silken cloth was presented to the Prophet. The Prophet used to forbid people to wear silk. So, the people were pleased to see it. The Prophet said, “By Him in Whose Hands Muhammad's soul is, the handkerchiefs of Sad bin Mu'adh in Paradise are better than this.” Anas added, “The present was sent to the Prophet by Ukaidir (a Christian) from Dauma.”


## Hadith 3:786

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

A Jewess brought a poisoned (cooked) sheep for the Prophet who ate from it. She was brought to the Prophet and he was asked, “Shall we kill her?” He said, “No.” I continued to see the effect of the poison on the palate of the mouth of Allah's Apostle .


## Hadith 3:787

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abu Bakr:_

We were one-hundred and thirty persons accompanying the Prophet who asked us whether anyone of us had food. There was a man who had about a Sa of wheat which was mixed with water then. A very tall pagan came driving sheep. The Prophet asked him, “Will you sell us (a sheep) or give it as a present?” He said, “I will sell you (a sheep).” The Prophet bought a sheep and it was slaughtered. The Prophet ordered that its liver and other abdominal organs be roasted. By Allah, the Prophet gave every person of the one-hundred-and-thirty a piece of that; he gave all those of them who were present; and kept the shares of those who were absent.The Prophet then put its meat in two huge basins and all of them ate to their fill, and even then more food was left in the two basins which were carried on the camel (or said something like it).


## Hadith 3:788

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Umar saw a silken cloak over a man for sale and requested the Prophet to buy it in order to wear it on Fridays and while meeting delegates. The Prophet said, “This is worn by the one who will have no share in the Hereafter.” Later on Allah's Apostle got some silken cloaks similar to that one, and he sent one to 'Umar. 'Umar said to the Prophet “How can I wear it, while you said about it what you said?” The Prophet said, “I have not given it to you to wear, but to sell or to give to someone else.” So, 'Umar sent it to his brother at Mecca before he embraced Islam.


## Hadith 3:789

_Narrated Asma' bint Abu Bakr:_

My mother came to me during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle and she was a pagan. I said to Allah's Apostle (seeking his verdict), “My mother has come to me and she desires to receive a reward from me, shall I keep good relations with her?” The Prophet said, “Yes, keep good relation with her. ”


## Hadith 3:790

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “He who takes back his present is like him who swallows his vomit.”


## Hadith 3:791

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “The bad example is not for us. He who takes back his present is like a dog that swallows back its vomit.”


## Hadith 3:792

_Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:_

I gave a horse in Allah's Cause. The person to whom it was given, did not look after it. I intended to buy it from him, thinking that he would sell it cheap. When I asked the Prophet he said, “Don't buy it, even if he gives it to you for one Dirham, as the person who takes back what he has given in charity, is like a dog that swallows back its vomit.”


## Hadith 3:793

_Narrated Jabir: The Prophet gave the verdict that 'Umra is for the_

one to whom it is presented.


## Hadith 3:794

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Umra is permissible.” Ata said, “Jabir narrated the same to me from the Prophet.”


## Hadith 3:795

_Narrated Anas:_

Once the people of Medina were frightened, so the Prophet borrowed a horse from Abu Talha called Al-Mandub, and rode it. When he came back he said, “We have not seen anything (to be afraid of), but the horse was very fast (having an energy as inexhaustible as the water of the sea).”


## Hadith 3:796

_Narrated Aiman:_

I went to 'Aisha and she was wearing a coarse dress costing five Dirhams. 'Aisha said, “Look up and see my slave-girl who refuses to wear it in the house though during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle I had a similar dress which no woman desiring to appear elegant (before her husband) failed to borrow from me.”


## Hadith 3:797

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “What a good Maniha (the she-camel which has recently given birth and which gives profuse milk) is, and (what a good Maniha) (the sheep which gives profuse milk, a bowl in the morning and another in the evening) is!”


## Hadith 3:798

_Narrated Malik:_

Maniha is a good deed of charity.


## Hadith 3:799

_Narrated Ibn Shihab Az-Zuhri:_

Anas bin Malik said, “When the emigrants came Medina, they had nothing whereas the Ansar had land and property. The Ansar gave them their land on condition that the emigrants would give them half the yearly yield and work on the land and provide the necessaries for cultivation.” His (i.e. Anas's mother who was also the mother of 'Abdullah bin Abu Talha, gave some date-palms to Allah' Apostle who gave them to his freed slave-girl (Um Aiman) who was also the mother of Usama bin Zaid. When the Prophet finished from the fighting against the people of Khaibar and returned to Medina, the emigrants returned to the Ansar the fruit gifts which the Ansar had given them. The Prophet also returned to Anas's mother the date-pallms. Allah's Apostle gave Um Aiman other trees from his garden in lieu of the old gift.


## Hadith 3:800

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:_

That Allah's Apostle said, “There are forty virtuous deeds and the best of them is the Maniha of a she-goat, and anyone who does one of these virtuous deeds hoping for Allah's reward with firm confidence that he will get it, then Allah will make him enter Paradise because of Hassan (a sub-narrator) said, ”We tried to count those good deeds below the Maniha; we mentioned replying to the sneezer, removing harmful things from the road, etc., but we failed to count even fifteen."

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_700">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:601 to 3:700</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_895">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 3:801 to 3:895</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
