---
title: "Hadith 3:801 to 3:895"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_800">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:701 to 3:800</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_100">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:1 to 4:100</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 3:801

_Narrated Jabir:_

Some men had superfluous land and they said that they would give it to others to cultivate on the condition that they would get one-third or one-fourth or one half of its yield. The Prophet said, “Whoever has land should cultivate it himself or give it to his brother or keep it uncultivated.”

emigration. The Prophet said to him, “May Allah be merciful to you. The matter of emigration is difficult. Have you got some camels?” He replied in the affirmative. The Prophet asked him, “Do you pay their Zakat?” He replied in the affirmative. He asked, “Do you lend them so that their milk may be utilized by others?” The bedouin said, “Yes.” The Prophet asked, “Do you milk them on the day off watering them?” He replied, “Yes.” The Prophet said, “Do good deeds beyond the merchants (or the sea) and Allah will never disregard any of your deeds.” (See Hadith No. 260, Vol. 5)


## Hadith 3:802

_Narrated Tawus:_

That he was told by the most learned one amongst them (i.e. Ibn Abbas) that the Prophet went towards some land which was flourishing with vegetation and asked to whom it belonged. He was told that such and such a person took it on rent. The Prophet said, "It would have been better (for the owner) if he had given it to him gratis rather than charging him a fixed rent.


## Hadith 3:803

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The Prophet Abraham migrated with Sarah. The people (of the town where they migrated) gave her Ajar (i.e. Hajar). Sarah returned and said to Abraham, ”Do you know that Allah has humiliated that pagan and he has given a slave-girl for my service?"


## Hadith 3:804

_Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khatab:_

Once I gave a horse (for riding) in Allah's Cause. Later I saw it being sold. I asked Allah's Apostle (whether I could buy it). He said, “Don't buy it, for you should not get back what you have given in charity.”


## Hadith 3:805

_Narrated Urwa bin Al-Musayyab, Alqama bin Waqqas and Ubaidullah bin_

Abdullah:

About the story of 'Aisha and their narrations were similar attesting each other, when the liars said what they invented about 'Aisha, and the Divine Inspiration was delayed, Allah's Apostle sent for 'Ali and Usama to consult them in divorcing his wife (i.e. 'Aisha). Usama said, “Keep your wife, as we know nothing about her except good.” Buraira said, “I cannot accuse her of any defect except that she is still a young girl who sleeps, neglecting her family's dough which the domestic goats come to eat (i.e. she was too simpleminded to deceive her husband).” Allah's Apostle said, “Who can help me to take revenge over the man who has harmed me by defaming the reputation of my family? By Allah, I have not known about my family-anything except good, and they mentioned (i.e. accused) a man about whom I did not know anything except good.”


## Hadith 3:806

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle and Ubai bin Kab Al-Ansari went to the garden where Ibn Saiyad used to live. When Allah's Apostle entered (the garden), he (i.e. Allah's Apostle ) started hiding himself behind the datepalms as he wanted to hear secretly the talk of Ibn Saiyad before the latter saw him. Ibn Saiyad wrapped with a soft decorated sheet was lying on his bed murmuring. Ibn Saiyad's mother saw the Prophet hiding behind the stems of the date-palms. She addressed Ibn Saiyad saying, “O Saf, this is Muhammad.” Hearing that Ibn Saiyad stopped murmuring (or got cautious), the Prophet said, “If she had left him undisturbed, he would have revealed his reality.” (See Hadith No. 290, Vol 4 for details)


## Hadith 3:807

_Narrated Aisha:_

The wife of Rifa'a Al-Qurazi came to the Prophet and said, “I was Rifa'a's wife, but he divorced me and it was a final irrevocable divorce. Then I married AbdurRahman bin Az-Zubair but he is impotent.” The Prophet asked her 'Do you want to remarry Rifa'a? You cannot unless you had a complete sexual relation with your present husband.“ Abu Bakr was sitting with Allah's Apostle and Khalid bin Said bin Al-'As was at the door waiting to be admitted. He said, ”O Abu Bakr! Do you hear what this (woman) is revealing frankly before the Prophet ?"


## Hadith 3:808

_Narrated Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika from 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:_

Uqba married the daughter of Abu Ihab bin Aziz, and then a woman came and said, “I suckled 'Uqba and his wife.” 'Uqba said to her, “I do not know that you have suckled me, and you did not inform me.” He then sent someone to the house of Abu Ihab to enquire about that but they did not know that she had suckled their daughter. Then 'Uqba went to the Prophet in Medina and asked him about it. The Prophet said to him, “How (can you keep your wife) after it has been said (that both of you were suckled by the same woman)?” So, he divorced her and she was married to another (husband).


## Hadith 3:809

_Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:_

People were (sometimes) judged by the revealing of a Divine Inspiration during the lifetime of Allah's Apostle but now there is no longer any more (new revelation). Now we judge you by the deeds you practice publicly, so we will trust and favor the one who does good deeds in front of us, and we will not call him to account about what he is really doing in secret, for Allah will judge him for that; but we will not trust or believe the one who presents to us with an evil deed even if he claims that his intentions were good.


## Hadith 3:810

_Narrated Anas:_

A funeral procession passed in front of the Prophet and the people praised the deceased. The Prophet said, “It has been affirmed (Paradise).” Then another funeral procession passed by and the people talked badly of the deceased. The Prophet said, “It has been affirmed (Hell).” Allah's Apostle was asked, “O Allah's Apostle! You said it has been affirmed for both?” The Prophet said, “The testimony of the people (is accepted), (for) the believer are Allah's witnesses on the earth.”


## Hadith 3:811

_Narrated Abu Al-Aswad:_

Once I went to Medina where there was an outbreak of disease and the people were dying rapidly. I was sitting with 'Umar and a funeral procession passed by. The people praised the deceased. 'Umar said, “It has been affirmed” (Paradise). Then another funeral procession passed by. The people praised the deceased. 'Umar said, “It has been affirmed.” (Paradise). Then another funeral procession passed by. The people praised the deceased. 'Umar said, “It has been affirmed (Paradise).” Then a third funeral procession passed by and the people talked badly of the deceased. 'Umar said, “It has been affirmed (Hell).” I asked Umar, “O chief of the believers! What has been affirmed?” He said, “I have said what the Prophet said. He said, 'Allah will admit into paradise any Muslim whose good character is attested by four persons.' We asked the Prophet, 'If there were three witnesses only?' He said, 'Even three.' We asked, 'If there were two only?' He said, 'Even two.' But we did not ask him about one witness.”


## Hadith 3:812

_Narrated Aisha:_

Aflah asked the permission to visit me but I did not allow him. He said, “Do you veil yourself before me although I am your uncle?” 'Aisha said, “How is that?” Aflah replied, “You were suckled by my brother's wife with my brother's milk.” I asked Allah's Apostle about it, and he said, “Allah is right, so permit him to visit you.”


## Hadith 3:813

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said about Hamza's daughter, “I am not legally permitted to marry her, as foster relations are treated like blood relations (in marital affairs). She is the daughter of my foster brother.”


## Hadith 3:814

_Narrated Amra bint 'Abdur-Rahman:_

That 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet told her uncle that once, while the Prophet was in her house, she heard a man asking Hafsa's permission to enter her house. 'Aisha said, “I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! I think the man is Hafsa's foster uncle.' ” 'Aisha added, “O Allah's Apostle! There is a man asking the permission to enter your house.” Allah's Apostle replied, “I think the man is Hafsa's foster uncle.” 'Aisha said, “If so-and-so were living (i.e. her foster uncle) would he be allowed to visit me?” Allah's Apostle said, “Yes, he would, as the foster relations are treated like blood relations (in marital affairs).”


## Hadith 3:815

_Narrated Aisha:_

Once the Prophet came to me while a man was in my house. He said, “O 'Aisha! Who is this (man)?” I replied, “My foster brothers” He said, “O 'Aisha! Be sure about your foster brothers, as fostership is only valid if it takes place in the suckling period (before two years of age).”


## Hadith 3:816

_Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair:_

A woman committed theft in the Ghazwa of the Conquest (of Mecca) and she was taken to the Prophet who ordered her hand to be cut off. 'Aisha said, “Her repentance was perfect and she was married (later) and used to come to me (after that) and I would present her needs to Allah's Apostle.”


## Hadith 3:817

_Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:_

Allah's Apostle ordered that an unmarried man who committed illegal sexual intercourse be scourged one hundred lashes and sent into exile for one year.


## Hadith 3:818

_Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:_

My mother asked my father to present me a gift from his property; and he gave it to me after some hesitation. My mother said that she would not be satisfied unless the Prophet was made a witness to it. I being a young boy, my father held me by the hand and took me to the Prophet . He said to the Prophet, “His mother, bint Rawaha, requested me to give this boy a gift.” The Prophet said, “Do you have other sons besides him?” He said, “Yes.” The Prophet said, “Do not make me a will not become a witness for injustice.”


## Hadith 3:819

_Narrated Zahdam bin Mudrab:_

I heard Imran bin Husain saying, “The Prophet said, 'The best people are those living in my generation, then those coming after them, and then those coming after (the second generation).” Imran said “I do not know whether the Prophet mentioned two or three generations after your present generation. The Prophet added, 'There will be some people after you, who will be dishonest and will not be trustworthy and will give witness (evidences) without being asked to give witness, and will vow but will not fulfill their vows, and fatness will appear among them.”


## Hadith 3:820

_Narrated Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “The people of my generation are the best, then those who follow them, and then whose who follow the latter. After that there will come some people whose witness will go ahead of their oaths, and their oaths will go ahead of their witness.” Ibrahim (a sub-narrator) said, “We used to be beaten for taking oaths by saying, 'I bear witness by the Name of Allah or by the Covenant of Allah.”


## Hadith 3:821

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet was asked about the great sins He said, "They are:—

(1 ) To join others in worship with Allah,

(2) To be undutiful to one's parents.

(3) To kill a person (which Allah has forbidden to kill) (i.e. to commit the crime of murdering).

(4) And to give a false witness."


## Hadith 3:822

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

The Prophet said thrice, “Should I inform you out the greatest of the great sins?” They said, “Yes, O Allah's Apostle!” He said, “To join others in worship with Allah and to be undutiful to one's parents.” The Prophet then sat up after he had been reclining (on a pillow) and said, "And I warn you against giving a false witness, and he kept on saying that warning till we thought he would not stop. (See Hadith No. 7, Vol. 8)


## Hadith 3:823

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet heard a man (reciting Quran) in the Mosque, and he said, "May Allah bestow His Mercy upon him. No doubt, he made me remember such-and such Verses of such-and-such Sura which I dropped (from my memory).

and then he heard the voice of 'Abbas who was praying in the Mosque, and said, “O 'Aisha! Is this 'Abbad's voice?” I said, “Yes.” He said, “O Allah! Be merciful to 'Abbas!”


## Hadith 3:824

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

The Prophet said, “Bilal pronounces the Adhan when it is still night (before dawn), so eat and drink till the next Adhan is pronounced (or till you hear Ibn Um Maktum's Adhan).” Ibn Um Maktum was a blind man who would not pronounce the Adhan till he was told that it was dawn.


## Hadith 3:825

_Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama:_

Some outer garments were received the Prophet and my father (Makhrama) said to me, “Let us go to the Prophet so that he may give us something from the garments.” So, my father stood at the door and spoke. The Prophet recognized his voice and came out carrying a garment and telling Makhrama the good qualities of that garment, adding, “I have kept this for you, I have sent this for you.”


## Hadith 3:826

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

The Prophet said, “Isn't the witness of a woman equal to half of that of a man?” The women said, “Yes.” He said, “This is because of the deficiency of a woman's mind.”


## Hadith 3:827

_Narrated Uqba bin Al-Harith:_

That he had married Um Yahya bint Abu Ihab. He said. “A black slave-lady came and said, 'I suckled you both.' I then mentioned that to the Prophet who turned his face aside.” Uqba further said, “I went to the other side and told the Prophet about it. He said, 'How can you (keep her as your wife) when the lady has said that she suckled both of you (i.e. you and your wife?)” So, the Prophet ordered him to divorce her.


## Hadith 3:828

_Narrated 'Uqba bin Al-Harith:_

I married a woman and later on a woman came and said, “I suckled you both.” So, I went to the Prophet (to ask him about it). He said, "How can you (keep her as a wife) when it has been said (that you were foster brother and sister)? Leave (divorce) her.


## Hadith 3:829

_Narrated Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) "Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to go on a journey, he would draw lots amongst his wives and would take with him the one upon whom the lot fell. During a Ghazwa of his, he drew lots amongst us and the lot fell upon me, and I proceeded with him after Allah had decreed the use of the veil by women. I was carried in a Howdah (on the camel) and dismounted while still in it. When Allah's Apostle was through with his Ghazwa and returned home, and we approached the city of Medina, Allah's Apostle ordered us to proceed at night. When the order of setting off was given, I walked till I was past the army to answer the call of nature. After finishing I returned (to the camp) to depart (with the others) and suddenly realized that my necklace over my chest was missing. So, I returned to look for it and was delayed because of that. The people who used to carry me on the camel, came to my Howdah and put it on the back of the camel, thinking that I was in it, as, at that time, women were light in weight, and thin and lean, and did not use to eat much. So, those people did not feel the difference in the heaviness of the Howdah while lifting it, and they put it over the camel. At that time I was a young lady. They set the camel moving and proceeded on. I found my necklace after the army had gone, and came to their camp to find nobody. So, I went to the place where I used to stay, thinking that they would discover my absence and come back in my search. While in that state, I felt sleepy and slept.

Safwan bin Mu'attal As-Sulami Adh-Dhakwani was behind the army and reached my abode in the morning. When he saw a sleeping person, he came to me, and he used to see me before veiling. So, I got up when I heard him saying, “Inna lil-lah-wa inn a ilaihi rajiun (We are for Allah, and we will return to Him).” He made his camel knell down. He got down from his camel, and put his leg on the front legs of the camel and then I rode and sat over it. Safwan set out walking, leading the camel by the rope till we reached the army who had halted to take rest at midday. Then whoever was meant for destruction, fell into destruction, (some people accused me falsely) and the leader of the false accusers was 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul. After that we returned to Medina, and I became ill for one month while the people were spreading the forged statements of the false accusers. I was feeling during my ailment as if I were not receiving the usual kindness from the Prophet which I used to receive from him when I got sick. But he would come, greet and say, 'How is that (girl)?' I did not know anything of what was going on till I recovered from my ailment and went out with Um Mistah to the Manasi where we used to answer the call of nature, and we used not to go to answer the call of nature except from night to night and that was before we had lavatories near to our houses. And this habit of ours was similar to the habit of the old 'Arabs in the open country (or away from houses). So. I and Um Mistah bint Ruhm went out walking. Um Mistah stumbled because of her long dress and on that she said, 'Let Mistah be ruined.' I said, 'You are saying a bad word. Why are you abusing a man who took part in (the battle of) Badr?' She said, 'O Hanata (you there) didn't you hear what they said?' Then she told me the rumors of the false accusers.

My sickness was aggravated, and when I returned home, Allah's Apostle came to me, and after greeting he said, 'How is that (girl)?' I requested him to allow me to go to my parents. I wanted then to be sure of the news through them I Allah's Apostle allowed me, and I went to my parents and asked my mother, 'What are the people talking about?' She said, 'O my daughter! Don't worry much about this matter. By Allah, never is there a charming woman loved by her husband who has other wives, but the women would forge false news about her.' I said, 'Glorified be Allah! Are the people really taking of this matter?' That night I kept on weeping and could not sleep till morning. In the morning Allah's Apostle called Ali bin Abu Talib and Usama bin Zaid when he saw the Divine Inspiration delayed, to consul them about divorcing his wife (i.e. 'Aisha). Usama bin Zaid said what he knew of the good reputation of his wives and added, 'O Allah's Apostle! Keep you wife, for, by Allah, we know nothing about her but good.' 'Ali bin Abu Talib said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Allah has no imposed restrictions on you, and there are many women other than she, yet you may ask the woman-servant who will tell you the truth.' On that Allah's Apostle called Buraira and said, 'O Burair. Did you ever see anything which roused your suspicions about her?' Buraira said, 'No, by Allah Who has sent you with the Truth, I have never seen in her anything faulty except that she is a girl of immature age, who sometimes sleeps and leaves the dough for the goats to eat.' On that day Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit and requested that somebody support him in punishing 'Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul. Allah's Apostle said, 'Who will support me to punish that person ('Abdullah bin Ubai bin Salul) who has hurt me by slandering the reputation of my family? By Allah, I know nothing about my family but good, and they have accused a person about whom I know nothing except good, and he never entered my house except in my company.'

Sad bin Mu'adh got up and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! by Allah, I will relieve you from him. If that man is from the tribe of the Aus, then we will chop his head off, and if he is from our brothers, the Khazraj, then order us, and we will fulfill your order.' On that Sad bin 'Ubada, the chief of the Khazraj and before this incident, he had been a pious man, got up, motivated by his zeal for his tribe and said, 'By Allah, you have told a lie; you cannot kill him, and you will never be able to kill him.' On that Usaid bin Al-Hadir got up and said (to Sad bin 'Ubada), 'By Allah! you are a liar. By Allah, we will kill him; and you are a hypocrite, defending the hypocrites.' On this the two tribes of Aus and Khazraj got excited and were about to fight each other, while Allah's Apostle was standing on the pulpit. He got down and quietened them till they became silent and he kept quiet. On that day I kept on weeping so much so that neither did my tears stop, nor could I sleep.

In the morning my parents were with me and I had wept for two nights and a day, till I thought my liver would burst from weeping. While they were sitting with me and I was weeping, an Ansari woman asked my permission to enter, and I allowed her to come in. She sat down and started weeping with me. While we were in this state, Allah's Apostle came and sat down and he had never sat with me since the day they forged the accusation. No revelation regarding my case came to him for a month. He recited Tashah-hud (i.e. None has the right to be worshipped but Allah and Muhammad is His Apostle) and then said, 'O 'Aisha! I have been informed such-and-such about you; if you are innocent, then Allah will soon reveal your innocence, and if you have committed a sin, then repent to Allah and ask Him to forgive you, for when a person confesses his sin and asks Allah for forgiveness, Allah accepts his repentance.' When Allah's Apostle finished his speech my tears ceased completely and there remained not even a single drop of it. I requested my father to reply to Allah's Apostle on my behalf. My father said, By Allah, I do not know what to say to Allah's Apostle.' I said to my mother, 'Talk to Allah's Apostle on my behalf.' She said, 'By Allah, I do not know what to say to Allah's Apostle.

I was a young girl and did not have much knowledge of the Quran. I said. 'I know, by Allah, that you have listened to what people are saying and that has been planted in your minds and you have taken it as a truth. Now, if I told you that I am innocent and Allah knows that I am innocent, you would not believe me and if I confessed to you falsely that I am guilty, and Allah knows that I am innocent you would believe me. By Allah, I don't compare my situation with you except to the situation of Joseph's father (i.e. Jacob) who said, 'So (for me) patience is most fitting against that which you assert and it is Allah (Alone) whose help can be sought.' Then I turned to the other side of my bed hoping that Allah would prove my innocence. By Allah I never thought that Allah would reveal Divine Inspiration in my case, as I considered myself too inferior to be talked of in the Holy Qur'an. I had hoped that Allah's Apostle might have a dream in which Allah would prove my innocence. By Allah, Allah's Apostle had not got up and nobody had left the house before the Divine Inspiration came to Allah's Apostle. So, there overtook him the same state which used to overtake him, (when he used to have, on being inspired divinely). He was sweating so much so that the drops of the sweat were dropping like pearls though it was a (cold) wintry day. When that state of Allah's Apostle was over, he was smiling and the first word he said, 'Aisha! Thank Allah, for Allah has declared your innocence.' My mother told me to go to Allah's Apostle . I replied, 'By Allah I will not go to him and will not thank but Allah.' So Allah revealed: “Verily! They who spread the slander are a gang among you . . .” (24.11)

When Allah gave the declaration of my Innocence, Abu Bakr, who used to provide for Mistah bin Uthatha for he was his relative, said, 'By Allah, I will never provide Mistah with anything because of what he said about Aisha.' But Allah later revealed: —

“And let not those who are good and wealthy among you swear not to help their kinsmen, those in need and those who left their homes in Allah's Cause. Let them forgive and overlook. Do you not wish that Allah should forgive you? Verily! Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful.” (24.22) After that Abu Bakr said, 'Yes ! By Allah! I like that Allah should forgive me,' and resumed helping Mistah whom he used to help before.

Allah's Apostle also asked Zainab bint Jahsh (i.e. the Prophet's wife about me saying, 'What do you know and what did you see?' She replied, 'O Allah's Apostle! I refrain to claim hearing or seeing what I have not heard or seen. By Allah, I know nothing except goodness about Aisha.“ Aisha further added ”Zainab was competing with me (in her beauty and the Prophet's love), yet Allah protected her (from being malicious), for she had piety."


## Hadith 3:830

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

A man praised another man in front of the Prophet . The Prophet said to him, “Woe to you, you have cut off your companion's neck, you have cut off your companion's neck,” repeating it several times and then added, “Whoever amongst you has to praise his brother should say, 'I think that he is so and so, and Allah knows exactly the truth, and I do not confirm anybody's good conduct before Allah, but I think him so and so,' if he really knows what he says about him.”


## Hadith 3:831

_Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:_

The Prophet heard someone praising another and exaggerating in his praise. The Prophet said, "You have ruined or cut the man's back (by praising him so much).


## Hadith 3:832

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle called me to present myself in front of him or the eve of the battle of Uhud, while I was fourteen years of age at that time, and he did not allow me to take part in that battle, but he called me in front of him on the eve of the battle of the Trench when I was fifteen years old, and he allowed me (to join the battle).“ Nafi' said, ”I went to 'Umar bin 'Abdul Aziz who was Caliph at that time and related the above narration to him, He said, “This age (fifteen) is the limit between childhood and manhood,” and wrote to his governors to give salaries to those who reached the age of fifteen.


## Hadith 3:833

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

The Prophet said, “Bath on Friday is compulsory for those who have attained the age of puberty.”


## Hadith 3:834

_Narrated Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If somebody takes a false oath in order to get the property of a Muslim (unjustly) by that oath, then Allah will be angry with him when he will meet Him.” Al-Ash'ath informed me, “By Allah! This was said regarding me. There was a dispute about a piece of land between me and a man from the Jews who denied my right. I took him to the Prophet. Allah's Apostle asked me, 'Do you have an evidence?' I replied in the negative. He said to the Jew, 'Take an oath.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! He will surely take an oath and take my property unjustly.” So, Allah revealed: “Verily! Those who purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and their oaths . . . ” (3.77)


## Hadith 3:835

_Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:_

Ibn 'Abbas wrote that the Prophet gave his verdict on the basis of the defendant's oath.


## Hadith 3:836

_Narrated Abu Wail:_

Abdullah (bin Mas'ud) said, “Whoever takes a (false) oath in order to grab some property (unjustly), Allah will be angry with him when he will meet Him. Allah confirmed that through His Divine Revelation: ”Verily! Those who purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and their oaths . . . they will have a painful punishment." (3.77)

Al-Ash'ath bin Qais came to us and asked, 'What is Abu Abdur-Rahman (i.e. 'Abdullah) telling you? 'We told him what he was narrating to us. He said, 'He was telling the truth; this Divine Verse was revealed in connection with me. There was a dispute between me and another man about something and the case was filed before Allah's Apostle who said, 'Produce your two witnesses or else the defendant is to take an oath.' I said, The defendant will surely take a (false) oath caring for nothing.' The Prophet said, 'Whoever takes a false oath in order to grab (other's) property, then Allah will be angry with him when he will meet Him.' Then Allah revealed its confirmation. Al-Ashath then recited the above Divine Verse." (3.77)


## Hadith 3:837

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Hilal bin Umaiya accused his wife before the Prophet of committing illegal sexual intercourse with Sharik bin Sahma.' The Prophet said, “Produce a proof, or else you would get the legal punishment (by being lashed) on your back.” Hilal said, “O Allah's Apostle! If anyone of us saw another man over his wife, would he go to search for a proof.” The Prophet went on saying, “Produce a proof or else you would get the legal punishment (by being lashed) on your back.” The Prophet then mentioned the narration of Lian (as in the Holy Book). (Surat-al-Nur: 24)


## Hadith 3:838

_Narrated Abu Huraira: Allah's Apostle said, "There are three persons_

whom Allah will neither talk to nor look at, nor purify from (the sins), and they will have a painful punishment. (They are):

(1) A man possessed superfluous water on a way and he withheld it from the travelers.

(2) a man who gives a pledge of allegiance to a Muslim ruler and gives it only for worldly gains. If the ruler gives him what he wants, he remains obedient to It, otherwise he does not abide by it, and

(3) a man bargains with another man after the Asr prayer and the latter takes a false oath in the Name of Allah) claiming that he has been offered so much for the thing and the former (believes him and) buys it."


## Hadith 3:839

_Narrated Ibn Mas'ud:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever takes a (false) oath in order to grab (others) property, then Allah will be angry with him when he will meet Him.”


## Hadith 3:840

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet asked some people to take an oath, and they hurried for it. The Prophet ordered that lots should be drawn amongst them as to who would take an oath first.


## Hadith 3:841

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa:_

A man displayed some goods in the market and took a false oath that he had been offered so much for them though he was not offered that amount Then the following Divine Verse was revealed:— “Verily! Those who purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's covenant and their oaths . . . Will get painful punishment.” (3.77) Ibn Abu Aufa added, "Such person as described above is a treacherous Riba-eater (i.e. eater of usury).


## Hadith 3:842

_Narrated Abu Wail from Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever takes a false oath in order to grab another man's (or his brother's) property, then Allah will be angry with him when he will meet him.” Then Allah confirmed this by revealing the Divine Verse: “Verily! Those who purchase a little gain at the cost of Allah's Covenant and their oaths . . . Will get painful punishment.” (3.77) Al-Ash'ath met me and asked, “What did 'Abdullah tell you today?” I said, “So and so.” He said, “The Verse was revealed regarding my case.”


## Hadith 3:843

_Narrated Talha bin 'Ubaidullah:_

A man came to Allah's Apostle asking him about Islam, Allah's Apostle said, “You have to offer five compulsory prayers in a day and a night (24 hours).” The man asked, “Is there any more compulsory prayers for me?” Allah's Apostle said, “No, unless you like to offer Nawafil (i.e. optional prayers).” Allah's Apostle then added, “You have to observe fasts during the month of Ramadan.” The man said, “Am I to fast any other days?' Allah's Apostle said, ”No, unless you wish to observe the optional fast voluntarily.“ Then Allah's Apostle told him about the compulsory Zakat. The man asked, ”Do I have to give anything besides?“ Allah's Apostle said, ”No, unless you wish to give in charity voluntarily.“ So, the man departed saying, ”By Allah I will neither do more nor less than that.“ Allah's Apostle said, ”If he has said the truth he will be successful."


## Hadith 3:844

_Narrated Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever has to take an oath should swear by Allah or remain silent.” (i.e. He should not swear by other than Allah.)


## Hadith 3:845

_Narrated Um Salama:_

Once Allah's Apostle said, “You people present your cases to me and some of you may be more eloquent and persuasive in presenting their argument. So, if I give some one's right to another (wrongly) because of the latter's (tricky) presentation of the case, I am really giving him a piece of fire; so he should not take it.”


## Hadith 3:846

_Narrated Abdullah bin Abbas:_

Abu Sufyan told me that Heraclius said to him, “When I enquired you what he (i.e. Muhammad) ordered you, you replied that he ordered you to establish the prayer, to speak the truth, to be chaste, to keep promises and to pay back trusts.” Then Heraclius added, “These are really the qualities of a prophet.”


## Hadith 3:847

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, "The signs of a hypocrite are three:

(1) whenever he speaks, he tells a lie,

(2) whenever he is entrusted, he proves to be dishonest,

(3) whenever he promises, he breaks his promise.


## Hadith 3:848

_Narrated Muhammad bin Ali:_

Jabir bin Abdullah said, “When the Prophet died, Abu Bakr received some property from Al-Ala bin Al-Hadrami. Abu Bakr said to the people, ”Whoever has a money claim on the Prophet, or was promised something by him, should come to us (so that we may pay him his right).“ Jabir added, ”I said (to Abu Bakr), Allah's Apostle promised me that he would give me this much, and this much, and this much (spreading his hands three times).“ Jabir added, ”Abu Bakr counted for me and handed me five-hundred (gold pieces), and then five-hundred, and then five-hundred."


## Hadith 3:849

_Narrated Said bin Jubair:_

A Jew from Hira asked me which one of the two periods Musa (i.e. Prophet Moses) completed. I said, “I don't know, (but wait) till I see the most learned 'Arab and enquire him about it.” So, I went to Ibn 'Abbas and asked him. He replied, “Moses completed the longer and better period.” Ibn 'Abbas added, “No doubt, an apostle of Allah always does what he says.”


## Hadith 3:850

_Narrated Ubaidullah bin Abdullah bin Utba:_

Ibn Abbas said, “O Muslims? How do you ask the people of the Scriptures, though your Book (i.e. the Quran) which was revealed to His Prophet is the most recent information from Allah and you recite it, the Book that has not been distorted? Allah has revealed to you that the people of the scriptures have changed with their own hands what was revealed to them and they have said (as regards their changed Scriptures): This is from Allah, in order to get some worldly benefit thereby.” Ibn Abbas added: “Isn't the knowledge revealed to you sufficient to prevent you from asking them? By Allah I have never seen any one of them asking (Muslims) about what has been revealed to you.”


## Hadith 3:851

_Narrated An-Nu'man bin Bashir:_

The Prophet said, “The example of the person abiding by Allah's orders and limits (or the one who abides by the limits and regulations prescribed by Allah) in comparison to the one who do wrong and violate Allah's limits and orders is like the example of people drawing lots for seats in a boat. Some of them got seats in the upper part while the others in the lower part ; those in the, lower part have to pass by those in the upper one to get water, and that troubled the latter. One of them (i.e. the people in the lower part) took an axe and started making a hole in the bottom of the boat. The people of the upper part came and asked him, (saying), 'What is wrong with you?' He replied, ”You have been troubled much by my (coming up to you), and I have to get water.' Now if they prevent him from doing that they will save him and themselves, but if they leave him (to do what he wants), they will destroy him and themselves."


## Hadith 3:852

_Narrated Um Al-Ala:_

That when the Ansar drew lots as to which of the emigrants should dwell with which of the Ansar, the name of Uthman bin Mazun came out (to be in their lot). Um Al-Ala further said, “Uthman stayed with us, and we nursed him when he got sick, but he died. We shrouded him in his clothes, and Allah's Apostle came to our house and I said, (addressing the dead 'Uthman), 'O Abu As-Sa'ib! May Allah be merciful to you. I testify that Allah has blessed you.' The Prophet said to me, ”How do you know that Allah has blessed him?“ I replied, 'I do not know O Allah's Apostle! May my parents be sacrificed for you.' Allah's Apostle said, 'As regards Uthman, by Allah he has died and I really wish him every good, yet, by Allah, although I am Allah's Apostle, I do not know what will be done to him.' Um Al-Ala added, 'By Allah I shall never attest the piety of anybody after him. And what Allah's Apostles said made me sad.” Um Al-Ala further said, “Once I slept and saw in a dream, a flowing stream for Uthman. So I went to Allah's Apostle and told him about it, he said, 'That is (the symbol of) his deeds.”


## Hadith 3:853

_Narrated Aisha:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to go on a journey, he used to draw lots among his wives and would take with him the one on whom the lot fell. He also used to fix for everyone of his wives a day and a night, but Sauda bint Zam'a gave her day and night to 'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet intending thereby to please Allah's Apostle.


## Hadith 3:854

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, "If the people knew what is the reward of making the call (for the prayer) and (of being in) the first row (in the prayer), and if they found no other way to get this privilege except by casting lots, they would certainly cast lots for it. If they knew the reward of the noon prayer, they would race for it, and if they knew the reward of the morning (i.e. Fajr) and Isha prayers, they would present themselves for the prayer even if they had to crawl to reach there.


## Hadith 3:855

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

There was a dispute amongst the people of the tribe of Bani 'Amr bin 'Auf. The Prophet went to them along with some of his companions in order to make peace between them. The time for the prayer became due but the Prophet did not turn up; Bilal pronounced the Adhan (i.e. call) for the prayer but the Prophet did not turn up, so Bilal went to Abu Bakr and said, “The time for the prayer is due and the Prophet i detained, would you lead the people in the prayer?” Abu Bakr replied, “Yes, you wish.” So, Bilal pronounced the Iqama of the prayer and Abu Bakr went ahead (to lead the prayer), but the Prophet came walking among the rows till he joined the first row. The people started clapping and they clapped too much, and Abu Bakr used not to look hither and thither in the prayer, but he turned round and saw the Prophet standing behind him. The Prophet beckoned him with his hand to keep on praying where he was. Abu Bakr raised his hand and praised Allah and then retreated till he came in the (first) row, and the Prophet went ahead and lead the people in the prayer. When the Prophet finished the prayer, he turned towards the people and said, “O people! When something happens to you during the prayer, you start clapping. Really clapping is (permissible) for women only. If something happens to one of you in his prayer, he should say: 'Subhan Allah', (Glorified be Allah), for whoever hears him (saying so) will direct his attention towards him. O Abu Bakr! What prevented you from leading the people in the prayer when I beckoned to you (to continue)?” Abu Bakr replied, "It did not befit the son of Abu Quhafa to lead the prayer in front of the Prophet.


## Hadith 3:856

_Narrated Anas:_

It was said to the Prophet “Would that you see Abdullah bin Ubai.” So, the Prophet went to him, riding a donkey, and the Muslims accompanied him, walking on salty barren land. When the Prophet reached 'Abdullah bin Ubai, the latter said, “Keep away from me! By Allah, the bad smell of your donkey has harmed me.” On that an Ansari man said (to 'Abdullah), “By Allah! The smell of the donkey of Allah's Apostle is better than your smell.” On that a man from 'Abdullah's tribe got angry for 'Abdullah's sake, and the two men abused each other which caused the friends of the two men to get angry, and the two groups started fighting with sticks, shoes and hands. We were informed that the following Divine Verse was revealed (in this concern):— “And if two groups of Believers fall to fighting then, make peace between them.” (49.9)


## Hadith 3:857

_Narrated Um Kulthum bint Uqba:_

That she heard Allah's Apostle saying, “He who makes peace between the people by inventing good information or saying good things, is not a liar.”


## Hadith 3:858

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

Once the people of Quba fought with each other till they threw stones on each other. When Allah's Apostle was informed about it, he said, “Let us go to bring about a reconciliation between them.”


## Hadith 3:859

_Narrated Aisha:_

The following Verse: If a woman fears cruelty or desertion on her husband's part (i.e. the husband notices something unpleasant about his wife, such as old age or the like, and wants to divorce her, but she asks him to keep her and provide for her as he wishes). (4.128) “There is no blame on them if they reconcile on such basis.”


## Hadith 3:860

_Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:_

A bedouin came and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Judge between us according to Allah's Laws.” His opponent got up and said, “He is right. Judge between us according to Allah's Laws.” The bedouin said, “My son was a laborer working for this man, and he committed illegal sexual intercourse with his wife. The people told me that my son should be stoned to death; so, in lieu of that, I paid a ransom of one hundred sheep and a slave girl to save my son. Then I asked the learned scholars who said, ”Your son has to be lashed one-hundred lashes and has to be exiled for one year.“ The Prophet said, ”No doubt I will judge between you according to Allah's Laws. The slave-girl and the sheep are to go back to you, and your son will get a hundred lashes and one year exile.“ He then addressed somebody, ”O Unais! go to the wife of this (man) and stone her to death" So, Unais went and stoned her to death.


## Hadith 3:861

_Narrated Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If somebody innovates something which is not in harmony with the principles of our religion, that thing is rejected.”


## Hadith 3:862

_Narrated Al-Bara bin 'Azib:_

When Allah's Apostle concluded a peace treaty with the people of Hudaibiya, Ali bin Abu Talib wrote the document and he mentioned in it, “Muhammad, Allah's Apostle .” The pagans said, “Don't write: 'Muhammad, Allah's Apostle', for if you were an apostle we would not fight with you.” Allah's Apostle asked Ali to rub it out, but Ali said, “I will not be the person to rub it out.” Allah's Apostle rubbed it out and made peace with them on the condition that the Prophet and his companions would enter Mecca and stay there for three days, and that they would enter with their weapons in cases.


## Hadith 3:863

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

When the Prophet intended to perform 'Umra in the month of Dhul-Qada, the people of Mecca did not let him enter Mecca till he settled the matter with them by promising to stay in it for three days only. When the document of treaty was written, the following was mentioned: 'These are the terms on which Muhammad, Allah's Apostle agreed (to make peace).' They said, “We will not agree to this, for if we believed that you are Allah's Apostle we would not prevent you, but you are Muhammad bin 'Abdullah.” The Prophet said, “I am Allah's Apostle and also Muhammad bin 'Abdullah.” Then he said to 'Ali, “Rub off (the words) 'Allah's Apostle' ”, but 'Ali said, “No, by Allah, I will never rub off your name.” So, Allah's Apostle took the document and wrote, 'This is what Muhammad bin 'Abdullah has agreed upon: No arms will be brought into Mecca except in their cases, and nobody from the people of Mecca will be allowed to go with him (i.e. the Prophet ) even if he wished to follow him and he (the Prophet ) will not prevent any of his companions from staying in Mecca if the latter wants to stay.' When the Prophet entered Mecca and the time limit passed, the Meccans went to 'Ali and said, “Tell your Friend (i.e. the Prophet ) to go out, as the period (agreed to) has passed.” So, the Prophet went out of Mecca. The daughter of Hamza ran after them (i.e. the Prophet and his companions), calling, “O Uncle! O Uncle!” 'Ali received her and led her by the hand and said to Fatima, “Take your uncle's daughter.” Zaid and Ja'far quarrel ed about her. 'Ali said, “I have more right to her as she is my uncle's daughter.” Ja'far said, “She is my uncle's daughter, and her aunt is my wife.” Zaid said, “She is my brother's daughter.” The Prophet judged that she should be given to her aunt, and said that the aunt was like the mother. He then said to 'All, “You are from me and I am from you”, and said to Ja'far, “You resemble me both in character and appearance”, and said to Zaid, “You are our brother (in faith) and our freed slave.”


## Hadith 3:864

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle set out for the 'Umra but the pagans of Quraish prevented him from reaching the Ka'ba. So, he slaughtered his sacrifice and got his head shaved at Al-Hudaibiya, and agreed with them that he would perform 'Umra the following year and would not carry weapons except swords and would not stay in Mecca except for the period they al lowed. So, the Prophet performed the 'Umra in the following year and entered Mecca according to the treaty, and when he stayed for three days, the pagans ordered him to depart, and he departed.


## Hadith 3:865

_Narrated Sahl bin Abu Hathma:_

Abdullah bin Sahl and Muhaiyisa bin Mas'ud bin Zaid went to Khaibar when it had a peace treaty (with the Muslims).


## Hadith 3:866

_Narrated Anas:_

Ar-Rabi, the daughter of An-Nadr broke the tooth of a girl, and the relatives of Ar-Rabi' requested the girl's relatives to accept the Irsh (compensation for wounds etc.) and forgive (the offender), but they refused. So, they went to the Prophet who ordered them to bring about retaliation. Anas bin An-Nadr asked, “O Allah”; Apostle! Will the tooth of Ar-Rabi' be broken? No, by Him Who has sent you with the Truth, her tooth will not be broken.“ The Prophet said, ”O Anas! Allah“; law ordains retaliation.” Later the relatives of the girl agreed and forgave her. The Prophet said, “There are some of Allah's slaves who, if they take an oath by Allah, are responded to by Allah i.e. their oath is fulfilled). Anas added, ”The people agreed and accepted the Irsh."


## Hadith 3:867

_Narrated Al-Hasan Al-Basri:_

By Allah, Al-Hasan bin Ali led large battalions like mountains against Muawiya. Amr bin Al-As said (to Muawiya), “I surely see battalions which will not turn back before killing their opponents.” Muawiya who was really the best of the two men said to him, “O 'Amr! If these killed those and those killed these, who would be left with me for the jobs of the public, who would be left with me for their women, who would be left with me for their children?” Then Muawiya sent two Quraishi men from the tribe of 'Abd-i-Shams called 'Abdur Rahman bin Sumura and Abdullah bin 'Amir bin Kuraiz to Al-Hasan saying to them, “Go to this man (i.e. Al-Hasan) and negotiate peace with him and talk and appeal to him.” So, they went to Al-Hasan and talked and appealed to him to accept peace. Al-Hasan said, “We, the offspring of 'Abdul Muttalib, have got wealth and people have indulged in killing and corruption (and money only will appease them).” They said to Al-Hasan, “Muawiya offers you so and so, and appeals to you and entreats you to accept peace.” Al-Hasan said to them, “But who will be responsible for what you have said?” They said, “We will be responsible for it.” So, what-ever Al-Hasan asked they said, “We will be responsible for it for you.” So, Al-Hasan concluded a peace treaty with Muawiya. Al-Hasan (Al-Basri) said: I heard Abu Bakr saying, “I saw Allah's Apostle on the pulpit and Al-Hasan bin 'Ali was by his side. The Prophet was looking once at the people and once at Al-Hasan bin 'Ali saying, 'This son of mine is a Saiyid (i.e. a noble) and may Allah make peace between two big groups of Muslims through him.”


## Hadith 3:868

_Narrated Aisha:_

Once Allah's Apostle heard the loud voices of some opponents quarreling at the door. One of them was appealing to the other to deduct his debt and asking him to be lenient but the other was saying, “By Allah I will not do so.” Allah's Apostle went out to them and said, “Who is the one who was swearing by Allah that he would not do a favor?” That man said, “I am that person, O Allah's Apostle! I will give my opponent whatever he wishes.”


## Hadith 3:869

_Narrated Abdullah bin Kab bin Malik from Kab bin Malik:_

Abdullah bin Abu Hadrad Al-Aslami owed Kab bin Malik some money. One day the latter met the former and demanded his right, and their voices grew very loud. The Prophet passed by them and said, “O Ka'b,” beckoning with his hand as if intending to say, “Deduct half the debts.” So, Kab took half what the other owed him and remitted the other half.


## Hadith 3:870

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “There is a Sadaqa to be given for every joint of the human body; and for every day on which the sun rises there is a reward of a Sadaqa (i.e. charitable gift) for the one who establishes justice among people.”


## Hadith 3:871

_Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair:_

Az-Zubair told me that he quarrelled with an Ansari man who had participated in (the battle of) Badr in front of Allah's Apostle about a water stream which both of them used for irrigation. Allah's Apostle said to Az-Zubair, “O Zubair! Irrigate (your garden) first, and then let the water flow to your neighbor.” The Ansari became angry and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Is it because he is your cousin?” On that the complexion of Allah's Apostle changed (because of anger) and said (to Az-Zubair), “I irrigate (your garden) and then with-hold the water till it reaches the walls (surrounding the palms).” So, Allah's Apostle gave Az-Zubair his full right. Before that Allah's Apostle had given a generous judgment beneficial for Az-Zubair and the Ansari, but when the Ansan irritated Allah's Apostle he gave Az-Zubair his full right according to the evident law. Az-Zubair said, “By Allah ! I think the following Verse was revealed concerning that case: ”But no by your Lord They can have No faith Until they make you judge In all disputes between them." (4.65)


## Hadith 3:872

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:_

My father died and was in debt. I suggested that his creditors take the fruits (i.e. dates) of my garden in lieu of the debt of my father, but they refused the offer, as they thought that it would not cover the full debt. So, I went to the Prophet and told him about it. He said (to me), “When you pluck the dates and collect them in the Mirbad (i.e. a place where dates are dried), call me (Allah's Apostle).” Finally he came accompanied by Abu Bakr and 'Umar and sat on the dates and invoked Allah to bless them. Then he said, “Call your creditors and give them their full rights.” So, I paid all my father's creditors in full and yet thirteen extra Wasqs of dates remained, seven of which were 'Ajwa and six were Laun or six of which were Ajwa and seven were Laun. I met Allah's Apostle at sunset and informed him about it. On that he smiled and said, “Go to Abu Bakr and 'Umar and tell them about it.” They said, “We perceived that was going to happen, as Allah's Apostle did what he did.”


## Hadith 3:873

_Narrated Abdullah bin Kab:_

That Ka'b bin Malik told him that in the lifetime of Allah's Apostle he demanded his debt from Ibn Abu Hadrad in the Mosque. Their voices grew louder till Allah's Apostle heard them while he was in his house. So he lifted the curtain of his room and called Ka'b bin Malik saying, “O Ka'b!” He replied, “Labbaik! O Allah's Apostle!” He beckoned to him with his hand suggesting that he deduct half the debt. Ka'b said, “I agree, O Allah's Apostle!” Allah's Apostle then said (to Ibn Abu Hadrad), “Get up and pay him the rest.”


## Hadith 3:874

_Narrated Marwan and al-Miswar bin Makhrama:_

(from the companions of Allah's Apostle) When Suhail bin Amr agreed to the Treaty (of Hudaibiya), one of the things he stipulated then, was that the Prophet should return to them (i.e. the pagans) anyone coming to him from their side, even if he was a Muslim; and would not interfere between them and that person. The Muslims did not like this condition and got disgusted with it. Suhail did not agree except with that condition. So, the Prophet agreed to that condition and returned Abu Jandal to his father Suhail bin 'Amr. Thenceforward the Prophet returned everyone in that period (of truce) even if he was a Muslim. During that period some believing women emigrants including Um Kalthum bint Uqba bin Abu Muait who came to Allah's Apostle and she was a young lady then. Her relative came to the Prophet and asked him to return her, but the Prophet did not return her to them for Allah had revealed the following Verse regarding women:

"O you who believe! When the believing women come to you as emigrants. Examine them, Allah knows best as to their belief, then if you know them for true believers, Send them not back to the unbelievers, (for) they are not lawful (wives) for the disbelievers, Nor are the unbelievers lawful (husbands) for them (60.10)

according to this Verse: “O you who believe! When the believing women come to you, as emigrants test them . . . for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.” (60.10-12) Aisha said, “When any of them agreed to that condition Allah's Apostle would say to her, 'I have accepted your pledge of allegiance.' He would only say that, but, by Allah he never touched the hand of any women (i.e. never shook hands with them) while taking the pledge of allegiance and he never took their pledge of allegiance except by his words (only).”


## Hadith 3:875

_Narrated Jarir:_

When I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle and he stipulated that I should give good advice to every Muslim.


## Hadith 3:876

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

I gave the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle for offering the prayers perfectly paying the Zakat and giving good advice to every Muslim.


## Hadith 3:877

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If someone sells pollinated date-palms, their fruits will be for the seller, unless the buyer stipulates the contrary.”


## Hadith 3:878

_Narrated Urwa:_

Aisha told me that Buraira came to seek her help in writing for emancipation and at that time she had not paid any part of her price. 'Aisha said to her, “Go to your masters and if they agree that I will pay your price (and free you) on condition that your Wala' will be for me, I will pay the money.” Buraira told her masters about that, but they refused, and said, “If 'Aisha wants to do a favor she could, but your Wala will be for us.” Aisha informed Allah's Apostle of that and he said to her, “Buy and manumit Buraira as the Wala' will go to the manumitted.”


## Hadith 3:879

_Narrated Jabir:_

While I was riding a (slow) and tired camel, the Prophet passed by and beat it and prayed for Allah's Blessings for it. The camel became so fast as it had never been before. The Prophet then said, “Sell it to me for one Uqiyya (of gold).” I said, “No.” He again said, “Sell it to me for one Uqiyya (of gold).” I sold it and stipulated that I should ride it to my house. When we reached (Medina) I took that camel to the Prophet and he gave me its price. I returned home but he sent for me (and when I went to him) he said, “I will not take your camel. Take your camel as a gift for you.” (Various narrations are mentioned here with slight variations in expressions relating the condition that Jabir had the right to ride the sold camel up to Medina).


## Hadith 3:880

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Ansar said to the Prophet, “Divide our date-palms between us and our emigrant brothers.” The Prophet said, “No.” The Ansar said to the emigrants, “You may do the labor (in our gardens) and we will share the fruits with you.” The emigrants said, “We hear and obey.”


## Hadith 3:881

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

Allah's Apostle gave the land of Khaibar to the Jews on the condition that they would work on it and cultivate it and they would get half of its yield.


## Hadith 3:882

_Narrated Uqba bin Amir:_

Allah's Apostle said, “From among all the conditions which you have to fulfill, the conditions which make it legal for you to have sexual relations (i.e. the marriage contract) have the greatest right to be fulfilled.”


## Hadith 3:883

_Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:_

We used to work on the fields more than the other Ansar, and we used to rent the land (for the yield of a specific portion of it). But sometimes that portion or the rest of the land did not give any yield, so we were forbidden (by the Prophet ) to follow such a system, but we were allowed to rent the land for money.


## Hadith 3:884

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “No town-dweller should sell for a bedouin. Do not practice Najsh (i.e. Do not offer a high price for a thing which you do not want to buy, in order to deceive the people). No Muslim should offer more for a thing already bought by his Muslim brother, nor should he demand the hand of a girl already engaged to another Muslim. A Muslim woman shall not try to bring about The divorce of her sister (i.e. another Muslim woman) in order to take her place herself.”


## Hadith 3:885

_Narrated Abu Huraira and Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani:_

A bedouin came to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's apostle! I ask you by Allah to judge My case according to Allah's Laws.” His opponent, who was more learned than he, said, “Yes, judge between us according to Allah's Laws, and allow me to speak.” Allah's Apostle said, “Speak.” He (i .e. the bedouin or the other man) said, “My son was working as a laborer for this (man) and he committed illegal sexual intercourse with his wife. The people told me that it was obligatory that my son should be stoned to death, so in lieu of that I ransomed my son by paying one hundred sheep and a slave girl. Then I asked the religious scholars about it, and they informed me that my son must be lashed one hundred lashes, and be exiled for one year, and the wife of this (man) must be stoned to death.” Allah's Apostle said, “By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, I will judge between you according to Allah's Laws. The slave-girl and the sheep are to be returned to you, your son is to receive a hundred lashes and be exiled for one year. You, Unais, go to the wife of this (man) and if she confesses her guilt, stone her to death.” Unais went to that woman next morning and she confessed. Allah's Apostle ordered that she be stoned to death.


## Hadith 3:886

_Narrated Aiman Al-Makki:_

rs had stipulated that her Wala would be for them.' The Prophet said,


## Hadith 3:887

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle forbade (1) the meeting of the caravan (of goods) on the way, (2) and that a residing person buys for a bedouin, (3) and that a woman stipulates the divorce of the wife of the would-be husband, (4) and that a man tries to cause the cancellation of a bargain concluded by another. He also forbade An-Najsh (see Hadith 824) and that one withholds the milk in the udder of the animal so that he may deceive people on selling it.


## Hadith 3:888

_Narrated Ubai bin Kab:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Moses the Apostle of Allah,” and then he narrated the whole story about him. Al-Khadir said to Moses, “Did not I tell you that you can have no patience with me.” (18.72). Moses then violated the agreement for the first time because of forgetfulness, then Moses promised that if he asked Al-Khadir about anything, the latter would have the right to desert him. Moses abided by that condition and on the third occasion he intentionally asked Al-Khadir and caused that condition to be applied. The three occasions referred to above are referred to by the following Verses:

“Call me not to account for forgetting And be not hard upon me.” (18.73)

“Then they met a boy and Khadir killed him.” (18.74)

“Then they proceeded and found a wall which was on the verge of falling and Khadir set it up straight.” (18.77)


## Hadith 3:889

_Narrated Urwa:_

Aisha said, “Buraira came to me and said, 'My people (masters) have written the contract for my emancipation for nine Awaq ) of gold) to be paid in yearly installments, one Uqiyya per year; so help me.” Aisha said (to her), “If your masters agree, I will pay them the whole sum provided the Wala will be for me.” Buraira went to her masters and told them about it, but they refused the offer and she returned from them while Allah's Apostles was sitting. She said, “I presented the offer to them, but they refused unless the Wala' would be for them.” When the Prophet heard that and 'Aisha told him about It, he said to her, “Buy Buraira and let them stipulate that her Wala' will be for them, as the Wala' is for the manumitted.” 'Aisha did so. After that Allah's Apostle got up amidst the people, Glorified and Praised Allah and said, “What is wrong with some people who stipulate things which are not in Allah's Laws? Any condition which is not in Allah's Laws is invalid even if there were a hundred such conditions. Allah's Rules are the most valid and Allah's Conditions are the most solid. The Wala is for the manumitted.”


## Hadith 3:890

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

When the people of Khaibar dislocated Abdullah bin Umar's hands and feet, Umar got up delivering a sermon saying, “No doubt, Allah's Apostle made a contract with the Jews concerning their properties, and said to them, 'We allow you (to stand in your land) as long as Allah allows you.' Now Abdullah bin Umar went to his land and was attacked at night, and his hands and feet were dislocated, and as we have no enemies there except those Jews, they are our enemies and the only people whom we suspect, I have made up my mind to exile them.” When Umar decided to carry out his decision, a son of Abu Al-Haqiq's came and addressed 'Umar, “O chief of the believers, will you exile us although Muhammad allowed us to stay at our places, and made a contract with us about our properties, and accepted the condition of our residence in our land?” 'Umar said, “Do you think that I have forgotten the statement of Allah's Apostle, i.e.: What will your condition be when you are expelled from Khaibar and your camel will be carrying you night after night?” The Jew replied, “That was joke from Abu-l-Qasim.” 'Umar said, “O the enemy of Allah! You are telling a lie.” 'Umar then drove them out and paid them the price of their properties in the form of fruits, money, camel saddles and ropes, etc."


## Hadith 3:891

_Narrated Al-Miswar bin Makhrama and Marwan:_

(whose narrations attest each other) Allah's Apostle set out at the time of Al-Hudaibiya (treaty), and when they proceeded for a distance, he said, “Khalid bin Al-Walid leading the cavalry of Quraish constituting the front of the army, is at a place called Al-Ghamim, so take the way on the right.” By Allah, Khalid did not perceive the arrival of the Muslims till the dust arising from the march of the Muslim army reached him, and then he turned back hurriedly to inform Quraish. The Prophet went on advancing till he reached the Thaniyya (i.e. a mountainous way) through which one would go to them (i.e. people of Quraish). The she-camel of the Prophet sat down. The people tried their best to cause the she-camel to get up but in vain, so they said, “Al-Qaswa' (i.e. the she-camel's name) has become stubborn! Al-Qaswa' has become stubborn!” The Prophet said, “Al-Qaswa' has not become stubborn, for stubbornness is not her habit, but she was stopped by Him Who stopped the elephant.” Then he said, “By the Name of Him in Whose Hands my soul is, if they (i.e. the Quraish infidels) ask me anything which will respect the ordinances of Allah, I will grant it to them.”

The Prophet then rebuked the she-camel and she got up. The Prophet changed his way till he dismounted at the farthest end of Al-Hudaibiya at a pit (i.e. well) containing a little water which the people used in small amounts, and in a short while the people used up all its water and complained to Allah's Apostle; of thirst. The Prophet took an arrow out of his arrow-case and ordered them to put the arrow in that pit. By Allah, the water started and continued sprouting out till all the people quenched their thirst and returned with satisfaction. While they were still in that state, Budail bin Warqa-al-Khuza'i came with some persons from his tribe Khuza'a and they were the advisers of Allah's Apostle who would keep no secret from him and were from the people of Tihama. Budail said, “I left Kab bin Luai and 'Amir bin Luai residing at the profuse water of Al-Hudaibiya and they had milch camels (or their women and children) with them, and will wage war against you, and will prevent you from visiting the Kaba.” Allah's Apostle said, “We have not come to fight anyone, but to perform the 'Umra. No doubt, the war has weakened Quraish and they have suffered great losses, so if they wish, I will conclude a truce with them, during which they should refrain from interfering between me and the people (i.e. the 'Arab infidels other than Quraish), and if I have victory over those infidels, Quraish will have the option to embrace Islam as the other people do, if they wish; they will at least get strong enough to fight. But if they do not accept the truce, by Allah in Whose Hands my life is, I will fight with them defending my Cause till I get killed, but (I am sure) Allah will definitely make His Cause victorious.” Budail said, “I will inform them of what you have said.” So, he set off till he reached Quraish and said, “We have come from that man (i.e. Muhammad) whom we heard saying something which we will disclose to you if you should like.” Some of the fools among Quraish shouted that they were not in need of this information, but the wiser among them said, “Relate what you heard him saying.” Budail said, “I heard him saying so-and-so,” relating what the Prophet had told him.

Urwa bin Mas'ud got up and said, “O people! Aren't you the sons? They said, ”Yes.“ He added, ”Am I not the father?“ They said, ”Yes.“ He said, ”Do you mistrust me?“ They said, ”No.“ He said, ”Don't you know that I invited the people of 'Ukaz for your help, and when they refused I brought my relatives and children and those who obeyed me (to help you)?“ They said, ”Yes.“ He said, ”Well, this man (i.e. the Prophet) has offered you a reasonable proposal, you'd better accept it and allow me to meet him.“ They said, ”You may meet him.“ So, he went to the Prophet and started talking to him. The Prophet told him almost the same as he had told Budail. Then Urwa said, ”O Muhammad! Won't you feel any scruple in extirpating your relations? Have you ever heard of anyone amongst the Arabs extirpating his relatives before you? On the other hand, if the reverse should happen, (nobody will aid you, for) by Allah, I do not see (with you) dignified people, but people from various tribes who would run away leaving you alone.“ Hearing that, Abu Bakr abused him and said, ”Do you say we would run and leave the Prophet alone?“ Urwa said, ”Who is that man?“ They said, ”He is Abu Bakr.“ Urwa said to Abu Bakr, ”By Him in Whose Hands my life is, were it not for the favor which you did to me and which I did not compensate, I would retort on you.“ Urwa kept on talking to the Prophet and seizing the Prophet's beard as he was talking while Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba was standing near the head of the Prophet, holding a sword and wearing a helmet. Whenever Urwa stretched his hand towards the beard of the Prophet, Al-Mughira would hit his hand with the handle of the sword and say (to Urwa), ”Remove your hand from the beard of Allah's Apostle.“ Urwa raised his head and asked, ”Who is that?“ The people said, ”He is Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba.“ Urwa said, ”O treacherous! Am I not doing my best to prevent evil consequences of your treachery?"

Before embracing Islam Al-Mughira was in the company of some people. He killed them and took their property and came (to Medina) to embrace Islam. The Prophet said (to him, “As regards your Islam, I accept it, but as for the property I do not take anything of it. (As it was taken through treason). Urwa then started looking at the Companions of the Prophet. By Allah, whenever Allah's Apostle spat, the spittle would fall in the hand of one of them (i.e. the Prophet's companions) who would rub it on his face and skin; if he ordered them they would carry his orders immediately; if he performed ablution, they would struggle to take the remaining water; and when they spoke to him, they would lower their voices and would not look at his face constantly out of respect. Urwa returned to his people and said, ”O people! By Allah, I have been to the kings and to Caesar, Khosrau and An-Najashi, yet I have never seen any of them respected by his courtiers as much as Muhammad is respected by his companions. By Allah, if he spat, the spittle would fall in the hand of one of them (i.e. the Prophet's companions) who would rub it on his face and skin; if he ordered them, they would carry out his order immediately; if he performed ablution, they would struggle to take the remaining water; and when they spoke, they would lower their voices and would not look at his face constantly out of respect.“ Urwa added, ”No doubt, he has presented to you a good reasonable offer, so please accept it.“ A man from the tribe of Bani Kinana said, ”Allow me to go to him,“ and they allowed him, and when he approached the Prophet and his companions, Allah's Ap le I said, ”He is so-and-so who belongs to the tribe that respects the Budn (i.e. camels of the sacrifice). So, bring the Budn in front of him.“ So, the Budn were brought before him and the people received him while they were reciting Talbiya. When he saw that scene, he said, ”Glorified be Allah! It is not fair to prevent these people from visiting the Ka'ba.“ When he returned to his people, he said, 'I saw the Budn garlanded (with colored knotted ropes) and marked (with stabs on their backs). I do not think it is advisable to prevent them from visiting the Ka'ba.” Another person called Mikraz bin Hafs got up and sought their permission to go to Muhammad, and they allowed him, too. When he approached the Muslims, the Prophet said, “Here is Mikraz and he is a vicious man.” Mikraz started talking to the Prophet and as he was talking, Suhail bin Amr came.

When Suhail bin Amr came, the Prophet said, “Now the matter has become easy.” Suhail said to the Prophet “Please conclude a peace treaty with us.” So, the Prophet called the clerk and said to him, “Write: By the Name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.” Suhail said, “As for 'Beneficent,' by Allah, I do not know what it means. So write: By Your Name O Allah, as you used to write previously.” The Muslims said, “By Allah, we will not write except: By the Name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.” The Prophet said, “Write: By Your Name O Allah.” Then he dictated, “This is the peace treaty which Muhammad, Allah's Apostle has concluded.” Suhail said, “By Allah, if we knew that you are Allah's Apostle we would not prevent you from visiting the Kaba, and would not fight with you. So, write: ”Muhammad bin Abdullah.“ The Prophet said, ”By Allah! I am Apostle of Allah even if you people do not believe me. Write: Muhammad bin Abdullah.“ (Az-Zuhri said, ”The Prophet accepted all those things, as he had already said that he would accept everything they would demand if it respects the ordinance of Allah, (i.e. by letting him and his companions perform 'Umra.)“ The Prophet said to Suhail, ”On the condition that you allow us to visit the House (i.e. Ka'ba) so that we may perform Tawaf around it.“ Suhail said, ”By Allah, we will not (allow you this year) so as not to give chance to the 'Arabs to say that we have yielded to you, but we will allow you next year." So, the Prophet got that written.

Then Suhail said, “We also stipulate that you should return to us whoever comes to you from us, even if he embraced your religion.” The Muslims said, “Glorified be Allah! How will such a person be returned to the pagans after he has become a Muslim? While they were in this state Abu- Jandal bin Suhail bin 'Amr came from the valley of Mecca staggering with his fetters and fell down amongst the Muslims. Suhail said, ”O Muhammad! This is the very first term with which we make peace with you, i.e. you shall return Abu Jandal to me.“ The Prophet said, ”The peace treaty has not been written yet.“ Suhail said, ”I will never allow you to keep him.“ The Prophet said, ”Yes, do.“ He said, ”I won't do.: Mikraz said, “We allow you (to keep him).” Abu Jandal said, “O Muslims! Will I be returned to the pagans though I have come as a Muslim? Don't you see how much I have suffered?”

Abu Jandal had been tortured severely for the Cause of Allah. Umar bin Al-Khattab said, “I went to the Prophet and said, 'Aren't you truly the Apostle of Allah?' The Prophet said, 'Yes, indeed.' I said, 'Isn't our Cause just and the cause of the enemy unjust?' He said, 'Yes.' I said, 'Then why should we be humble in our religion?' He said, 'I am Allah's Apostle and I do not disobey Him, and He will make me victorious.' I said, 'Didn't you tell us that we would go to the Ka'ba and perform Tawaf around it?' He said, 'Yes, but did I tell you that we would visit the Ka'ba this year?' I said, 'No.' He said, 'So you will visit it and perform Tawaf around it?' ” Umar further said, “I went to Abu Bakr and said, 'O Abu Bakr! Isn't he truly Allah's Prophet?' He replied, 'Yes.' I said, 'Then why should we be humble in our religion?' He said, 'Indeed, he is Allah's Apostle and he does not disobey his Lord, and He will make him victorious. Adhere to him as, by Allah, he is on the right.' I said, 'Was he not telling us that we would go to the Kaba and perform Tawaf around it?' He said, 'Yes, but did he tell you that you would go to the Ka'ba this year?' I said, 'No.' He said, ”You will go to Ka'ba and perform Tawaf around it.“ (Az-Zuhri said, ” 'Umar said, 'I performed many good deeds as expiation for the improper questions I asked them.' ")

When the writing of the peace treaty was concluded, Allah's Apostle said to his companions, “Get up and' slaughter your sacrifices and get your head shaved.” By Allah none of them got up, and the Prophet repeated his order thrice. When none of them got up, he left them and went to Um Salama and told her of the people's attitudes towards him. Um Salama said, “O the Prophet of Allah! Do you want your order to be carried out? Go out and don't say a word to anybody till you have slaughtered your sacrifice and call your barber to shave your head.” So, the Prophet went out and did not talk to anyone of them till he did that, i.e. slaughtered the sacrifice and called his barber who shaved his head. Seeing that, the companions of the Prophet got up, slaughtered their sacrifices, and started shaving the heads of one another, and there was so much rush that there was a danger of killing each other. Then some believing women came (to the Prophet ); and Allah revealed the following Divine Verses:—

“O you who believe, when the believing women come to you as emigrants examine them . . .” (60.10)

Umar then divorced two wives of his who were infidels. Later on Muawiya bin Abu Sufyan married one of them, and Safwan bin Umaya married the other. When the Prophet returned to Medina, Abu Basir, a new Muslim convert from Quraish came to him. The Infidels sent in his pursuit two men who said (to the Prophet ), “Abide by the promise you gave us.” So, the Prophet handed him over to them. They took him out (of the City) till they reached Dhul-Hulaifa where they dismounted to eat some dates they had with them. Abu Basir said to one of them, “By Allah, O so-and-so, I see you have a fine sword.” The other drew it out (of the scabbard) and said, “By Allah, it is very fine and I have tried it many times.” Abu Bair said, “Let me have a look at it.”

When the other gave it to him, he hit him with it till he died, and his companion ran away till he came to Medina and entered the Mosque running. When Allah's Apostle saw him he said, “This man appears to have been frightened.” When he reached the Prophet he said, “My companion has been murdered and I would have been murdered too.” Abu Basir came and said, “O Allah's Apostle, by Allah, Allah has made you fulfill your obligations by your returning me to them (i.e. the Infidels), but Allah has saved me from them.” The Prophet said, “Woe to his mother! what excellent war kindler he would be, should he only have supporters.” When Abu Basir heard that he understood that the Prophet would return him to them again, so he set off till he reached the seashore. Abu Jandal bin Suhail got himself released from them (i.e. infidels) and joined Abu Basir. So, whenever a man from Quraish embraced Islam he would follow Abu Basir till they formed a strong group. By Allah, whenever they heard about a caravan of Quraish heading towards Sham, they stopped it and attacked and killed them (i.e. infidels) and took their properties. The people of Quraish sent a message to the Prophet requesting him for the Sake of Allah and Kith and kin to send for (i.e. Abu Basir and his companions) promising that whoever (amongst them) came to the Prophet would be secure. So the Prophet sent for them (i.e. Abu Basir's companions) and Allah I revealed the following Divine Verses:

“And it is He Who Has withheld their hands from you and your hands From them in the midst of Mecca, After He made you the victorious over them. . . . the unbelievers had pride and haughtiness, in their hearts . . . the pride and haughtiness of the time of ignorance.” (48.24-26) And their pride and haughtiness was that they did not confess (write in the treaty) that he (i.e. Muhammad) was the Prophet of Allah and refused to write: “In the Name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the Most Merciful,” and prevented the Mushriks from visiting the Ka'ba.

to examine the women emigrants. We have been told also that when Allah revealed the order that the Muslims should return to the pagans what they had spent on their wives who emigrated (after embracing Islam) and that the Mushriks should not. keep unbelieving women as their wives, 'Umar divorced two of his wives, Qariba, the daughter of Abu Urhaiya and the daughter of Jarwal Al-Khuza'i. Later on Mu'awlya married Qariba and Abu Jahm married the other."

When the pagans refused to pay what the Muslims had spent on their wives, Allah revealed: “And if any of your wives have gone from you to the unbelievers and you have an accession (By the coming over of a woman from the other side) (Then pay to those whose wives have gone) The equivalent of what they had spent (On their Mahr).” (60.11)

So, Allah ordered that the Muslim whose wife, has gone, should be given, as a compensation of the Mahr he had given to his wife, from the Mahr of the wives of the pagans who had emigrated deserting their husbands.

We do not know any of the women emigrants who deserted Islam after embracing it. We have also been told that Abu Basir bin Asid Ath-Thaqafi came to the Prophet as a Muslim emigrant during the truce. Al-Akhnas bin Shariq wrote to the Prophet requesting him to return Abu Basir.


## Hadith 3:892

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle mentioned a person who asked an Israeli man to lend him one-thousand Dinars, and the Israeli lent him the sum for a certain fixed period.


## Hadith 3:893

_Narrated Amra:_

Aisha said that Buraira came to seek her help in the writing of her emancipation. 'Aisha said to her, “If you wish, I will pay your masters (your price) and the wala' will be for me.” When Allah's Apostle came, she told him about it. The Prophet said to her, “Buy her (i.e. Buraira) and manumit her, for the Wala is for the one who manumits.” Then Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit and said, “What about those people who stipulate conditions which are not in Allah's Laws? Whoever stipulates such conditions as are not in Allah's Laws, then those conditions are invalid even if he stipulated a hundred such conditions.”


## Hadith 3:894

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Allah has ninety-nine names, i.e. one-hundred minus one, and whoever knows them will go to Paradise.” (Please see Hadith No. 419 Vol. 8)


## Hadith 3:895

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Umar bin Khattab got some land in Khaibar and he went to the Prophet to consult him about it saying, “O Allah' Apostle got some land in Khaibar better than which I have never had, what do you suggest that I do with it?” The Prophet said, “If you like you can give the land as endowment and give its fruits in charity.” So Umar gave it in charity as an endowment on the condition that would not be sold nor given to anybody as a present and not to be inherited, but its yield would be given in charity to the poor people, to the Kith and kin, for freeing slaves, for Allah's Cause, to the travelers and guests; and that there would be no harm if the guardian of the endowment ate from it according to his need with good intention, and fed others without storing it for the future."

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_800">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:701 to 3:800</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_100">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:1 to 4:100</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
