---
title: "Hadith 4:1 to 4:100"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_895">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:801 to 3:895</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_200">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:101 to 4:200</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 4:1

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: Allah's Apostle said, "It is not_

permissible for any Muslim who has something to will to stay for two nights without having his last will and testament written and kept ready with him."


## Hadith 4:2

_Narrated Amr bin Al-Harith:_

(The brother of the wife of Allah's Apostle. Juwaira bint Al-Harith) When Allah's Apostle died, he did not leave any Dirham or Dinar (i.e. money), a slave or a slave woman or anything else except his white mule, his arms and a piece of land which he had given in charity .


## Hadith 4:3

_Narrated Talha bin Musarrif:_

I asked 'Abdullah bin Abu Aufa “Did the Prophet make a will?” He replied, “No,” I asked him, “How is it then that the making of a will has been enjoined on people, (or that they are ordered to make a will)?” He replied, “The Prophet bequeathed Allah's Book (i.e. Quran).”


## Hadith 4:4

_Narrated Al-Aswad:_

In the presence of 'Aisha some people mentioned that the Prophet had appointed 'Ali by will as his successor. 'Aisha said, “When did he appoint him by will? Verily when he died he was resting against my chest (or said: in my lap) and he asked for a wash-basin and then collapsed while in that state, and I could not even perceive that he had died, so when did he appoint him by will?”


## Hadith 4:5

_Narrated Sad bin Abu Waqqas:_

The Prophet came visiting me while I was (sick) in Mecca, ('Amir the sub-narrator said, and he disliked to die in the land, whence he had already migrated). He (i.e. the Prophet) said, “May Allah bestow His Mercy on Ibn Afra (Sad bin Khaula).” I said, “O Allah's Apostle! May I will all my property (in charity)?” He said, “No.” I said, “Then may I will half of it?” He said, “No”. I said, “One third?” He said: “Yes, one third, yet even one third is too much. It is better for you to leave your inheritors wealthy than to leave them poor begging others, and whatever you spend for Allah's sake will be considered as a charitable deed even the handful of food you put in your wife's mouth. Allah may lengthen your age so that some people may benefit by you, and some others be harmed by you.” At that time Sad had only one daughter.


## Hadith 4:6

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

I recommend that people reduce the proportion of what they bequeath by will to the fourth (of the whole legacy), for Allah's Apostle said, “One-third, yet even one third is too much.”


## Hadith 4:7

_Narrated Sad:_

I fell sick and the Prophet paid me a visit. I said to him, “O Allah's Apostle! I invoke Allah that He may not let me expire in the land whence I migrated (i.e. Mecca).” He said, “May Allah give you health and let the people benefit by you.” I said, “I want to will my property, and I have only one daughter and I want to will half of my property (to be given in charity).” He said,“ Half is too much.” I said, “Then I will one third.” He said, “One-third, yet even one-third is too much.” (The narrator added, “So the people started to will one third of their property and that was Permitted for them.”)


## Hadith 4:8

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Utba bin Abi Waqqas entrusted (his son) to his brother Sad bin Abi Waqqas saying, “The son of the slave-girl of Zam'a is my (illegal) son, take him into your custody.” So during the year of the Conquest (of Mecca) Sad took the boy and said, “This is my brother's son whom my brother entrusted to me.” 'Abu bin Zam's got up and said, “He is my brother and the son of the slave girl of my father and was born on my father's bed.” Then both of them came to Allah's Apostle and Sad said, “O Allah's Apostle! This is my brother's son whom my brother entrusted to me.”

Then 'Abu bin Zam'a got up and said, “This is my brother and the son of the slave-girl of my father.” Allah's Apostle said, “O Abu bin Zam'a! This boy is for you as the boy belongs to the bed (where he was born), and for the adulterer is the stone (i.e. deprivation).” Then the Prophet said to his wife Sauda bint Zam'a, “Screen yourself from this boy,” when he saw the boy's resemblance to 'Utba. Since then the boy did not see Sauda till he died.


## Hadith 4:9

_Narrated Anas:_

A Jew crushed the head of a girl between two stones. She was asked, “Who has done so to you, so-and-so? So-and-so?” Till the name of the Jew was mentioned, whereupon she nodded (in agreement). So the Jew was brought and was questioned till he confessed. The Prophet then ordered that his head be crushed with stones.


## Hadith 4:10

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The custom (in old days) was that the property of the deceased would be inherited by his offspring; as for the parents (of the deceased), they would inherit by the will of the deceased. Then Allah cancelled from that custom whatever He wished and fixed for the male double the amount inherited by the female, and for each parent a sixth (of the whole legacy) and for the wife an eighth or a fourth and for the husband a half or a fourth.


## Hadith 4:11

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A man asked the Prophet, “O Allah's Apostle! What kind of charity is the best?” He replied. “To give in charity when you are healthy and greedy hoping to be wealthy and afraid of becoming poor. Don't delay giving in charity till the time when you are on the death bed when you say, 'Give so much to so-and-so and so much to so-and so,' and at that time the property is not yours but it belongs to so-and-so (i.e. your inheritors).”


## Hadith 4:12

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The signs of a hypocrite are three: Whenever he speaks he tells a lie; whenever he is entrusted he proves dishonest; whenever he promises he breaks his promise.”


## Hadith 4:13

_Narrated 'Urwa bin Az-Zubair: Hakim bin Hizam said, "I asked Allah's_

Apostle for something, and he gave me, and I asked him again and he gave me and said, 'O Hakim! This wealth is green and sweet (i.e. as tempting as fruits), and whoever takes it with

The upper (i.e. giving) hand is better than the lower (i.e. taking) hand.“ Hakim added, ”I said, O Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with the Truth I will never demand anything from anybody after you till I die.“ Afterwards Abu Bakr used to call Hakim to give him something but he refused to accept anything from him. Then 'Umar called him to give him (something) but he refused. Then 'Umar said, ”O Muslims! I offered to him (i.e. Hakim) his share which Allah has ordained for him from this booty and he refuses to take it." Thus Hakim did not ask anybody for anything after the Prophet, till he died—may Allah bestow His mercy upon him.


## Hadith 4:14

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “All of you are guardians and responsible for your charges: the Ruler (i.e. Imam) is a guardian and responsible for his subjects; and a man is a guardian of his family and is responsible for his charges; and a lady is a guardian in the house of her husband and is responsible for her charge; and a servant is a guardian of the property of his master and is responsible for his charge.” I think he also said, “And a man is a guardian of the property of his father.”


## Hadith 4:15

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said to Abu Talha, “I recommend that you divide (this garden) amongst your relatives.” Abu Talha said, “O Allah's Apostle! I will do the same.” So Abu Talha divided it among his relatives and cousins.

Ibn 'Abbes said, "When the Qur'anic Verse:

“Warn your nearest kinsmen.” (26.214)

Was revealed, the Prophet started calling the various big families of Quraish, “O Bani Fihr! O Bani Adi!”.

Abu Huraira said, “When the Verse: ”Warn your nearest kinsmen“ was revealed, the Prophet said (in a loud voice), ”O people of Quraish!"


## Hadith 4:16

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

When Allah revealed the Verse: “Warn your nearest kinsmen,” Allah's Apostle got up and said, “O people of Quraish (or said similar words)! Buy (i.e. save) yourselves (from the Hellfire) as I cannot save you from Allah's Punishment; O Bani Abd Manaf! I cannot save you from Allah's Punishment, O Safiya, the Aunt of Allah's Apostle! I cannot save you from Allah's Punishment; O Fatima bint Muhammad! Ask me anything from my wealth, but I cannot save you from Allah's Punishment.”


## Hadith 4:17

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet saw a man driving a Badana (i.e. camel for sacrifice) and said to him, “Ride on it.” The man said, “O Allah's Apostle! It is a Bandana.” (The Prophet repeated his order) and on the third or fourth time he said, “Ride it, (woe to you” or said: “May Allah be merciful to you).”


## Hadith 4:18

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle saw a man driving a Badana and said to him, “Ride on it,” and on the second or the third time he added, “Woe to you.”


## Hadith 4:19

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The mother of Sad bin 'Ubada died in his absence. He said, “O Allah's Apostle! My mother died in my absence; will it be of any benefit for her if I give Sadaqa on her behalf?” The Prophet said, “Yes,” Sad said, “I make you a witness that I gave my garden called Al Makhraf in charity on her behalf.”


## Hadith 4:20

_Narrated Kab bin Malik:_

I said, “O Allah's Apostle! For the acceptance of my repentance I wish to give all my property in charity for Allah's sake through His Apostle .” He said, “It is better for you to keep some of the property for yourself.” I said, “Then I will keep my share in Khaibar.”


## Hadith 4:21

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Some people claim that the order in the above Verse is cancelled, by Allah, it is not cancelled, but the people have stopped acting on it. There are two kinds of guardians (who are in charge of the inheritance): One is that who inherits; such a person should give (of what he inherits to the relatives, the orphans and the needy, etc.), the other is that who does not inherit (e.g. the guardian of the orphans): such a person should speak kindly and say (to those who are present at the time of distribution), “I can not give it to you (as the wealth belongs to the orphans).”


## Hadith 4:22

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

A man said to the Prophet, “My mother died suddenly, and I think that if she could speak, she would have given in charity. May I give in charity on her behalf?” He said, “Yes! Give in charity on her behalf.”


## Hadith 4:23

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Sad bin Ubada consulted Allah's Apostle saying, “My mother died and she had an unfulfilled vow.” The Prophet said, “Fulfill it on her behalf.”


## Hadith 4:24

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

That the mother of Sad bin Ubada the brother of Bani Saida died in Sad's absence, so he came to the Prophet saying, “O Allah's Apostle! My mother died in my absence, will it benefit her if I give in charity on her behalf?” The Prophet said, “Yes.” Sad said, “I take you as my witness that I give my garden Al-Makhraf in charity on her behalf.”


## Hadith 4:25

_Narrated Az-Zuhri:_

Urwa bin Az-Zubair said that he asked 'Aisha about the meaning of the Quranic Verse:—

“And if you fear that you will not deal fairly with the orphan girls then marry (other) women of your choice.” (4.2-3)

Aisha said, "It is about a female orphan under the guardianship of her guardian who is inclined towards her because of her beauty and wealth, and likes to marry her with a Mahr less than what is given to women of her standard. So they (i.e. guardians) were forbidden to marry the orphans unless they paid them a full appropriate Mahr (otherwise) they were ordered to marry other women instead of them. Later on the people asked Allah's Apostle about it. So Allah revealed the following Verse:—

“They ask your instruction (O Muhammad!) regarding women. Say: Allah instructs you regarding them...” (4.127)

and in this Verse Allah indicated that if the orphan girl was beautiful and wealthy, her guardian would have the desire to marry her without giving her an appropriate Mahr equal to what her peers could get, but if she was undesirable for lack of beauty or wealth, then he would not marry her, but seek to marry some other woman instead of her. So, since he did not marry her when he had no inclination towards her, he had not the right to marry her when he had an interest in her, unless he treated her justly by giving her a full Mahr and securing all her rights.


## Hadith 4:26

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

In the lifetime of Allah's Apostle , Umar gave in charity some of his property, a garden of date-palms called Thamgh. 'Umar said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have some property which I prize highly and I want to give it in charity.” The Prophet; said, “Give it in charity (i.e. as an endowment) with its land and trees on the condition that the land and trees will neither be sold nor given as a present, nor bequeathed, but the fruits are to be spent in charity.” So 'Umar gave it in charity, and it was for Allah's Cause, the emancipation of slaves, for the poor, for guests, for travelers, and for kinsmen. The person acting as its administrator could eat from it reasonably and fairly, and could let a friend of his eat from it provided he had no intention of becoming wealthy by its means.


## Hadith 4:27

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The following Verse:—

“If a guardian is well-off, let him claim no remuneration (i.e. wages), but if he is poor, let him have for himself what is just and reasonable.” (4.6)

was revealed in connection with the guardian of an orphan, and it means that if he is poor he can have for himself (from the orphan's wealth) what is just and reasonable according to the orphan's share of the inheritance.


## Hadith 4:28

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Avoid the seven great destructive sins.” The people enquire, “O Allah's Apostle! What are they? ”He said, "To join others in worship along with Allah, to practice sorcery, to kill the life which Allah has forbidden except for a just cause, (according to Islamic law), to eat up Riba (usury), to eat up an orphan's wealth, to give back to the enemy and fleeing from the battlefield at the time of fighting, and to accuse, chaste women, who never even think of anything touching chastity and are good believers.


## Hadith 4:29

_Narrated Anas:_

When Allah's Apostle came to Medina; he did not have any servant. Abu Talha (Anas' step-father) took me to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Anas is a wise boy, so let him serve you.” So, I served him at home and on journeys. If I did anything, he never asked me why I did it, and if I refrained from doing anything, he never asked me why I refrained from doing it.


## Hadith 4:30

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Abu Talha had the greatest wealth of date-palms amongst the Ansar in Medina, and he prized above all his wealth (his garden) Bairuha', which was situated opposite the Mosque (of the Prophet ). The Prophet used to enter It and drink from its fresh water. When the following Divine Verse came:—

“By no means shall you attain piety until you spend of what you love,” (3.92)

Abu Talha got up saying. “O Allah's Apostle! Allah says, 'You will not attain piety until you spend of what you love,' and I prize above al I my wealth, Bairuha' which I want to give in charity for Allah's Sake, hoping for its reward from Allah. So you can use it as Allah directs you.” On that the Prophet said, “Bravo! It is a profitable (or perishable) property. (Ibn Maslama is not sure as to which word is right, i.e. profitable or perishable.) I have heard what you have said, and I recommend that you distribute this amongst your relatives.” On that Abu Talha said, “O Allah's Apostle! I will do (as you have suggested).” So, Abu Talha distributed that garden amongst his relatives and cousins.


## Hadith 4:31

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

A man said to Allah's Apostle , “My mother died, will it benefit her if I give in charity on her behalf?” The Prophet replied in the affirmative. The man said, “I have a garden and I make you a witness that I give it in charity on her behalf.”


## Hadith 4:32

_Narrated Anas:_

When the Prophet ordered that the mosque be built, he said, “O Bani An-Najjar! Suggest to me a price for this garden of yours.” They replied, “By Allah! We will demand its price from none but Allah.”


## Hadith 4:33

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

When 'Umar got a piece of land in Khaibar, he came to the Prophet saying, “I have got a piece of land, better than which I have never got. So what do you advise me regarding it?” The Prophet said, “If you wish you can keep it as an endowment to be used for charitable purposes.” So, 'Umar gave the land in charity (i.e. as an endowments on the condition that the land would neither be sold nor given as a present, nor bequeathed, (and its yield) would be used for the poor, the kinsmen, the emancipation of slaves, Jihad, and for guests and travelers; and its administrator could eat in a reasonable just manner, and he also could feed his friends without intending to be wealthy by its means."


## Hadith 4:34

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Umar got some property in Khaibar and he came to the Prophet and informed him about it. The Prophet said to him, “If you wish you can give it in charity.” So 'Umar gave it in charity (i.e. as an endowment) the yield of which was to be used for the good of the poor, the needy, the kinsmen and the guests.


## Hadith 4:35

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

When Allah's Apostle came to Medina, he ordered that a mosque be built. He said, “O Bani An-Najjar! Suggest me a price for the garden of yours.” They replied, “By Allah, we will not ask its price except from Allah.”


## Hadith 4:36

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Once 'Umar gave a horse in charity to be used in holy fighting. It had been given to him by Allah's Apostle . 'Umar gave it to another man to ride. Then 'Umar was informed that the man put the horse for sale, so he asked Allah's Apostle whether he could buy it. Allah's Apostle replied, “You should not buy it, for you should not take back what you have given in charity.”


## Hadith 4:37

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “My heirs will not inherit a Dinar or a Dirham (i.e. money), for whatever I leave (excluding the adequate support of my wives and the wages of my employees) is given in charity.”


## Hadith 4:38

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

When 'Umar founded an endowment he stipulated that its administrator could eat from it and also feed his friend on the condition that he would not store anything for himself from it.


## Hadith 4:39

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said (at the time of building the Mosque), “O Ban, An-Najjar! Suggest to me a price for your garden.” They replied, “We do not ask its price except from Allah.”


## Hadith 4:40

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari:_

My father was martyred on the day (of the Ghazwa) of Uhud and left six daughters and some debts to be paid. When the time of plucking the date-fruits came, I went to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! you know that my father was martyred on Uhud's day and owed much debt, and I wish that the creditors would see you.” The Prophet said, “Go and collect the various kinds of dates and place them separately in heaps”' I did accordingly and called him. On seeing him, the creditors started claiming their rights pressingly at that time. When the Prophet saw how they behaved, he went round the biggest heap for three times and sat over it and said, “Call your companions (i.e. the creditors).” Then he kept on measuring and giving them, till Allah cleared all my father's debts. By Allah, it would have pleased me that Allah would clear the debts of my father even though I had not taken a single date to my sisters. But by Allah, all the heaps were complete, (as they were) and I looked at the heap where Allah's Apostle was sitting and noticed as if not a single date had been taken thereof.


## Hadith 4:41

_Narrated Abdullah bin Masud:_

I asked Allah's Apostle, “O Allah's Apostle! What is the best deed?” He replied, “To offer the prayers at their early stated fixed times.” I asked, “What is next in goodness?” He replied, “To be good and dutiful to your parents.” I further asked, what is next in goodness?“ He replied, ”To participate in Jihad in Allah's Cause." I did not ask Allah's Apostle anymore and if I had asked him more, he would have told me more.


## Hadith 4:42

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle said, "There is no Hijra (i.e. migration) (from Mecca to Medina) after the Conquest (of Mecca), but Jihad and good intention remain; and if you are called (by the Muslim ruler) for fighting, go forth immediately.


## Hadith 4:43

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(That she said), “O Allah's Apostle! We consider Jihad as the best deed. Should we not fight in Allah's Cause?” He said, “The best Jihad (for women) is Hajj-Mabrur (i.e. Hajj which is done according to the Prophet's tradition and is accepted by Allah).”


## Hadith 4:44

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A man came to Allah's Apostle and said, “Instruct me as to such a deed as equals Jihad (in reward).” He replied, “I do not find such a deed.” Then he added, “Can you, while the Muslim fighter is in the battle-field, enter your mosque to perform prayers without cease and fast and never break your fast?” The man said, “But who can do that?” Abu- Huraira added, “The Mujahid (i.e. Muslim fighter) is rewarded even for the footsteps of his horse while it wanders bout (for grazing) tied in a long rope.”


## Hadith 4:45

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Somebody asked, “O Allah's Apostle! Who is the best among the people?” Allah's Apostle replied “A believer who strives his utmost in Allah's Cause with his life and property.” They asked, “Who is next?” He replied, “A believer who stays in one of the mountain paths worshipping Allah and leaving the people secure from his mischief.”


## Hadith 4:46

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “The example of a Mujahid in Allah's Cause— and Allah knows better who really strives in His Cause——is like a person who fasts and prays continuously. Allah guarantees that He will admit the Mujahid in His Cause into Paradise if he is killed, otherwise He will return him to his home safely with rewards and war booty.”


## Hadith 4:47

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle used to visit Um Haran bint Milhan, who would offer him reals. Um-Haram was the wife of Ubada bin As-Samit. Allah's Apostle, once visited her and she provided him with food and started looking for lice in his head. Then Allah's Apostle slept, and afterwards woke up smiling. Um Haran asked, “What causes you to smile, O Allah's Apostle?” He said. “Some of my followers who (in a dream) were presented before me as fighters in Allah's Cause (on board a ship) amidst this sea cause me to smile; they were as kings on the thrones (or like kings on the thrones).” (Ishaq, a sub-narrator is not sure as to which expression the Prophet used.) Um-Haram said, “O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah that he makes me one of them. Allah's Apostle invoked Allah for her and slept again and woke up smiling. Once again Um Haram asked, ”What makes you smile, O Allah's Apostle?“ He replied, ”Some of my followers were presented to me as fighters in Allah's Cause,“ repeating the same dream. Um-Haram said, ”O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah that He makes me one of them.“ He said, ”You are amongst the first ones." It happened that she sailed on the sea during the Caliphate of Mu'awlya bin Abi Sufyan, and after she disembarked, she fell down from her riding animal and died.


## Hadith 4:48

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever believes in Allah and His Apostle, offer prayer perfectly and fasts the month of Ramadan, will rightfully be granted Paradise by Allah, no matter whether he fights in Allah's Cause or remains in the land where he is born.” The people said, “O Allah's Apostle ! Shall we acquaint the people with the is good news?” He said, “Paradise has one-hundred grades which Allah has reserved for the Mujahidin who fight in His Cause, and the distance between each of two grades is like the distance between the Heaven and the Earth. So, when you ask Allah (for something), ask for Al-firdaus which is the best and highest part of Paradise.” (i.e. The sub-narrator added, “I think the Prophet also said, 'Above it (i.e. Al-Firdaus) is the Throne of Beneficent (i.e. Allah), and from it originate the rivers of Paradise.”)


## Hadith 4:49

_Narrated Samura:_

The Prophet said, “Last night two men came to me (in a dream) and made me ascend a tree and then admitted me into a better and superior house, better of which I have never seen. One of them said, 'This house is the house of martyrs.”


## Hadith 4:50

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “A single endeavor (of fighting) in Allah's Cause in the forenoon or in the afternoon is better than the world and whatever is in it.”


## Hadith 4:51

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “A place in Paradise as small as a bow is better than all that on which the sun rises and sets (i.e. all the world).” He also said, “A single endeavor in Allah's Cause in the afternoon or in the forenoon is better than all that on which the sun rises and sets.”


## Hadith 4:52

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

The Prophet said, “A single endeavor in Allah's Cause in the afternoon and in the forenoon is better than the world and whatever is in it.”


## Hadith 4:53

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Nobody who dies and finds good from Allah (in the Hereafter) would wish to come back to this world even if he were given the whole world and whatever is in it, except the martyr who, on seeing the superiority of martyrdom, would like to come back to the world and get killed again (in Allah's Cause).”

Allah's Cause in the afternoon or in the forenoon is better than all the world and whatever is in it. A place in Paradise as small as the bow or lash of one of you is better than all the world and whatever is in it. And if a houri from Paradise appeared to the people of the earth, she would fill the space between Heaven and the Earth with light and pleasant scent and her head cover is better than the world and whatever is in it."


## Hadith 4:54

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, "By Him in Whose Hands my life is! Were it not for some men amongst the believers who dislike to be left behind me and whom I cannot provide with means of conveyance, I would certainly never remain behind any Sariya' (army-unit) setting out in Allah's Cause. By Him in Whose Hands my life is! I would love to be martyred in Al1ah's Cause and then get resurrected and then get martyred, and then get resurrected again and then get martyred and then get resurrected again and then get martyred.


## Hadith 4:55

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet delivered a sermon and said, “Zaid took the flag and was martyred, and then Ja'far took the flag and was martyred, and then 'Abdullah bin Rawaha took the flag and was martyred too, and then Khalid bin Al-Walid took the flag though he was not appointed as a commander and Allah made him victorious.” The Prophet further added, “It would not please us to have them with us.” Aiyub, a sub-narrator, added, “Or the Prophet, shedding tears, said, 'It would not p ease them to be with us.”


## Hadith 4:56

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Um Haram said, “Once the Prophet slept in my house near to me and got up smiling. I said, 'What makes you smile?' He replied, 'Some of my followers who (i.e. in a dream) were presented to me sailing on this green sea like kings on thrones.' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of them.” So the Prophet invoked Allah for her and went to sleep again. He did the same (i.e. got up and told his dream) and Um Haran repeated her question and he gave the same reply. She said, “Invoke Allah to make me one of them.” He said, “You are among the first batch.” Later on it happened that she went out in the company of her husband 'Ubada bin As-Samit who went for Jihad and it was the first time the Muslims undertook a naval expedition led by Mu awiya. When the expedition came to an end and they were returning to Sham, a riding animal was presented to her to ride, but the animal let her fall and thus she died.


## Hadith 4:57

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet sent seventy men from the tribe of Bani Salim to the tribe of Bani Amir. When they reached there, my maternal uncle said to them, “I will go ahead of you, and if they allow me to convey the message of Allah's Apostle (it will be all right); otherwise you will remain close to me.” So he went ahead of them and the pagans granted him security But while he was reporting the message of the Prophet , they beckoned to one of their men who stabbed him to death. My maternal uncle said, “Allah is Greater! By the Lord of the Kaba, I am successful.” After that they attached the rest of the party and killed them all except a lame man who went up to the top of the mountain. (Hammam, a sub-narrator said, “I think another man was saved along with him).” Gabriel informed the Prophet that they (i.e the martyrs) met their Lord, and He was pleased with them and made them pleased. We used to recite, “Inform our people that we have met our Lord, He is pleased with us and He has made us pleased ” Later on this Quranic Verse was cancelled. The Prophet invoked Allah for forty days to curse the murderers from the tribe of Ral, Dhakwan, Bani Lihyan and Bam Usaiya who disobeyed Allah and his Apostle


## Hadith 4:58

_Narrated Jundab bin Sufyan:_

In one of the holy Battles a finger of Allah's Apostle (got wounded and) bled. He said, “You are just a finger that bled, and what you got is in Allah's Cause.”


## Hadith 4:59

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “By Him in Whose Hands my soul is! Whoever is wounded in Allah's Cause....and Allah knows well who gets wounded in His Cause....will come on the Day of Resurrection with his wound having the color of blood but the scent of musk.”


## Hadith 4:60

_Narrated Abdullah bin Abbas:_

That Abu Sufyan told him that Heraclius said to him, "I asked you about the outcome of your battles with him (i.e. the Prophet ) and you told me that you fought each other with alternate success. So the Apostles are tested in this way but the ultimate victory is always theirs.


## Hadith 4:61

_Narrated Anas:_

My uncle Anas bin An-Nadr was absent from the Battle of Badr. He said, “O Allah's Apostle! I was absent from the first battle you fought against the pagans. (By Allah) if Allah gives me a chance to fight the pagans, no doubt. Allah will see how (bravely) I will fight.” On the day of Uhud when the Muslims turned their backs and fled, he said, “O Allah! I apologize to You for what these (i.e. his companions) have done, and I denounce what these (i.e. the pagans) have done.” Then he advanced and Sad bin Muadh met him. He said “O Sad bin Muadh ! By the Lord of An-Nadr, Paradise! I am smelling its aroma coming from before (the mountain of) Uhud,” Later on Sad said, “O Allah's Apostle! I cannot achieve or do what he (i.e. Anas bin An-Nadr) did. We found more than eighty wounds by swords and arrows on his body. We found him dead and his body was mutilated so badly that none except his sister could recognize him by his fingers.” We used to think that the following Verse was revealed concerning him and other men of his sort: “Among the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with Allah..........” (33.23)

His sister Ar-Rubbaya' broke a front tooth of a woman and Allah's Apostle ordered for retaliation. On that Anas (bin An-Nadr) said, “O Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with the Truth, my sister's tooth shall not be broken.” Then the opponents of Anas's sister accepted the compensation and gave up the claim of retaliation. So Allah's Apostle said, “There are some people amongst Allah's slaves whose oaths are fulfilled by Allah when they take them.”


## Hadith 4:62

_Narrated Kharija bin Zaid:_

Zaid bin Thabit said, “When the Quran was compiled from various written manuscripts, one of the Verses of Surat Al-Ahzab was missing which I used to hear Allah's Apostle reciting. I could not find it except with Khuzaima bin Thabjt Al-Ansari, whose witness Allah's Apostle regarded as equal to the witness of two men. And the Verse was:— ”Among the believers are men who have been true to what they covenanted with Allah." (33.23)


## Hadith 4:63

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

A man whose face was covered with an iron mask (i.e. clad in armor) came to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Shall I fight or embrace Islam first? ”The Prophet said, “Embrace Islam first and then fight.” So he embraced Islam, and was martyred. Allah's Apostle said, A Little work, but a great reward. “(He did very little (after embracing Islam), but he will be rewarded in abundance).”


## Hadith 4:64

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Um Ar-Rubai'bint Al-Bara', the mother of Hartha bin Suraqa came to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Prophet! Will you tell me about Hartha?” Hartha has been killed (i.e. martyred) on the day of Badr with an arrow thrown by an unidentified person. She added, “If he is in Paradise, I will be patient; otherwise, I will weep bitterly for him.” He said, “O mother of Hartha! There are Gardens in Paradise and your son got the Firdausal-ala (i.e. the best place in Paradise).”


## Hadith 4:65

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

A man came to the Prophet and asked, “A man fights for war booty; another fights for fame and a third fights for showing off; which of them fights in Allah's Cause?” The Prophet said, “He who fights that Allah's Word (i.e. Islam) should be superior, fights in Allah's Cause.”


## Hadith 4:66

_Narrated Abu Abs:_

(who is 'Abdur-Rahman bin Jabir) Allah's Apostle said,“ Anyone whose both feet get covered with dust in Allah's Cause will not be touched by the (Hell) fire.”


## Hadith 4:67

_Narrated 'Ikrima:_

that Ibn 'Abbas told him and 'Ali bin 'Abdullah to go to Abu Said and listen to some of his narrations; So they both went (and saw) Abu Said and his brother irrigating a garden belonging to them. When he saw them, he came up to them and sat down with his legs drawn up and wrapped in his garment and said, “(During the construction of the mosque of the Prophet) we carried the adobe of the mosque, one brick at a time while 'Ammar used to carry two at a time. The Prophet passed by 'Ammar and removed the dust off his head and said, ”May Allah be merciful to 'Ammar. He will be killed by a rebellious aggressive group. 'Ammar will invite them to (obey) Allah and they will invite him to the (Hell) fire."


## Hadith 4:68

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

When Allah's Apostle returned on the day (of the battle) of Al-Khandaq (i.e. Trench), he put down his arms and took a bath. Then Gabriel whose head was covered with dust, came to him saying, “You have put down your arms! By Allah, I have not put down my arms yet.” Allah's Apostle said, “Where (to go now)?” Gabriel said, “This way,” pointing towards the tribe of Bani Quraiza. So Allah's Apostle went out towards them .


## Hadith 4:69

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

For thirty days Allah's Apostle invoked Allah to curse those who had killed the companions of Bir-Mauna; he invoked evil upon the tribes of Ral, Dhakwan, and Usaiya who disobeyed Allah and His Apostle. There was reveled about those who were killed at Bir-Mauna a Quranic Verse we used to recite, but it was cancelled later on. The Verse was:

“Inform our people that we have met our Lord. He is pleased with us and He has made us pleased”


## Hadith 4:70

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:_

“Some people drank alcohol in the morning of the day (of the battle) of Uhud and were martyred (on the same day).” Sufyan was asked, “(Were they martyred) in the last part of the day?)” He replied, “Such information does not occur in the narration.”


## Hadith 4:71

_Narrated Jabir:_

My father's mutilated body was brought to the Prophet and was placed in front of him. I went to uncover his face but my companions forbade me. Then mourning cries of a lady were heard, and it was said that she was either the daughter or the sister of Amr. The Prophet said, “Why is she crying?” Or said, “Do not cry, for the angels are still shading him with their wings.” (Al-Bukhari asked Sadqa, a sub-narrator, “Does the narration include the expression: 'Till he was lifted?' ” The latter replied, “Jabir may have said it.”)


## Hadith 4:72

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Nobody who enters Paradise likes to go back to the world even if he got everything on the earth, except a Mujahid who wishes to return to the world so that he may be martyred ten times because of the dignity he receives (from Allah).”

of our Lord that “Whoever amongst us is killed will go to Paradise.” Umar asked the Prophet, “Is it not true that our men who are killed will go to Paradise and their's (i.e. those of the Pagan's) will go to the (Hell) fire?” The Prophet said, “Yes.”


## Hadith 4:73

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Know that Paradise is under the shades of swords.”


## Hadith 4:74

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Once Solomon, son of David said, '(By Allah) Tonight I will have sexual intercourse with one hundred (or ninety-nine) women each of whom will give birth to a knight who will fight in Allah's Cause.' On that a (i.e. if Allah wills) but he did not say, ‘Allah willing.’ Therefore only one of those women conceived and gave birth to a half-man. By Him in Whose Hands Muhammad's life is, if he had said, ”Allah willing', (he would have begotten sons) all of whom would have been knights striving in Allah's Cause."


## Hadith 4:74

_Narrated Anas: The Prophet was the best, the bravest and the most_

generous of all the people. Once when the people of Medina got frightened, the Prophet rode a horse and went ahead of them and said, “We found this horse very fast.”


## Hadith 4:75

_Narrated Muhammad bin Jubair:_

Jubair bin Mut'im told me that while he was in the company of Allah's Apostle with the people returning from Hunain, some people (bedouins) caught hold of the Prophet and started begging of him so much so that he had to stand under a (kind of thorny tree (i.e. Samurah) and his cloak was snatched away. The Prophet stopped and said, “Give me my cloak. If I had as many camels as these thorny trees, I would have distributed them amongst you and you will not find me a miser or a liar or a coward.”


## Hadith 4:76

_Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun Al-Audi:_

Sad used to teach his sons the following words as a teacher teaches his students the skill of writing and used to say that Allah's Apostle used to seek Refuge with Allah from them (i.e. the evils) at the end of every prayer. The words are:

'O Allah! I seek refuge with You from cowardice, and seek refuge with You from being brought back to a bad stage of old life and seek refuge with You from the afflictions of the world, and seek refuge with You from the punishments in the grave.'


## Hadith 4:77

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet used to say, “O Allah! I seek refuge with You from helplessness, laziness, cowardice and feeble old age; I seek refuge with You from afflictions of life and death and seek refuge with You from the punishment in the grave.”


## Hadith 4:78

_Narrated As-Sa'-ib bin Yazid:_

I was in the company of Talha bin 'Ubaidullah, Sad, Al-Miqdad bin Al-Aswad and 'Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf and I heard none of them narrating anything from Allah's Apostle but Talha was talking about the day (of the battle) of Uhud.


## Hadith 4:79

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

On the day of the Conquest (of Mecca) the Prophet said, “There is no emigration after the Conquest but Jihad and intentions. When you are called (by the Muslim ruler) for fighting, go forth immediately.” (See Hadith No. 42)


## Hadith 4:80

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Allah welcomes two men with a smile; one of whom kills the other and both of them enter Paradise. One fights in Allah's Cause and gets killed. Later on Allah forgives the 'killer who also get martyred (In Allah's Cause).”


## Hadith 4:80

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I went to Allah's Apostle while he was at Khaibar after it had fallen in the Muslims' hands. I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Give me a share (from the land of Khaibar).”

One of the sons of Sa'id bin Al-'As said, “O Allah's Apostle! Do not give him a share.” I said, “This is the murderer of Ibn Qauqal.” The son of Said bin Al-As said, “Strange! A Wabr (i.e. guinea pig) who has come down to us from the mountain of Qaduim (i.e. grazing place of sheep) blames me for killing a Muslim who was given superiority by Allah because of me, and Allah did not disgrace me at his hands (i.e. was not killed as an infidel).” (The sub-narrator said “I do not know whether the Prophet gave him a share or not.”)


## Hadith 4:81

_Narrated Anas bin Malik_

In the life-time of the Prophet, Abu Talha did not fast because of the Jihad, but after the Prophet died I never saw him without fasting except on 'Id-ul-Fitr and 'Id-ul-Aclha.


## Hadith 4:82

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Five are regarded as martyrs: They are those who die because of plague, abdominal disease, drowning or a falling building etc., and the martyrs in Allah's Cause.”


## Hadith 4:83

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Plauge is the cause of martyrdom of every Muslim (who dies because of it).”


## Hadith 4:84

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

When the Divine Inspiration: “Those of the believers who sit (at home), was revealed the Prophet sent for Zaid (bin Thabit) who came with a shoulder-blade and wrote on it. Ibn Um-Maktum complained about his blindness and on that the following revelation came: ”Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) except those who are disabled (by injury, or are blind or lame etc.) and those who strive hard and fight in the Way of Allah with their wealth and lives)." (4.95)


## Hadith 4:85

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi:_

I saw Marwan bin Al-Hakam sitting in the Mosque. So I came forward and sat by his side. He told us that Zaid bin Thabit had told him that Allah's Apostle had dictated to him the Divine Verse:

"Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) and those who strive hard and fight in the Cause of Allah with their wealth and lives.' (4.95)

Zaid said, “Ibn-Maktum came to the Prophet while he was dictating to me that very Verse. On that Ibn Um Maktum said, ”O Allah's Apostle! If I had power, I would surely take part in Jihad.“ He was a blind man. So Allah sent down revelation to His Apostle while his thigh was on mine and it became so heavy for me that I feared that my thigh would be broken. Then that state of the Prophet was over after Allah revealed ”...except those who are disabled (by injury or are blind or lame etc.) (4.95)


## Hadith 4:86

_Narrated Salim Abu-An-Nadr:_

'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa wrote and I read what he wrote that Allah's Apostle said, “When you face them ( i.e. your enemy) then be patient.”


## Hadith 4:87

_Narrated Anas:_

Allah's Apostle went towards the Khandaq (i.e. Trench) and saw the Emigrants and the Ansar digging in a very cold morning as they did not have slaves to do that for them. When he noticed their fatigue and hunger he said, “O Allah! The real life is that of the Here-after, (so please) forgive the Ansar and the Emigrants.” In its reply the Emigrants and the Ansar said, “We are those who have given a pledge of allegiance to Muhammad that we will carry on Jihad as long as we live.”


## Hadith 4:88

_Narrated Anas:_

The Emigrants and the Ansar started digging the trench around Medina carrying the earth on their backs and saying, “We are those who have given a pledge of allegiance to Muhammad that we will I carry on Jihad as long as we live.” The Prophet kept on replying, “O Allah, there is no good except the good of the Hereafter; so confer Your Blessings on the Ansar and the Emigrants.”


## Hadith 4:89

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

The Prophet went on carrying (i.e. the earth) and saying, “Without You (O Allah!) we would have got no guidance.”


## Hadith 4:90

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

On the day (of the battle) of Al-Ahzab (i.e. clans) I saw the Prophet carrying earth, and the earth was covering the whiteness of his abdomen. And he was saying, "Without You (O Allah!) we would have got no guidance, nor given in charity, nor prayed. So please bless us with tranquility and make firm our feet when we meet our enemies.

Indeed (these) people have rebelled against (oppressed) us but never shall we yield if they try to bring affliction upon us."


## Hadith 4:91

_Narrated Anas:_

We returned from the Ghazwa of Tabuk along with the Prophet. (See Hadith No. 92 below) .


## Hadith 4:92

_Narrated Anas:_

While the Prophet was in a Ghazwa he said, “Some people have remained behind us in Medina and we never crossed a mountain path or a valley, but they were with us (i.e. sharing the reward with us), as they have been held back by a (legal) excuse. ”


## Hadith 4:93

_Narrated Abu Said:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “Indeed, anyone who fasts for one day for Allah's Pleasure, Allah will keep his face away from the (Hell) fire for (a distance covered by a journey of) seventy years.”


## Hadith 4:94

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever spends two things in Allah's Cause, will be called by all the gate-keepers of Paradise who will be saying, 'O so-and-so! Come here.' ” Abu Bakr said, “O Allah's Apostle! Such persons will never be destroyed.” The Prophet said, “I hope you will be one of them.”


## Hadith 4:95

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

Allah's Apostle ascended the pulpit and said, “Nothing worries me as to what will happen to you after me, except the temptation of worldly blessings which will be conferred on you.” Then he mentioned the worldly pleasures. He started with the one (i.e. the blessings) and took up the other (i.e. the pleasures). A man got up saying, “O Allah's Apostle! Can the good bring about evil?” The Prophet remained silent and we thought that he was being inspired divinely, so all the people kept silent with awe. Then the Prophet wiped the sweat off his face and asked, “Where is the present questioner?” “Do you think wealth is good?” he repeated thrice, adding, “No doubt, good produces nothing but good. Indeed it is like what grows on the banks of a stream which either kills or nearly kills the grazing animals because of gluttony except the vegetation-eating animal which eats till both its flanks are full (i.e. till it gets satisfied) and then stands in the sun and defecates and urinates and again starts grazing. This worldly property is sweet vegetation. How excellent the wealth of the Muslim is, if it is collected through legal means and is spent in Allah's Cause and on orphans, poor people and travelers. But he who does not take it legally is like an eater who is never satisfied and his wealth will be a witness against him on the Day of Resurrection.”


## Hadith 4:96

_Narrated Zaid bin Khalid:_

Allah's Apostle said, “ He who pre pares a Ghazi going in Allah's Cause is given a reward equal to that of) a Ghazi; and he who looks after properly the dependents of a Ghazi going in Allah's Cause is (given a reward equal to that of) Ghazi.”


## Hadith 4:97

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet used not to enter any house in Medina except the house of Um Sulaim besides those of his wives when he was asked why, he said, “I take pity on her as her brother was killed in my company. ”


## Hadith 4:98

_Narrated Ibn Aun:_

Once Musa bin Anas while describing the battle of Yamama, said, “Anas bin Malik went to Thabit bin Qais, who had lifted his clothes from his thighs and was applying Hunut to his body. Anas asked, 'O Uncle! What is holding you back (from the battle)?' He replied, 'O my nephew! I am coming just now,' and went on perfuming himself with Hunut, then he came and sat (in the row). Anas then mentioned that the people fled from the battle-field. On that Thabit said, 'Clear the way for me to fight the enemy. We would never do so (i.e. flee) in the company of Allah's Apostle. How bad the habits you have acquired from your enemies!”


## Hadith 4:99

_Narrated Jabir:_

The Prophet said, “Who will bring me the information about the enemy on the day (of the battle) of Al-Ahzab (i.e. Clans)?” Az-Zubair said, “I will.” The Prophet said again, “Who will bring me the information about the enemy?” Az-Zubair said again, “I will.” The Prophet said, “Every prophet had a disciple and my disciple is Az-Zubair. ”


## Hadith 4:100

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

When the Prophet called the people (Sadqa, a sub-narrator, said, 'Most probably that happened on the day of Al-Khandaq) Az-Zubair responded to the call (i.e. to act as a reconnoiter). The Prophet) called the people again and Az-Zubair responded to the call. The Prophet then said, “Every prophet had a disciple and my disciple is Zubair bin Al-'Awwam.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/3_895">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 3:801 to 3:895</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_200">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:101 to 4:200</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
