---
title: "Hadith 4:101 to 4:200"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:1 to 4:100</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_300">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:201 to 4:300</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 4:101

_Narrated Malik bin Al-Huwairith:_

On my departure from the Prophet he said to me and to a friend of mine, “You two, pronounce the Adhan and the Iqama for the prayer and let the elder of you lead the prayer.”


## Hadith 4:102

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Good will remain (as a permanent quality) in the foreheads of horses till the Day of Resurrection.”


## Hadith 4:103

_Narrated Ursa bin ALGA:_

The Prophet said, “Good will remain (as a permanent quality) in the foreheads of horses till the Day of Resurrection.”

And narrated Anas bin Malik: Allah's Apostle said, “There is a blessing in the fore-heads of horses.”


## Hadith 4:104

_Narrated 'Urwa Al-Bariqi:_

The Prophet said, “Good will remain (as a permanent quality) in the foreheads of horses (for Jihad) till the Day of Resurrection, for they bring about either a reward (in the Hereafter) or booty (in this world.”


## Hadith 4:105

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “If somebody keeps a horse in Allah's Cause motivated by his faith in Allah and his belief in His Promise, then he will be rewarded on the Day of Resurrection for what the horse has eaten or drunk and for its dung and urine.”


## Hadith 4:106

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Qatada:_

(from his father) Abu Qatada went out (on a journey) with Allah's Apostle but he was left behind with some of his companions who were in the state of Ihram. He himself was not in the state of Ihram. They saw an opener before he could see it. When they saw the opener, they did not speak anything till Abu Qatada saw it. So, he rode over his horse called Al-Jarada and requested them to give him his lash, but they refused. So, he himself took it and then attacked the opener and slaughtered it. He ate of its meat and his companions ate, too, but they regretted their eating. When they met the Prophet (they asked him about it) and he asked, “Have you some of its meat (left) with you?” Abu Qatada replied, “Yes, we have its leg with us.” So, the Prophet took and ate it.


## Hadith 4:107

_Narrated Sahl:_

In our garden there was a horse belonging to the Prophet called Al-Luhaif or Al-Lakhif.


## Hadith 4:108

_Narrated Mu'adh:_

I was a companion rider of the Prophet on a donkey called 'Ufair. The Prophet asked, “O Mu'adh! Do you know what Allah's right on His slaves is, and what the right of His slaves on Him is?” I replied, “Allah and His Apostle know better.” He said, “Allah's right on His slaves is that they should worship Him (Alone) and should not worship any besides Him. And slave's right on Allah is that He should not punish him who worships none besides Him.” I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Should I not inform the people of this good news?” He said, “Do not inform them of it, lest they should depend on it (absolutely).”


## Hadith 4:109

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Once there was a feeling of fright in Medina, so the Prophet borrowed a horse belonging to us called Mandub (and he rode away on it). (When the Prophet returned) he said, “I have not seen anything of fright and I found it (i.e. this horse) very fast.”


## Hadith 4:110

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

I heard the Prophet saying. “Evil omen is in three things: The horse, the woman and the house.”


## Hadith 4:111

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad Saidi:_

Allah's Apostle said “If there is any evil omen in anything, then it is in the woman, the horse and the house.”


## Hadith 4:112

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “ Horses are kept for one of three purposes; for some people they are a source of reward, for some others they are a means of shelter and for some others they are a source of sins. The one for whom they are a source of reward, is he who keeps a horse for Allah's Cause (i.e. Jihad) tying it with a long tether on a meadow or in a garden with the result that whatever it eats from the area of the meadow or the garden where it is tied will be counted as good deeds for his benefit, and if it should break its rope and jump over one or two hillocks then all its dung and its foot marks will be written as good deeds for him; and if it passes by a river and drinks water from it even though he had no intention of watering it, even then he will get the reward for its drinking. As for the man for whom horses are a source of sins, he is the one who keeps a horse for the sake of pride and pretense and showing enmity for Muslims: such a horse will be a source of sins for him. When Allah's Apostle was asked about donkeys, he replied, ”Nothing has been revealed to me about them except this unique, comprehensive Verse: "Then anyone who does an atom's (or a small ant's) weight of good shall see it; And anyone who does an atom's (or a small ant's) weight of evil, shall see it.' (101.7-8)


## Hadith 4:113

_Narrated Muslim from Abu Aqil from Abu Al-Mutawakkil An-Naji:_

I called on Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari and said to him, “Relate to me what you have heard from Allah's Apostle .” He said, “I accompanied him on one of the journeys.” (Abu Aqil said, “I do not know whether that journey was for the purpose of Jihad or 'Umra.”) “When we were returning,” Jabir continued, "the Prophet said, 'Whoever wants to return earlier to his family, should hurry up.' We set off and I was on a black red tainted camel having no defect, and the people were behind me. While I was in that state the camel stopped suddenly (because of exhaustion). On that the Prophet said to me, 'O Jabir, wait!' Then he hit it once with his lash and it started moving on a fast pace. He then said, 'Will you sell the camel?' I replied in the affirmative when we reached Medina, and the Prophet went to the Mosque along with his companions. I, too, went to him after tying the camel on the pavement at the Mosque gate. Then I said to him, 'This is your camel.' He came out and started examining the camel and saying, 'The camel is ours.' Then the Prophet sent some Awaq (i.e. an amount) of gold saying, 'Give it to Jabir.' Then he asked, 'Have you taken the full price (of the camel)?' I replied in the affirmative. He said, 'Both the price and the camel are for you.' ''


## Hadith 4:114

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

There was a feeling of fright in Medina, so the Prophet borrowed a horse called Mandub belonging 'to Abu Talha and mounted it. (On his return), he said, “I did not see anything of fright and I found this horse very fast.”


## Hadith 4:115

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle fixed two shares for the horse and one share for its rider (from the war booty).


## Hadith 4:116

_Narrated Abu Ishaq:_

Somebody asked Al-Bar-a bin 'Azib, “Did you flee deserting Allah's Apostle during the battle of Hunain?” Al-Bara replied, “But Allah's Apostle did not flee. The people of the Tribe of Hawazin were good archers. When we met them, we attacked them, and they fled. When the Muslims started collecting the war booty, the pagans faced us with arrows, but Allah's Apostle did not flee. No doubt, I saw him on his white mule and Abu Sufyan was holding its reins and the Prophet was saying, 'I am the Prophet in truth: I am the son of 'Abdul Muttalib.' ”


## Hadith 4:117

_Narrated Ibn'Umar:_

When the Prophet put his feet in the stirrup and the she-camel got up carrying him he would start reciting Talbiya at the mosque of Dhul-Hulaifa.


## Hadith 4:118

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet met them (i.e. the people) while he was riding an unsaddled horse with his sword slung over his shoulder.


## Hadith 4:119

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Once the people of Medina were frightened, so the Prophet rode a horse belonging to Abu Talha and it ran slowly, or was of narrow paces. When he returned, he said, "I found your (i.e. Abu Talha's) horse very fast. After that the horse could not be surpassed in running..'


## Hadith 4:120

_Narrated ('Abdullah) bin 'Umar:_

The Prophet arranged for a horse race amongst the horses that had been made lean to take place between Al-Hafya'' and Thaniyat Al-Wada' (i.e. names of two places) and the horses which had not been mad.? lean from Ath-Thaniyat to the mosque of Bani Zuraiq. I was also amongst those who took part in that horse race. Sufyan, a sub-narrator, said, “The distance between Al-Hafya and Thaniya Al-Wada' is five or six miles; and between Thaniya and the mosque of Bani Zuraiq is one mile.”


## Hadith 4:121

_Narrated Abdullah:_

The Prophet arranged for a horse race of the horses which had not been made lean; the area of the race was from Ath-Thaniya to the mosque of Bani Zuraiq. (The sub-narrator said, “'Abdullah bin 'Umar was amongst those who participated in that horse race.”).


## Hadith 4:122

_Narrated Abu Ishaq from Musa bin 'Uqba from Mafia from Ibn 'Umar who_

said:

“Allah's Apostle arranged a horse race amongst the horses that had been made lean, letting them start from Al-Hafya' and their limit (distance of running) was up to Thaniyat-al-Wada'. I asked Musa, 'What was the distance between the two places?' Musa replied, 'Six or seven miles. He arranged a race of the horses which had not been made lean sending them from Thaniyat-al-Wada', and their limit was up to the mosque of Bani Zuraiq.' I asked, 'What was the distance between those two places?' He replied 'One mile or so.' Ibn 'Umar was amongst those who participated in that horse race.”


## Hadith 4:123

_Narrated Anas:_

The she camel of the Prophet was called Al-Adba.


## Hadith 4:124

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet had a she camel called Al Adba which could not be excelled in a race. (Humaid, a sub-narrator said, “Or could hardly be excelled.”) Once a bedouin came riding a camel below six years of age which surpasses it (i.e. Al'Adba) in the race. The Muslims felt it so much that the Prophet noticed their distress. He then said, “It is Allah's Law that He brings down whatever rises high in the world.”


## Hadith 4:125

_Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith:_

The Prophet did not leave anything behind him after his death except a white mule, his arms and a piece of land which he left to be given in charity.


## Hadith 4:126

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

that a man asked him. “O Abu 'Umara! Did you flee on the day (of the battle) of Hunain?” He replied, “No, by Allah, the Prophet did not flee but the hasty people fled and the people of the Tribe of Hawazin attacked them with arrows, while the Prophet was riding his white mule and Abu Sufyan bin Al-Harith was holding its reins, and the Prophet was saying, 'I am the Prophet in truth, I am the son of 'Abdul Muttalib.' ”


## Hadith 4:127

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

the mother of the faithful believers, I requested the Prophet permit me to participate in Jihad, but he said, “Your Jihad is the performance of Hajj.”


## Hadith 4:128

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

the mother of the faithful believers: The Prophet was asked by his wives about the Jihad and he replied, “The best Jihad (for you) is (the performance of) Hajj.”


## Hadith 4:129

_Narrated Anas:_

Allah's Apostle went to the daughter of Milhan and reclined there (and slept) and then (woke up) smiling. She asked, “O Allah's Apostle! What makes you smile?” He replied, (I dreamt that) some people amongst my followers were sailing on the green sea in Allah's Cause, resembling kings on thrones.“ She said, ”O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of them.“ He said, ”O Allah! Let her be one of them.“ Then he (slept again and woke up and) smiled. She asked him the same question and he gave the same reply. She said, ”Invoke Allah to make me one of them.“ He replied, ''You will be amongst the first group of them; you will not be amongst the last.” Later on she married 'Ubada bin As-Samit and then she sailed on the sea with bint Qaraza, Mu'awiya's wife (for Jihad). On her return, she mounted her riding animal, which threw her down breaking her neck, and she died on falling down.


## Hadith 4:130

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Whenever the Prophet intended to proceed on a journey, he used to draw lots amongst his wives and would take the one upon whom the lot fell. Once, before setting out for Jihad, he drew lots amongst us and the lot came to me; so I went with the Prophet; and that happened after the revelation of the Verse Hijab (i.e. veiling).


## Hadith 4:131

_Narrated Anas:_

On the day (of the battle) of Uhad when (some) people retreated and left the Prophet, I saw 'Aisha bint Abu Bakr and Um Sulaim, with their robes tucked up so that the bangles around their ankles were visible hurrying with their water skins (in another narration it is said, “carrying the water skins on their backs”). Then they would pour the water in the mouths of the people, and return to fill the water skins again and came back again to pour water in the mouths of the people.


## Hadith 4:132

_Narrated Tha'laba bin Abi Malik:_

'Umar bin Al-Khattab distributed some garments amongst the women of Medina. One good garment remained, and one of those present with him said, “O chief of the believers! Give this garment to your wife, the (grand) daughter of Allah's Apostle.” They meant Um Kulthum, the daughter of 'Ali. 'Umar said, Um Salit has more right (to have it).“ Um Salit was amongst those Ansari women who had given the pledge of allegiance to Allah's Apostle.' 'Umar said, ”She (i.e. Um Salit) used to carry the water skins for us on the day of Uhud."


## Hadith 4:133

_Narrated Ar-Rubayyi 'bint Mu'auwidh:_

We were in the company of the Prophet providing the wounded with water and treating them and bringing the killed to Medina (from the battle field) .


## Hadith 4:134

_Narrated Ar-Rabi'bint Mu'auwidh:_

We used to take part in holy battles with the Prophet by providing the people with water and serving them and bringing the killed and the wounded back to Medina.


## Hadith 4:135

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

Abu 'Amir was hit with an arrow in his knee, so I went to him and he asked me to remove the arrow. When I removed it, the water started dribbling from it. Then I went to the Prophet and told him about it. He said, “O Allah! Forgive 'Ubaid Abu 'Amir.”


## Hadith 4:136

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet was vigilant one night and when he reached Medina, he said, “Would that a pious man from my companions guard me tonight!” Suddenly we heard the clatter of arms. He said, “Who is that? ” He (The new comer) replied, “ I am Sad bin Abi Waqqas and have come to guard you.” So, the Prophet slept (that night).


## Hadith 4:137

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Let the slave of Dinar and Dirham of Quantify and Khamisa (i.e. money and luxurious clothes) perish for he is pleased if these things are given to him, and if not, he is displeased!”

Dirham, of Quantify and Khamisa perish as he is pleased if these things are given to him, and if not, he is displeased. Let such a person perish and relapse, and if he is pierced with a thorn, let him not find anyone to take it out for him. Paradise is for him who holds the reins of his horse to strive in Allah's Cause, with his hair unkempt and feet covered with dust: if he is appointed in the vanguard, he is perfectly satisfied with his post of guarding, and if he is appointed in the rearward, he accepts his post with satisfaction; (he is so simple and unambiguous that) if he asks for permission he is not permitted, and if he intercedes, his intercession is not accepted."


## Hadith 4:138

_Narrated Anas:_

I was in the company of Jabir bin 'Abdullah on a journey and he used to serve me though he was older than I. Jarir said, “I saw the Ansar doing a thing (i.e. showing great reverence to the Prophet ) for which I have vowed that whenever I meet any of them, I will serve him.”


## Hadith 4:139

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

I went along with the Prophet to Khaibar so as to serve him. (Later on) when the Prophet returned he, on seeing the Uhud mountain, said, “This is a mountain that loves us andis loved by us.” Then he pointed to Medina with his hand saying, “O Allah! I make the area which is in between Medina's two mountains a sanctuary, as Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary. O Allah! Bless us in our Sa and Mudd (i.e. units of measuring).”


## Hadith 4:140

_Narrated Anas:_

We were with the Prophet (on a journey) and the only shade one could have was the shade made by one's own garment. Those who fasted did not do any work and those who did not fast served the camels and brought the water on them and treated the sick and (wounded). So, the Prophet said, “Today, those who were not fasting took (all) the reward.”


## Hadith 4:141

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Charity is obligatory everyday on every joint of a human being. If one helps a person in matters concerning his riding animal by helping him to ride it or by lifting his luggage on to it, all this will be regarded charity. A good word, and every step one takes to offer the compulsory Congregational prayer, is regarded as charity; and guiding somebody on the road is regarded as charity.”


## Hadith 4:142

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'di :_

Allah's Apostle said, “To guard Muslims from infidels in Allah's Cause for one day is better than the world and whatever is on its surface, and a place in Paradise as small as that occupied by the whip of one of you is better than the world and whatever is on its surface; and a morning's or an evening's journey which a slave (person) travels in Allah's Cause is better than the world and whatever is on its surface.”


## Hadith 4:143

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said to Abu Talha, “Choose one of your boy servants to serve me in my expedition to Khaibar.” So, Abu Talha took me letting me ride behind him while I was a boy nearing the age of puberty. I used to serve Allah's Apostle when he stopped to rest. I heard him saying repeatedly, “O Allah! I seek refuge with You from distress and sorrow, from helplessness and laziness, from miserliness and cowardice, from being heavily in debt and from being overcome by men.” Then we reached Khaibar; and when Allah enabled him to conquer the Fort (of Khaibar), the beauty of Safiya bint Huyai bin Akhtab was described to him. Her husband had been killed while she was a bride. So Allah's Apostle selected her for himself and took her along with him till we reached a place called Sad-AsSahba,' where her menses were over and he took her for his wife. Haris (a kind of dish) was served on a small leather sheet. Then Allah's Apostle told me to call those who were around me. So, that was the marriage banquet of Allah's Apostle and Safiya. Then we left for Medina. I saw Allah's Apostle folding a cloak round the hump of the camel so as to make a wide space for Safiya (to sit on behind him) He sat beside his camel letting his knees for Safiya to put her feet on so as to mount the camel. Then, we proceeded till we approached Medina; he looked at Uhud (mountain) and said, “This is a mountain which loves us and is loved by us.” Then he looked at Medina and said, “O Allah! I make the area between its (i.e. Medina's) two mountains a sanctuary as Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary. O Allah! Bless them (i.e. the people of Medina) in their Mudd and Sa (i.e. measures).”


## Hadith 4:144

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Um Haram told me that the Prophet one day took a midday nap in her house. Then he woke up smiling. Um Haram asked, “O Allah's Apostle! What makes you smile?” He replied “I was astonished to see (in my dream) some people amongst my followers on a sea-voyage looking like kings on the thrones.” She said, “O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of them.” He replied, “You are amongst them.” He slept again and then woke up smiling and said the same as before twice or thrice. And she said, “O Allah's Apostle! Invoke Allah to make me one of them.” And he said, “You are amongst the first batch.” 'Ubada bin As-Samit married her (i.e. Um Haram) and then he took her for Jihad. When she returned, an animal was presented to her to ride, but she fell down and her neck was broken.


## Hadith 4:145

_Narrated Mus'ab bin Sad:_

Once Sad (bin Abi Waqqas) thought that he was superior to those who were below him in rank. On that the Prophet said, “You gain no victory or livelihood except through (the blessings and invocations of) the poor amongst you.”


## Hadith 4:146

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri_

The Prophet said, “A time will come when groups of people will go for Jihad and it will be asked, ‘Is there anyone amongst you who has enjoyed the company of the Prophet?’ The answer will be, ‘Yes.’ Then they will be given victory (by Allah) (because of him). Then a time will come when it will be asked. ‘Is there anyone amongst you who has enjoyed the company of the companions of the Prophet?’ It will be said, ‘Yes,’ and they will be given victory (by Allah). Then a time will come when it will be said. ‘Is there anyone amongst you who has enjoyed the company of the companions of the companions of the Prophet?’ It will be said, ‘Yes,’ and they will be given victory (by Allah).”


## Hadith 4:147

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad As-Sa'idi:_

Allah's Apostle and the pagans faced each other and started fighting. When Allah's Apostle returned to his camp and when the pagans returned to their camp, somebody talked about a man amongst the companions of Allah's Apostle who would follow and kill with his sword any pagan going alone. He said, “Nobody did his job (i.e. fighting) so properly today as that man.” Allah's Apostle said, “Indeed, he is amongst the people of the (Hell) Fire.” A man amongst the people said, “I shall accompany him (to watch what he does)” Thus he accompanied him, and wherever he stood, he would stand with him, and wherever he ran, he would run with him.

Then the (brave) man got wounded seriously and he decided to bring about his death quickly. He planted the blade of the sword in the ground directing its sharp end towards his chest between his two breasts. Then he leaned on the sword and killed himself. The other man came to Allah's Apostle and said, “I testify that you are Allah's Apostle.” The Prophet asked, “What has happened?” He replied, “(It is about) the man whom you had described as one of the people of the (Hell) Fire. The people were greatly surprised at what you said, and I said, ‘I will find out his reality for you.’ So, I came out seeking him. He got severely wounded, and hastened to die by slanting the blade of his sword in the ground directing its sharp end towards his chest between his two breasts. Then he eased on his sword and killed himself.” when Allah's Apostle said, “A man may seem to the people as if he were practising the deeds of the people of Paradise while in fact he is from the people of the Hell) Fire, another may seem to the people as if he were practicing the deeds of the people of Hell (Fire), while in fact he is from the people of Paradise.”


## Hadith 4:148

_Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:_

The Prophet passed by some people of the tribe of Bani Aslam who were practicing archery. The Prophet said, “O Bani Ismail ! Practice archery as your father Isma'il was a great archer. Keep on throwing arrows and I am with Bani so-and-so.” So one of the parties ceased throwing. Allah's Apostle said, “Why do you not throw?” They replied, “How should we throw while you are with them (i.e. on their side)?” On that the Prophet said, “Throw, and I am with all of you.”


## Hadith 4:149

_Narrated Abu Usaid:_

On the day (of the battle) of Badr when we stood in rows against (the army of) Quraish and they stood in rows against us, the Prophet said, “When they do come near you, throw arrows at them.”


## Hadith 4:150

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

While some Ethiopians were playing in the presence of the Prophet, 'Umar came in, picked up a stone and hit them with it. On that the Prophet said, “O 'Umar! Allow them (to play).” Ma'mar (the sub-narrator) added that they were playing in the Mosque.


## Hadith 4:151

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Abu Talha and the Prophet used to shield themselves with one shield. Abu Talha was a good archer, and when he threw (his arrows) the Prophet would look at the target of his arrows.


## Hadith 4:152

_Narrated Sahl:_

When the helmet of the Prophet was smashed on his head and blood covered his face and one of his front teeth got broken, 'Ali brought the water in his shield and Fatima the Prophet's daughter) washed him. But when she saw that the bleeding increased more by the water, she took a mat, burnt it, and placed the ashes on the wound of the Prophet and so the blood stopped oozing out.


## Hadith 4:153

_Narrated 'Umar:_

The properties of Bani An-Nadir which Allah had transferred to His Apostle as Fai Booty were not gained by the Muslims with their horses and camels. The properties therefore, belonged especially to Allah's Apostle who used to give his family their yearly expenditure and spend what remained thereof on arms and horses to be used in Allah's Cause.


## Hadith 4:154

_Narrated Ali:_

I never saw the Prophet saying, “Let my parents sacrifice their lives for you,” to any man after Sad. I heard him saying (to him), “Throw (the arrows)! Let my parents sacrifice their lives for you.”


## Hadith 4:155

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle came to my house while two girls were singing beside me the songs of Bu'ath (a story about the war between the two tribes of the Ansar, i.e. Khazraj and Aus, before Islam.) The Prophet reclined on the bed and turned his face to the other side. Abu Bakr came and scolded me and said protestingly, “Instrument of Satan in the presence of Allah's Apostle?” Allah's Apostle turned his face towards him and said, “Leave them.” When Abu Bakr became inattentive, I waved the two girls to go away and they left. It was the day of 'Id when negroes used to play with leather shields and spears. Either I requested Allah's Apostle or he himself asked me whether I would like to see the display. I replied in the affirmative. Then he let me stand behind him and my cheek was touching his cheek and he was saying, “Carry on, O Bani Arfida (i.e. negroes)!” When I got tired, he asked me if that was enough. I replied in the affirmative and he told me to leave.


## Hadith 4:156

_Narrated Anas:_

The 'Prophet was the best and the bravest amongst the people. Once the people of Medina got terrified at night, so they went in the direction of the noise (that terrified them). The Prophet met them (on his way back) after he had found out the truth. He was riding an unsaddled horse belonging to Abu Talha and a sword was hanging by his neck, and he was saying, “Don't be afraid! Don't be afraid!” He further said, “I found it (i.e. the horse) very fast,” or said, “This horse is very fast.” (Qastala-ni)


## Hadith 4:157

_Narrated Abu Umama:_

Some people conquered many countries and their swords were decorated neither with gold nor silver, but they were decorated with leather, lead and iron.


## Hadith 4:158

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:_

That he proceeded in the company of Allah's Apostle towards Najd to participate in a Ghazwa. (Holy-battle) When Allah's Apostle returned, he too returned with him. Midday came upon them while they were in a valley having many thorny trees. Allah's Apostle and the people dismounted and dispersed to rest in the shade of the trees. Allah's Apostle rested under a tree and hung his sword on it. We all took a nap and suddenly we heard Allah's Apostle calling us. (We woke up) to see a bedouin with him. The Prophet said, "This bedouin took out my sword while I was sleeping and when I woke up, I found the unsheathed sword in his hand and he challenged me saying, 'Who will save you from me?' I said thrice, 'Allah.' The Prophet did not punish him but sat down.


## Hadith 4:159

_Narrated Sahl:_

That he was asked about the wound of the Prophet on the day (of the battle) of Uhud. He said, “The face of the Prophet as wounded and one of his front teeth as broken and the helmet over his head was smashed. Fatima washed of the blood while Ali held water. When she saw that bleeding was increasing continuously, she burnt a mat (of date-palm leaves) till it turned into ashes which she put over the wound and thus the bleeding ceased.”


## Hadith 4:160

_Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith:_

The Prophet did not leave behind him after his death, anything except his arms, his white mule, and a piece of land at Khaibar which he left to be given in charity .


## Hadith 4:161

_Narrated Jabir:_

as above (Hadith No. 158).


## Hadith 4:162

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

That he participated in a Ghazwa (Holy-Battle) in the company of Allah's Apostle. Midday came upon them while they were in a valley having many thorny trees. The people dispersed to rest in the shade of the trees. The Prophet rested under a tree, hung his sword on it, and then slept. Then he woke up to find near to him, a man whose presence he had not noticed before. The Prophet said, “This (man) took my sword (out of its scabbard) and said, 'Who will save you from me.' I replied, 'Allah.' So, he put the sword back into its scabbard, and you see him sitting here.” Anyhow, the Prophet did not punish him. (See Hadith No. 158)


## Hadith 4:163

_Narrated Abu Qatada:_

That he was in the company of Allah's Apostle and when they had covered a portion of the road to Mecca, he and some of the companions lagged behind. The latter were in a state of Ihram, while he was not. He saw an onager and rode his horse and requested his companions to give him his lash but they refused. Then he asked them to give him his spear but they refused, so he took it himself, attacked the onager, and killed it. Some of the companions of the Prophet ate of it while some others refused to eat. When they caught up with Allah's Apostle they asked him about that, and he said, “That was a meal Allah fed you with.” (It is also said that Allah's Apostle asked, “Have you got something of its meat?”)


## Hadith 4:164

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet , while in a tent (on the day of the battle of Badr) said, “O Allah! I ask you the fulfillment of Your Covenant and Promise. O Allah! If You wish (to destroy the believers) You will never be worshipped after today.” Abu Bakr caught him by the hand and said, “This is sufficient, O Allah's Apostle! You have asked Allah pressingly.” The Prophet was clad in his armor at that time. He went out, saying to me: “There multitude will be put to flight and they will show their backs. Nay, but the Hour is their appointed time (for their full recompense) and that Hour will be more grievous and more bitter (than their worldly failure).” (54.45-46) Khalid said that was on the day of the battle of Badr.


## Hadith 4:165

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle died while his (iron) armor was mortgaged to a Jew for thirty Sas of barley.


## Hadith 4:166

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The example of a miser and the one who gives in charity, is like the example of two men wearing iron cloaks so tightly that their arms are raised forcibly towards their collar-bones. So, whenever a charitable person wants to give in charity, his cloak spreads over his body so much so that it wipes out his traces, but whenever the miser wants to give in charity, the rings (of the iron cloak) come closer to each other and press over his body, and his hands gets connected to his collar-bones. Abu Huraira heard the Prophet saying. ”The miser then tries to widen it but in vain."


## Hadith 4:167

_Narrated Al-Mughira bin Shu'ba:_

Allah's Apostle went out to answer the call of nature and on his return I brought some water to him. He performed the ablution while he was wearing a Sha'mi cloak. He rinsed his mouth and washed his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out, and washed his face. Then he tried to take out his hands through his sleeves but they were tight, so he took them out from underneath, washed them and passed wet hands over his head and over his leather socks.


## Hadith 4:168

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet allowed 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and Az-Zubair to wear silken shirts because they had a skin disease causing itching.


## Hadith 4:169

_Narrated Anas:_

as above.


## Hadith 4:170

_Narrated Anas:_

Abdur Rahman bin 'Auf and Az-Zubair complained to the Prophet, i.e. about the lice (that caused itching) so he allowed them to wear silken clothes. I saw them wearing such clothes in a holy battle.


## Hadith 4:171

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet allowed 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and Az-Zubair bin Al-'Awwam to wear silk.


## Hadith 4:172

_Narrated Anas:_

(Wearing of silk) was allowed to them (i.e. 'AbdurRahman and Az-Zubair) because of the itching they suffered from.


## Hadith 4:173

_Narrated Umaiya Ad-Damri:_

I saw the Prophet eating of a shoulder (of a sheep) by cutting from it and then he was called to prayer and he prayed without repeating his ablution.


## Hadith 4:174

_Narrated Az-Zuhri:_

as above (Hadith No. 173...) and added that the Prophet put the knife down.


## Hadith 4:175

_Narrated Khalid bin Madan:_

That 'Umair bin Al-Aswad Al-Anasi told him that he went to 'Ubada bin As-Samit while he was staying in his house at the sea-shore of Hims with (his wife) Um Haram. 'Umair said. Um Haram informed us that she heard the Prophet saying, “Paradise is granted to the first batch of my followers who will undertake a naval expedition.” Um Haram added, I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Will I be amongst them?' He replied, ‘You are amongst them.’ The Prophet then said, ‘The first army amongst’ my followers who will invade Caesar‘s City will be forgiven their sins.’ I asked, 'Will I be one of them, O Allah's Apostle?' He replied in the negative."


## Hadith 4:176

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “You (i.e. Muslims) will fight wi the Jews till some of them will hide behind stones. The stones will (betray them) saying, 'O 'Abdullah (i.e. slave of Allah)! There is a Jew hiding behind me; so kill him.' ”


## Hadith 4:177

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The Hour will not be established until you fight with the Jews, and the stone behind which a Jew will be hiding will say. ”O Muslim! There is a Jew hiding behind me, so kill him."


## Hadith 4:178

_Narrated 'Amr bin Taghlib:_

The Prophet said, “One of the portents of the Hour is that you will fight with people wearing shoes made of hair; and one of the portents of the Hour is that you will fight with broad-faced people whose faces will look like shields coated with leather.”


## Hadith 4:179

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The Hour will not be established until you fight with the Turks; people with small eyes, red faces, and flat noses. Their faces will look like shields coated with leather. The Hour will not be established till you fight with people whose shoes are made of hair.”


## Hadith 4:180

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The Hour will not be established till you fight with people wearing shoes made of hair. And the Hour will not be established till you fight with people whose faces look like shields coated with leather. ” (Abu Huraira added, “They will be) small-eyed, flat nosed, and their faces will look like shields coated with leather.”)


## Hadith 4:181

_Narrated Abu Ishaq:_

A man asked Al-Bara', “O Abu 'Umara! Did you all flee on the day (of the battle) of Hunain?” He replied, “No, by Allah! Allah's Apostle did not flee, but his young unarmed companions passed by the archers of the tribe of Hawazin and Bani Nasr whose arrows hardly missed a target, and they threw arrows at them hardly missing a shot. So the Muslims retreated towards the Prophet while he was riding his white mule which was being led by his cousin Abu Sufyan bin Al-Harith bin 'Abdul Muttalib. The Prophet dismounted and invoked Allah for victory; then he said, 'I am the Prophet, without a lie; I am the son of 'Abdul Muttalib, and then he arranged his companions in rows.”


## Hadith 4:182

_Narrated 'Ali:_

When it was the day of the battle of Al-Ahzab (i.e. the clans), Allah's Apostle said, “O Allah! Fill their (i.e. the infidels') houses and graves with fire as they busied us so much that we did not perform the prayer (i.e. 'Asr) till the sun set.”


## Hadith 4:183

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet used to recite the following invocations during Qunut: “O Allah! Save Salama bin Hisham. O Allah! Save Al-Walid bin Al-Walid. O Allah! Save 'Aiyash bin Rabi'a O Allah ! Save the weak Muslims. O Allah! Be very hard on Mudar tribe. O Allah! Afflict them with years (of famine) similar to the (famine) years of the time of Prophet Joseph.”


## Hadith 4:184

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa:_

Allah's Apostle invoked evil upon the pagans on the ay (of the battle) of Al-Ahzab, saying, “O Allah! The Revealer of the Holy Book, the Swift-Taker of Accounts, O Allah, defeat Al-Ahzab (i.e. the clans), O Allah, defeat them and shake them.”


## Hadith 4:185

_Narrated Abdullah:_

Once the Prophet was offering the prayer in the shade of the Ka'ba. Abu Jahl and some Quraishi men sent somebody to bring the abdominal contents of a shecamel which had been slaughtered somewhere in Mecca, and when he brought them, they put them over the Prophet Then Fatima (i.e. the Prophet's daughter) came and threw them away from him, and he said, “O Allah! Destroy (the pagans of) Quraish; O Allah! Destroy Quraish; O Allah Destroy Quraish,” naming especially Abu Jahl bin Hisham, 'Utba bin Rabi'a, Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al Walid bin 'Utba, Ubai bin Khalaf and 'Uqba bin Abi Mitt. (The narrator, 'Abdullah added, "I saw them all killed and thrown in the Badr well).


## Hadith 4:186

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Once the Jews came to the Prophet and said, “Death be upon you.” So I cursed them. The Prophet said, “What is the matter?” I said, “Have you not heard what they said?” The Prophet said, “Have you not heard what I replied (to them)? (I said), (‘The same is upon you.’)”


## Hadith 4:187

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle wrote a letter to Caesar saying, “If you reject Islam, you will be responsible for the sins of the peasants (i.e. your people).”


## Hadith 4:188

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Tufail bin 'Amr Ad-Dausi and his companions came to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle! The people of the tribe of Daus disobeyed and refused to follow you; so invoke Allah against them.” The people said, “The tribe of Daus is ruined.” The Prophet said, “O Allah! Give guidance to the people of Daus, and let them embrace Islam.”


## Hadith 4:189

_Narrated Anas:_

When the Prophet intended to write a letter to the ruler of the Byzantines, he was told that those people did not read any letter unless it was stamped with a seal. So, the Prophet got a silver ring— as if I were just looking at its white glitter on his hand —— and stamped on it the expression “Muhammad, Apostle of Allah”.


## Hadith 4:190

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle sent his letter to Khusrau and ordered his messenger to hand it over to the Governor of Bahrain who was to hand it over to Khusrau. So, when Khusrau read the letter he tore it. Said bin Al-Musaiyab said, “The Prophet then invoked Allah to disperse them with full dispersion, (destroy them (i.e. Khusrau and his followers) severely)”.


## Hadith 4:191

_Narrated Abdullah bin Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle wrote to Caesar and invited him to Islam and sent him his letter with Dihya Al-Kalbi whom Allah's Apostle ordered to hand it over to the Governor of Busra who would forward it to Caesar. Caesar as a sign of gratitude to Allah, had walked from Hims to Ilya (i.e. Jerusalem) when Allah had granted Him victory over the Persian forces. So, when the letter of Allah's Apostle reached Caesar, he said after reading t, 'Seek for me any one of his people! (Arabs of Quraish tribe) if present here, in order to ask him about Allah's Apostle. At that time Abu Sufyan bin Harb was in Sham with some men frown Quraish who had come (to Sham) as merchants during the truce that had been concluded between Allah's Apostle; and the infidels of Quraish. Abu Sufyan said, Caesar's messenger found us somewhere in Sham so he took me and my companions to Ilya and we were admitted into Ceasar's court to find him sitting in his royal court wearing a crown and surrounded by the senior dignitaries of the Byzantine. He said to his translator. 'Ask them who amongst them is a close relation to the man who claims to be a prophet.“ Abu Sufyan added, ”I replied, 'I am the nearest relative to him.' He asked, 'What degree of relationship do you have with him?' I replied, 'He is my cousin,' and there was none of Bani Abu Manaf in the caravan except myself. Caesar said, 'Let him come nearer.' He then ordered that my companions stand behind me near my shoulder and said to his translator, 'Tell his companions that I am going to ask this man about the man who claims to be a prophet. If he tells a lie, they should contradict him immediately.“ Abu Sufyan added, ”By Allah ! Had it not been shameful that my companions label me a liar, I would not have spoken the truth about him when he asked me. But I considered it shameful to be called a liar by my companions. So I told the truth. He then said to his translator, 'Ask him what kind of family does he belong to.' I replied, ‘He belongs to a noble family amongst us.’ He said, ‘Have anybody else amongst you ever claimed the same before him? ’I replied, ‘No.’ He said, ‘Had you ever blamed him for telling lies before he claimed what he claimed? ’ I replied, ‘No.’ He said, ‘Was anybody amongst his ancestors a king?’ I replied, ‘No.’ He said, ‘Do the noble or the poor follow him?’ I replied, ‘It is the poor who follow him.’ He said, ‘Are they increasing or decreasing (day by day)?’ I replied,‘ They are increasing.’ He said, ‘Does anybody amongst those who embrace his (the Prophet's) Religion become displeased and then discard his Religion?’. I replied, ‘No. ’ He said, ‘Does he break his promises?’ I replied, 'No, but we are now at truce with him and we are afraid that he may betray us.” Abu Sufyan added, “Other than the last sentence, I could not say anything against him. Caesar then asked, ‘Have you ever had a war with him?’ I replied, ‘Yes.’ He said, ‘What was the outcome of your battles with him?’ I replied, ‘The result was unstable; sometimes he was victorious and sometimes we.’ He said, ‘What does he order you to do?’ I said, ‘He tells us to worship Allah alone, and not to worship others along with Him, and to leave all that our fore-fathers used to worship. He orders us to pray, give in charity, be chaste, keep promises and return what is entrusted to us.’ When I had said that, Caesar said to his translator, ‘Say to him: I ask you about his lineage and your reply was that he belonged to a noble family. In fact, all the apostles came from the noblest lineage of their nations. Then I questioned you whether anybody else amongst you had claimed such a thing, and your reply was in the negative. If the answer had been in the affirmative, I would have thought that this man was following a claim that had been said before him. When I asked you whether he was ever blamed for telling lies, your reply was in the negative, so I took it for granted that a person who did not tell a lie about (others) the people could never tell a lie about Allah. Then I asked you whether any of his ancestors was a king. Your reply was in the negative, and if it had been in the affirmative, I would have thought that this man wanted to take back his ancestral kingdom. When I asked you whether the rich or the poor people followed him, you replied that it was the poor who followed him. In fact, such are the followers of the apostles. Then I asked you whether his followers were increasing or decreasing. You replied that they were increasing. In fact, this is the result of true faith till it is complete (in all respects). I asked you whether there was anybody who, after embracing his religion, became displeased and discarded his religion; your reply was in the negative. In fact, this is the sign of true faith, for when its cheerfulness enters and mixes in the hearts completely, nobody will be displeased with it. I asked you whether he had ever broken his promise. You replied in the negative. And such are the apostles; they never break their promises. When I asked you whether you fought with him and he fought with you, you replied that he did, and that sometimes he was victorious and sometimes you. Indeed, such are the apostles; they are put to trials and the final victory is always theirs. Then I asked you what he ordered you. You replied that he ordered you to worship Allah alone and not to worship others along with Him, to leave all that your fore-fathers used to worship, to offer prayers, to speak the truth, to be chaste, to keep promises, and to return what is entrusted to you. These are really the qualities of a prophet who, I knew (from the previous Scriptures) would appear, but I did not know that he would be from amongst you. If what you say should be true, he will very soon occupy the earth under my feet, and if I knew that I would reach him definitely, I would go immediately to meet Him; and were I with him, then I would certainly wash his feet.’ ” Abu Sufyan added, "Caesar then asked for the letter of Allah's Apostle and it was read. Its contents were:—

"In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful (This letter is) from Muhammad, the slave of Allah, and His Apostle, to Heraculius, the Ruler of the Byzantine. Peace be upon the followers of guidance. Now then, I invite you to Islam (i.e. surrender to Allah), embrace Islam and you will be safe; embrace Islam and Allah will bestow on you a double reward. But if you reject this invitation of Islam, you shall be responsible for misguiding the peasants (i.e. your nation). O people of the Scriptures! Come to a word common to you and us and you, that we worship. None but Allah, and that we associate nothing in worship with Him; and that none of us shall take others as Lords besides Allah. Then if they turn away, say: Bear witness that we are (they who have surrendered (unto Him)..(3.64)

Abu Sufyan added, “When Heraclius had finished his speech, there was a great hue and cry caused by the Byzantine Royalties surrounding him, and there was so much noise that I did not understand what they said. So, we were turned out of the court. When I went out with my companions and we were alone, I said to them, 'Verily, Ibn Abi Kabsha's (i.e. the Prophet's) affair has gained power. This is the King of Bani Al-Asfar fearing him.” Abu Sufyan added, “By Allah, I remained low and was sure that his religion would be victorious till Allah converted me to Islam, though I disliked it ”


## Hadith 4:192

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

That he heard the Prophet on the day (of the battle) of Khaibar saying, “I will give the flag to a person at whose hands Allah will grant victory.” So, the companions of the Prophet got up, wishing eagerly to see to whom the flag will be given, and everyone of them wished to be given the flag. But the Prophet asked for 'Ali. Someone informed him that he was suffering from eye-trouble. So, he ordered them to bring 'Ali in front of him. Then the Prophet spat in his eyes and his eyes were cured immediately as if he had never any eye-trouble. 'Ali said, “We will fight with them (i.e. infidels) till they become like us (i.e. Muslims).” The Prophet said, “Be patient, till you face them and invite them to Islam and inform them of what Allah has enjoined upon them. By Allah! If a single person embraces Islam at your hands (i.e. through you), that will be better for you than the red camels.”


## Hadith 4:193

_Narrated Anas:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle attacked some people, he would never attack them till it was dawn. If he heard the Adhan (i.e. call for prayer) he would delay the fight, and if he did not hear the Adhan, he would attack them immediately after dawn. We reached Khaibar at night.


## Hadith 4:194

_Narrated Anas:_

as Hadith No. 193 above.


## Hadith 4:195

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet set out for Khaibar and reached it at night. He used not to attack if he reached the people at night, till the day broke. So, when the day dawned, the Jews came out with their bags and spades. When they saw the Prophet; they said, “Muhammad and his army!” The Prophet said, Allahu—Akbar! (Allah is Greater) and Khaibar is ruined, for whenever we approach a nation (i.e. enemy to fight) then it will be a miserable morning for those who have been warned."


## Hadith 4:196

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah 's Apostle said, “ I have been ordered to fight with the people till they say, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah,' and whoever says, 'None has the right to be worshipped but Allah,' his life and property will be saved by me except for Islamic law, and his accounts will be with Allah, (either to punish him or to forgive him.)”


## Hadith 4:197

_Narrated Ka'b bin Malik:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to lead a Ghazwa, he would use an equivocation from which one would understand that he was going to a different destination .


## Hadith 4:198

_Narrated Ka'b bin Malik:_

Whenever Allah's Apostle intended to carry out a Ghazwa, he would use an equivocation to conceal his real destination till it was the Ghazwa of Tabuk which Allah's Apostle carried out in very hot weather. As he was going to face a very long journey through a wasteland and was to meet and attack a large number of enemies. So, he made the situation clear to the Muslims so that they might prepare themselves accordingly and get ready to conquer their enemy. The Prophet informed them of the destination he was heading for (Ka'b bin Malik used to say, “Scarcely did Allah's Apostle set out for a journey on a day other than Thursday.”)


## Hadith 4:199

_Narrated Ka'b bin Malik:_

The Prophet set out on Thursday for the Ghazwa of Tabuk and he used to prefer to set out (i.e. travel) on Thursdays.


## Hadith 4:200

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet offered a four-Rak'at Zuhr prayer at Medina and then offered a two Rak'at 'Asr prayer at Dhul-Hulaifa and I heard the companions of the Prophet reciting Talbiya aloud (for Hajj and 'Umra) altogether.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_100">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:1 to 4:100</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_300">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:201 to 4:300</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
