---
title: "Hadith 4:201 to 4:300"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_200">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:101 to 4:200</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_400">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:301 to 4:400</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 4:201

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

We set out in the company of Allah's Apostle five days before the end of Dhul Qa'da intending to perform Hajj only. When we approached Mecca Allah's Apostle ordered those who did not have the Hadi (i.e. an animal for sacrifice) with them, to perform the Tawaf around the Ka'ba, and between Safa and Marwa and then finish their Ihram. Beef was brought to us on the day of (i.e. the days of slaughtering) and I asked, “What is this?” Somebody said, Allah's Apostle has slaughtered (a cow) on behalf of his wives."


## Hadith 4:202

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Once the Prophet set out in the month of Ramadan. He observed fasting till he reached a place called Kadid where he broke his fast.


## Hadith 4:203

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The 'Prophet said, “It is obligatory for one to listen to and obey (the ruler's orders) unless these orders involve one disobedience (to Allah); but if an act of disobedience (to Allah) is imposed, he should not listen to or obey it.”


## Hadith 4:204

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

That heard Allah's Apostle saying, “We are the last but will be the foremost to enter Paradise).” The Prophet added, “He who obeys me, obeys Allah, and he who disobeys me, disobeys Allah. He who obeys the chief, obeys me, and he who disobeys the chief, disobeys me. The Imam is like a shelter for whose safety the Muslims should fight and where they should seek protection. If the Imam orders people with righteousness and rules justly, then he will be rewarded for that, and if he does the opposite, he will be responsible for that.”


## Hadith 4:205

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

When we reached (Hudaibiya) in the next year (of the treaty of Hudaibiya), not even two men amongst us agreed unanimously as to which was the tree under which we had given the pledge of allegiance, and that was out of Allah's Mercy. (The sub narrator asked Naf'i, “For what did the Prophet take their pledge of allegiance, was it for death?” Naf'i replied “No, but he took their pledge of allegiance for patience.”)


## Hadith 4:206

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Zaid:_

that in the time (of the battle) of Al-Harra a person came to him and said, “Ibn Hanzala is taking the pledge of allegiance from the people for death.” He said, “I will never give a pledge of allegiance for such a thing to anyone after Allah's Apostle.”


## Hadith 4:207

_Narrated Yazid bin Ubaid:_

Salama said, “I gave the Pledge of allegiance (Al-Ridwan) to Allah's Apostle and then I moved to the shade of a tree. When the number of people around the Prophet diminished, he said, 'O Ibn Al-Akwa ! Will you not give to me the pledge of Allegiance?' I replied, 'O Allah's Apostle! I have already given to you the pledge of Allegiance.' He said, 'Do it again.' So I gave the pledge of allegiance for the second time.” I asked 'O Abu Muslim! For what did you give he pledge of Allegiance on that day?“ He replied, ”We gave the pledge of Allegiance for death."


## Hadith 4:208

_Narrated Anas:_

On the day (of the battle) of the Trench, the Ansar were saying, “We are those who have sworn allegiance to Muhammad for Jihaid (for ever) as long as we live.” The Prophet replied to them, “O Allah! There is no life except the life of the Hereafter. So honor the Ansar and emigrants with Your Generosity.”

requested him to take the pledge of allegiance from us for migration. He said, “Migration has passed away with its people.” I asked, “For what will you take the pledge of allegiance from us then?” He said, “I will take (the pledge) for Islam and Jihad.”


## Hadith 4:209

_Narrated Abdullah:_

Today a man came to me and asked me a question which I did not know how to answer. He said, “Tell me, if a wealthy active man, well-equipped with arms, goes out on military expeditions with our chiefs, and orders us to do such things as we cannot do (should we obey him?)” I replied, “By Allah, I do not know what to reply you, except that we, were in the company of the Prophet and he used to order us to do a thing once only till we finished it. And no doubt, everyone among you will remain in a good state as long as he obeys Allah. If one is in doubt as to the legality of something, he should ask somebody who would satisfy him, but soon will come a time when you will not find such a man. By Him, except Whom none has the right to be worshipped. I see that the example of what has passed of this life (to what remains thereof) is like a pond whose fresh water has been used up and nothing remains but muddy water.”


## Hadith 4:210

_Narrated Salim Abu An-Nadr:_

The freed slave of 'Umar bin 'Ubaidullah who was 'Umar's clerk: 'Abdullah bin Abi Aufa wrote him (i.e. 'Umar) a letter that contained the following:—

“Once Allah's Apostle (during a holy battle), waited till the sun had declined and then he got up among the people and said, ”O people! Do not wish to face the enemy (in a battle) and ask Allah to save you (from calamities) but if you should face the enemy, then be patient and let it be known to you that Paradise is under the shades of swords.“ He then said,, ”O Allah! The Revealer of the (Holy) Book, the Mover of the clouds, and Defeater of Al-Ahzab (i.e. the clans of infidels), defeat them infidels and bestow victory upon us."


## Hadith 4:211

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

I participated in a Ghazwa along with Allah's Apostle The Prophet met me (on the way) while I was riding a camel of ours used for irrigation and it had got so tired that it could hardly walk. The Prophet asked me, “What is wrong with the camel?” I replied, “It has got tired.” So. Allah's Apostle came from behind it and rebuked it and prayed for it so it started surpassing the other camels and going ahead of them. Then he asked me, “How do you find your camel (now)?” I replied, “I find it quite well, now as it has received your blessings.” He said, “Will you sell it to me?” I felt shy (to refuse his offer) though it was the only camel for irrigation we had. So, I said, “Yes.” He said, “Sell it to me then.” I sold it to him on the condition that I should keep on riding it till I reached Medina. Then I said, “O Allah's Apostle! I am a bridegroom,” and requested him to allow me to go home. He allowed me, and I set out for Medina before the people till I reached Medina, where I met my uncle, who asked me about the camel and I informed him all about it and he blamed me for that. When I took the permission of Allah's Apostle he asked me whether I had married a virgin or a matron and I replied that I had married a matron. He said, “Why hadn't you married a virgin who would have played with you, and you would have played with her?” I replied, “O Allah's Apostle! My father died (or was martyred) and I have some young sisters, so I felt it not proper that I should marry a young girl like them who would neither teach them manners nor serve them. So, I have married a matron so that she may serve them and teach them manners.” When Allah's Apostle arrived in Medina, I took the camel to him the next morning and he gave me its price and gave me the camel itself as well.


## Hadith 4:212

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Once there was a feeling of fright at Medina, so Allah's Apostle rode a horse belonging to Abu Talha and (on his return) he said, “We have not seen anything (fearful), but we found this horse very fast.”


## Hadith 4:213

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Once the people got frightened, so Allah's Apostle rode a slow horse belonging to Abu Talha, and he set out all alone, making the horse gallop. Then the people rode, making their horses gallop after him. On his return he said, “Don't be afraid (there is nothing to be afraid of) (and I have found) this horse a very fast one.” That horse was never excelled in running hence forward. (Qastalani Vol. 5)


## Hadith 4:214

_Narrated 'Umar bin Al-Khattab:_

I gave a horse to be used in Allah's Cause, but later on I saw it being sold. I asked the Prophet whether I could buy it. He said, “Don't buy it and don't take back your gift of charity.”


## Hadith 4:215

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

'Umar gave a horse to be used in Allah's Cause, but later on he found it being sold. So, he intended to buy it and asked Allah's Apostle who said, “Don't buy it and don't take back your gift of charity.”


## Hadith 4:216

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Were it not for the fear that it would be difficult for my followers, I would not have remained behind any Sariya, (army-unit) but I don't have riding camels and have no other means of conveyance to carry them on, and it is hard for me that my companions should remain behind me. No doubt I wish I could fight in Allah's Cause and be martyred and come to life again to be martyred and come to life once more.”


## Hadith 4:217

_Narrated Yali:_

I participated in the Ghazwa of Tabuk along with Allah's Apostle and I gave a young camel to be ridden in Jihad and that was, to me, one of my best deeds. Then I employed a laborer who quarrelled with another person. One of them bit the hand of the other and the latter drew his hand from the mouth of the former pulling out his front tooth. Then the former instituted a suit against the latter before the Prophet who rejected that suit saying, “Do you expect him to put out his hand for you to snap as a male camel snaps (vegetation)?”


## Hadith 4:218

_Narrated Tha'laba bin Abi Malik Al-Qurazi:_

When Qais bin Sad Al-Ansari, who used to carry the flag of the Prophet, intended to perform Hajj, he combed his hair.


## Hadith 4:219

_Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:_

Ali remained behind the Prophet during the battle of Khaibar as he way suffering from some eye trouble but then he said, “How should I stay behind Allah's Apostle?” So, he set out till he joined the Prophet. On the eve of the day of the conquest of Khaibar, Allah's Apostle said, “(No doubt) I will give the flag or, tomorrow, a man whom Allah and His Apostle love or who loves Allah and His apostle will take the flag. Allah will bestow victory upon him.” Suddenly 'Ali joined us though we were not expecting him. The people said, “Here is 'Ali. ”So, Allah's Apostle gave the flag to him and Allah bestowed victory upon him.


## Hadith 4:219

_Narrated Nafi bin Jubair:_

I heard Al Abbas telling Az-Zubair, “The Prophet ordered you to fix the flag here.”


## Hadith 4:220

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “I have been sent with the shortest expressions bearing the widest meanings, and I have been made victorious with terror (cast in the hearts of the enemy), and while I was sleeping, the keys of the treasures of the world were brought to me and put in my hand.” Abu Huraira added: Allah's Apostle has left the world and now you, people, are bringing out those treasures (i.e. the Prophet did not benefit by them).


## Hadith 4:221

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Abu Sufyan said, “Heraclius sent for me when I was in 'llya' (i.e. Jerusalem). Then he asked for the letter of Allah's Apostle and when he had finished its reading there was a great hue and cry around him and the voices grew louder and we were asked to quit the place. When we were turned out, I said to my companions, 'The cause of Ibn Abi Kabsha has become conspicuous as the King of Bani Al-Asfar is afraid of him.' ”


## Hadith 4:222

_Narrated Asma:_

I prepared the journey-food for Allah's Apostle in Abu Bakr's house when he intended to emigrate to Medina. I could not find anything to tie the food-container and the water skin with. So, I said to Abu Bakr, “By Allah, I do not find anything to tie (these things) with except my waist belt.” He said, “Cut it into two pieces and tie the water-skin with one piece and the food-container with the other (the sub-narrator added, ”She did accordingly and that was the reason for calling her Dhatun-Nitaqain (i.e. two-belted woman))."


## Hadith 4:223

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

During the life-time of the Prophet we used to take the meat of sacrificed animals (as journey food) to Medina. (See Hadith No. 474 Vol. 7)


## Hadith 4:224

_Narrated Suwaid bin An-Nu'man:_

That he went out in the company o; the Prophet during the year of Khaibar (campaign till they reached a place called As-Sahba', the lower part of Khaibar. They offered the 'Asr prayer (there) and the Prophet asked for the food. Nothing but Sawiq was brought to the Prophet. So, they chewed it and ate it and drank water. After that the Prophet got up, washed his mouth, and they too washed their mouths and then offered the prayer.


## Hadith 4:225

_Narrated Salama:_

Once the journey-food of the people ran short and they were in great need. So, they came to the Prophet to take his permission for slaughtering their camels, and he permitted them. Then 'Umar met them and they informed him about it. He said, “What will sustain you after your camels (are finished)?” Then 'Umar went to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle! What will sustain them after their camels (are finished)?” Allah's Apostle said, “Make an announcement amongst the people that they should bring all their remaining food (to me).” (They brought it and) the Prophet invoked Allah and asked for His Blessings for it. Then he asked them to bring their food utensils and the people started filling their food utensils with their hands till they were satisfied. Allah's Apostle then said, “I testify that None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and I am His Apostle. ”


## Hadith 4:226

_Narrated Wahb bin Kaisan:_

Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, “We set out, and we were three-hundred men carrying our journey-food on our shoulders. Then we began to eat a single date each per day.” A man asked (Jabir), “O Abu 'Abdullah! How could a person be satisfied with a single date?” Jabir replied, “We realized the value of that one date when we could not even have that much till we reached the sea-shore, when all of a sudden we saw a huge fish cast by the sea. So, we ate of it as much as we wished for eighteen days.”


## Hadith 4:227

_Narrated Aisha:_

That she said, “O Allah's Apostle! Your companions are returning with the reward of both Hajj and 'Umra, while I am returning with (the reward of) Hajj only.” He said to her, “Go, and let 'Abdur-Rahman (i.e. your brother) make you sit behind him (on the animal).” So, he ordered 'AbdurRahman to let her perform 'Umra from Al-Tan'im. Then the Prophet waited for her at the higher region of Mecca till she returned.


## Hadith 4:228

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Bakr As-Siddiq:_

The Prophet ordered me to let 'Aisha sit behind me (on the animal) and to let her perform 'Umra from At-Tan'im.


## Hadith 4:229

_Narrated Anas:_

I was riding behind Abu Talha (on the same) riding animal) and (the Prophet's companions) were reciting Talbiya aloud for both Hajj and 'Umra.


## Hadith 4:230

_Narrated 'Urwa from Usama bin Zaid:_

Allah's Apostle rode a donkey on which there was a saddle covered by a velvet sheet and let Usama ride behind him (on the donkey).


## Hadith 4:231

_Narrated Nafi from 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle came to Mecca through its higher region on the day of the Conquest (of Mecca) riding his she-camel on which Usama was riding behind him. Bilal and 'Uthman bin Talha, one of the servants of the Ka'ba, were also accompanying him till he made his camel kneel in the mosque and ordered the latter to bring the key of the Ka'ba. He opened the door of the Ka'ba and Allah's Apostle entered in the company of Usama, Bilal and 'Uthman, and stayed in it for a long period. When he came out, the people rushed to it, and 'Abdullah bin 'Umar was the first to enter it and found Bilal standing behind the door. He asked Bilal, “Where did the Prophet offer his prayer?” He pointed to the place where he had offered his prayer. 'Abdullah said, “I forgot to ask him how many Rakat he had performed.”


## Hadith 4:232

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “There is a (compulsory) Sadaqa (charity) to be given for every joint of the human body (as a sign of gratitude to Allah) everyday the sun rises. To judge justly between two persons is regarded as Sadaqa, and to help a man concerning his riding animal by helping him to ride it or by lifting his luggage on to it, is also regarded as Sadaqa, and (saying) a good word is also Sadaqa, and every step taken on one's way to offer the compulsory prayer (in the mosque) is also Sadaqa and to remove a harmful thing from the way is also Sadaqa.”


## Hadith 4:233

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle forbade the people to travel to a hostile country carrying (copies of) the Quran.


## Hadith 4:234

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet reached Khaibar in the morning, while the people were coming out carrying their spades over their shoulders. When they saw him they said, “This is Muhammad and his army! Muhammad and his army!” So, they took refuge in the fort. The Prophet raised both his hands and said, “Allahu Akbar, Khaibar is ruined, for when we approach a nation (i.e. enemy to fight) then miserable is the morning of the warned ones.” Then we found some donkeys which we (killed and) cooked: The announcer of the Prophet announced: “Allah and His Apostle forbid you to eat donkey's meat.” So, all the pots including their contents were turned upside down.


## Hadith 4:235

_Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:_

We were in the company of Allah's Apostle (during Hajj). Whenever we went up a high place we used to say: “None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, and Allah is Greater,” and our voices used to rise, so the Prophet said, “O people! Be merciful to yourselves (i.e. don't raise your voice), for you are not calling a deaf or an absent one, but One Who is with you, no doubt He is All-Hearer, ever Near (to all things).”


## Hadith 4:236

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Whenever we went up a place we would say, “Allahu—Akbar (i.e. Allah is Greater)”, and whenever we went down a place we would say, “Subhan Allah.”


## Hadith 4:237

_Narrated Jabir:_

Whenever we went up a place we would say Takbir, and whenever we went down we would say, “Subhan Allah.”


## Hadith 4:238

_Narrated Abdullah bin Umar:_

Whenever the Prophet returned from the Hajj or the 'Umra or a Ghazwa, he would say Takbir thrice. Whenever he came upon a mountain path or wasteland, and then he would say, “None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, Alone Who has no partner. All the Kingdom belongs to Him and all the praises are for Him and He is Omnipotent. We are returning with repentance, worshipping, prostrating ourselves and praising our Lord. Allah fulfilled His Promise, granted victory to His slave and He Alone defeated all the clans.”


## Hadith 4:239

_Narrated Ibrahim Abu Isma'il As-Saksaki:_

I heard Abu Burda who accompanied Yazid bin Abi Kabsha on a journey. Yazid used to observe fasting on journeys. Abu Burda said to him, “I heard Abu Musa several times saying that Allah's Apostle said, 'When a slave falls ill or travels, then he will get reward similar to that he gets for good deeds practiced at home when in good health.”


## Hadith 4:240

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

On the day of the battle of the Trench, the Prophet wanted somebody from amongst the people to volunteer to be a reconnoitre. Az-Zubair volunteered. He demanded the same again and Az-Zubair volunteered again. Then he repeated the same demand (thrice) and AzZubair volunteered once more. The Prophet then said, “ Every prophet has a disciple and my disciple is Az-Zubair.”


## Hadith 4:241

_Narrated Ibn' Umar:_

from the Prophet the following Hadith (No. 242).


## Hadith 4:242

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “If the people knew what I know about traveling alone, then nobody would travel alone at night.”


## Hadith 4:243

_Narrated Hisham's father:_

Usama bin Zaid was asked at what pace the Prophet rode during Hajjat-ul-Wada' “He rode at a medium pace, but when he came upon an open way he would go at full pace.”


## Hadith 4:244

_Narrated Aslam:_

While I was in the company of 'Abdullah bin 'Umar on the way to Mecca, he received the news of the severe illness of Safiya bint Abi Ubaid (i.e. his wife), so he proceeded at greater speed, and when the twilight disappeared, he dismounted and offered the Maghrib and 'Isha 'prayers together and said, “ I saw the Prophet delaying the Maghrib prayer to offer it along with the 'Isha' when he was in a hurry on a journey.”


## Hadith 4:245

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Journey is a piece of torture, for it disturbs one's sleep, eating and drinking. So, when you fulfill your job, you should hurry up to your family.”


## Hadith 4:246

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Umar bin Al-Khattab gave a horse to be ridden in Allah's Cause and then he found it being sold. He intended to purchase it. So, he consulted Allah's Apostle who said, “Don't buy it and don't take back your gift of charity.”


## Hadith 4:247

_Narrated Aslam:_

I heard 'Umar bin Al-Khattab saying, “I gave a horse to be ridden in Allah's Cause and the person who got it intended to sell it or neglected it. So, I wanted to buy it as I thought he would sell it cheap. I consulted the Prophet who said, ”Do not buy it even if for one Dirham, because he who takes back his gift is like a dog swallowing its vomit."


## Hadith 4:248

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:_

A man came to the Prophet asking his permission to take part in Jihad. The Prophet asked him, “Are your parents alive?” He replied in the affirmative. The Prophet said to him, “Then exert yourself in their service.”


## Hadith 4:249

_Narrated Abu Bashir Al-Ansari:_

That he was in the company of Allah's Apostle on some of his journeys. (The sub-narrator 'Abdullah adds, “I think that Abu Bashir also said, 'And the people were at their sleeping places.”) Allah's Apostle sent a messenger ordering: “There shall not remain any necklace of string or any other kind of necklace round the necks of camels except it is cut off.”


## Hadith 4:250

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

That he heard the Prophet saying, “It is not permissible for a man to be alone with a woman, and no lady should travel except with a Muhram (i.e. her husband or a person whom she cannot marry in any case for ever; e.g. her father, brother, etc.).” Then a man got up and said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have enlisted in the army for such-and-such Ghazwa and my wife is proceeding for Hajj.” Allah's Apostle said, “Go, and perform the Hajj with your wife.”


## Hadith 4:251

_Narrated 'Ubaidullah bin Abi Rafi:_

I heard 'Ali saying, “Allah's Apostle sent me, Az-Zubair and Al-Miqdad somewhere saying, 'Proceed till you reach Rawdat Khakh. There you will find a lady with a letter. Take the letter from her.' ” So, we set out and our horses ran at full pace till we got at Ar-Rawda where we found the lady and said (to her). “Take out the letter.” She replied, “I have no letter with me.” We said, “Either you take out the letter or else we will take off your clothes.” So, she took it out of her braid. We brought the letter to Allah's Apostle and it contained a statement from Hatib bin Abi Balta a to some of the Meccan pagans informing them of some of the intentions of Allah's Apostle. Then Allah's Apostle said, “O Hatib! What is this?” Hatib replied, “O Allah's Apostle! Don't hasten to give your judgment about me. I was a man closely connected with the Quraish, but I did not belong to this tribe, while the other emigrants with you, had their relatives in Mecca who would protect their dependents and property . So, I wanted to recompense for my lacking blood relation to them by doing them a favor so that they might protect my dependents. I did this neither because of disbelief not apostasy nor out of preferring Kufr (disbelief) to Islam.” Allah's Apostle, said, “Hatib has told you the truth.” Umar said, O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop off the head of this hypocrite.“ Allah's Apostle said, ”Hatib participated in the battle of Badr, and who knows, perhaps Allah has already looked at the Badr warriors and said, 'Do whatever you like, for I have forgiven you."


## Hadith 4:252

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

When it was the day (of the battle) of Badr, prisoners of war were brought including Al-Abbas who was undressed. The Prophet looked for a shirt for him. It was found that the shirt of 'Abdullah bin Ubai would do, so the Prophet let him wear it. That was the reason why the Prophet took off and gave his own shirt to 'Abdullah. (The narrator adds, “He had done the Prophet some favor for which the Prophet liked to reward him.”)


## Hadith 4:253

_Narrated Sahl:_

On the day (of the battle) of Khaibar the Prophet said, “Tomorrow I will give the flag to somebody who will be given victory (by Allah) and who loves Allah and His Apostle and is loved by Allah and His Apostle.” So, the people wondered all that night as to who would receive the flag and in the morning everyone hoped that he would be that person. Allah's Apostle asked, “Where is 'Ali?” He was told that 'Ali was suffering from eye-trouble, so he applied saliva to his eyes and invoked Allah to cure him. He at once got cured as if he had no ailment. The Prophet gave him the flag. 'Ali said, “Should I fight them till they become like us (i.e. Muslim)?” The Prophet said, “Go to them patiently and calmly till you enter the land. Then, invite them to Islam, and inform them what is enjoined upon them, for, by Allah, if Allah gives guidance to somebody through you, it is better for you than possessing red camels.”


## Hadith 4:254

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Allah wonders at those people who will enter Paradise in chains.”


## Hadith 4:255

_Narrated Abu Burda's father:_

The Prophet said, “Three persons will get their reward twice. (One is) a person who has a slave girl and he educates her properly and teaches her good manners properly (without violence) and then manumits and marries her. Such a person will get a double reward. (Another is) a believer from the people of the scriptures who has been a true believer and then he believes in the Prophet (Muhammad). Such a person will get a double reward. (The third is) a slave who observes Allah's Rights and Obligations and is sincere to his master.”


## Hadith 4:256

_Narrated As-Sab bin Jaththama:_

The Prophet passed by me at a place called Al-Abwa or Waddan, and was asked whether it was permissible to attack the pagan warriors at night with the probability of exposing their women and children to danger. The Prophet replied, “They (i.e. women and children) are from them (i.e. pagans).” I also heard the Prophet saying, “The institution of Hima is invalid except for Allah and His Apostle.”


## Hadith 4:257

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

During some of the Ghazawat of the Prophet a woman was found killed. Allah's Apostle disapproved the killing of women and children.


## Hadith 4:258

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

During some of the Ghazawat of Allah's Apostle a woman was found killed, so Allah's Apostle forbade the killing of women and children.


## Hadith 4:259

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle sent us in a mission (i.e. am army-unit) and said, “If you find so-and-so and so-and-so, burn both of them with fire.” When we intended to depart, Allah's Apostle said, “I have ordered you to burn so-and-so and so-and-so, and it is none but Allah Who punishes with fire, so, if you find them, kill them.”


## Hadith 4:260

_Narrated Ikrima:_

Ali burnt some people and this news reached Ibn 'Abbas, who said, “Had I been in his place I would not have burnt them, as the Prophet said, 'Don't punish (anybody) with Allah's Punishment.' No doubt, I would have killed them, for the Prophet said, 'If somebody (a Muslim) discards his religion, kill him.' ”


## Hadith 4:261

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

A group of eight men from the tribe of 'Ukil came to the Prophet and then they found the climate of Medina unsuitable for them. So, they said, “O Allah's Apostle! Provide us with some milk.” Allah's Apostle said, “I recommend that you should join the herd of camels.” So they went and drank the urine and the milk of the camels (as a medicine) till they became healthy and fat. Then they killed the shepherd and drove away the camels, and they became unbelievers after whey were Muslims. When the Prophet was informed by a shouter for help, he sent some men in their pursuit, and before the sun rose high, they were brought, and he had their hands and feet cut off. Then he ordered for nails which were heated and passed over their eyes, and whey were left in the Harra (i.e. rocky land in Medina). They asked for water, and nobody provided them with water till they died (Abu Qilaba, a sub-narrator said, “They committed murder and theft and fought against Allah and His Apostle, and spread evil in the land.”)


## Hadith 4:262

_Narrated Jarir:_

Allah's Apostles said to me, “Will you relieve me from Dhul-Khalasa? Dhul-Khalasa was a house (of an idol) belonging to the tribe of Khath'am called Al-Ka'ba Al-Yama-niya. So, I proceeded with one hundred and fifty cavalry men from the tribe of Ahmas, who were excellent knights. It happened that I could not sit firm on horses, so the Prophet , stroke me over my chest till I saw his finger-marks over my chest, he said, 'O Allah! Make him firm and make him a guiding and rightly guided man.' ” Jarir proceeded towards that house, and dismantled and burnt it. Then he sent a messenger to Allah's Apostle informing him of that. Jarir's messenger said, “By Him Who has sent you with the Truth, I did not come to you till I had left it like an emancipated or gabby camel (i.e. completely marred and spoilt).” Jarir added, “The Prophet asked for Allah's Blessings for the horses and the men of Ahmas five times.”


## Hadith 4:263

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet burnt the date-palms of Bani An-Nadir.


## Hadith 4:264

_Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:_

Allah's Apostle sent a group of Ansari men to kill Abu-Rafi. One of them set out and entered their (i.e. the enemies) fort. That man said, “I hid myself in a stable for their animals. They closed the fort gate. Later they lost a donkey of theirs, so they went out in its search. I, too, went out along with them, pretending to look for it. They found the donkey and entered their fort. And I, too, entered along with them. They closed the gate of the fort at night, and kept its keys in a small window where I could see them. When those people slept, I took the keys and opened the gate of the fort and came upon Abu Rafi and said, 'O Abu Rafi. When he replied me, I proceeded towards the voice and hit him. He shouted and I came out to come back, pretending to be a helper. I said, 'O Abu Rafi, changing the tone of my voice. He asked me, 'What do you want; woe to your mother?' I asked him, 'What has happened to you?' He said, 'I don't know who came to me and hit me.' Then I drove my sword into his belly and pushed it forcibly till it touched the bone. Then I came out, filled with puzzlement and went towards a ladder of theirs in order to get down but I fell down and sprained my foot. I came to my companions and said, 'I will not leave till I hear the wailing of the women.' So, I did not leave till I heard the women bewailing Abu Rafi, the merchant pf Hijaz. Then I got up, feeling no ailment, (and we proceeded) till we came upon the Prophet and informed him.”


## Hadith 4:265

_Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:_

Allah's Apostle sent a group of the Ansar to Abu Rafi. Abdullah bin Atik entered his house at night and killed him while he was sleeping.


## Hadith 4:266

_Narrated Salim Abu An-Nadr:_

(the freed slave of 'Umar bin 'Ubaidullah) I was Umar's clerk. Once Abdullah bin Abi Aufa wrote a letter to 'Umar when he proceeded to Al-Haruriya. I read in it that Allah's Apostle in one of his military expeditions against the enemy, waited till the sun declined and then he got up amongst the people saying, “O people! Do not wish to meet the enemy, and ask Allah for safety, but when you face the enemy, be patient, and remember that Paradise is under the shades of swords.” Then he said, “O Allah, the Revealer of the Holy Book, and the Mover of the clouds and the Defeater of the clans, defeat them, and grant us victory over them.”


## Hadith 4:266

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said: “Do not wish to meet the enemy, but when you meet face) the enemy, be patient.”


## Hadith 4:267

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Khosrau will be ruined, and there will be no Khosrau after him, and Caesar will surely be ruined and there will be no Caesar after him, and you will spend their treasures in Allah's Cause.” He called, "War is deceit'.


## Hadith 4:268

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle called,: “War is deceit”.


## Hadith 4:269

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “War is deceit.”


## Hadith 4:270

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “Who is ready to kill Ka'b bin Al-Ashraf who has really hurt Allah and His Apostle?” Muhammad bin Maslama said, “O Allah's Apostle! Do you like me to kill him?” He replied in the affirmative. So, Muhammad bin Maslama went to him (i.e. Ka'b) and said, “This person (i.e. the Prophet) has put us to task and asked us for charity.” Ka'b replied, “By Allah, you will get tired of him.” Muhammad said to him, “We have followed him, so we dislike to leave him till we see the end of his affair.” Muhammad bin Maslama went on talking to him in this way till he got the chance to kill him.


## Hadith 4:271

_Narrated Jabir:_

The Prophet said, “Who is ready to kill Ka'b bin Ashraf (i.e. a Jew).” Muhammad bin Maslama replied, “Do you like me to kill him?” The Prophet replied in the affirmative. Muhammad bin Maslama said, “Then allow me to say what I like.” The Prophet replied, “I do (i.e. allow you).”


## Hadith 4:272

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

I saw Allah's Apostle on the day (of the battle) of the Trench carrying earth till the hair of his chest were covered with dust and he was a hairy man. He was reciting the following verses of 'Abdullah (bin Rawaha): “O Allah, were it not for You, We would not have been guided, Nor would we have given in charity, nor prayed. So, bestow on us calmness, and when we meet the enemy. Then make our feet firm, for indeed, Yet if they want to put us in affliction, (i.e. want to fight against us) we would not (flee but withstand them).” The Prophet used to raise his voice while reciting these verses. (See Hadith No. 432, Vol. 5).


## Hadith 4:273

_Narrated Jarir:_

Allah's Apostle did not screen himself from me since my embracing Islam, and whenever he saw me he would receive me with a smile. Once I told him that I could not sit firm on horses. He stroke me on the chest with his hand and said, “O Allah! Make him firm and make him a guiding and a rightly-guided man.”


## Hadith 4:274

_Narrated Abu Hazim:_

The people asked Sahl bin Sad As-Sa' idi “With what thing (medicine) was the wound of Allah's Apostle treated?” He replied, “There is none left (living) amongst the people who knows it better than. 'Ali used to bring water in his shield and Fatima (i.e. the Prophet's daughter) used to wash the blood off his face. Then a mat (of palm leaves) was burnt and its ash was inserted in the wound of Allah's Apostle.”


## Hadith 4:275

_Narrated Abu Burda:_

That his father said, “The Prophet sent Mu'adh and Abu Musa to Yemen telling them. 'Treat the people with ease and don't be hard on them; give them glad tidings and don't fill them with aversion; and love each other, and don't differ.”


## Hadith 4:276

_Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:_

The Prophet appointed 'Abdullah bin Jubair as the commander of the infantry men (archers) who were fifty on the day (of the battle) of Uhud. He instructed them, “Stick to your place, and don't leave it even if you see birds snatching us, till I send for you; and if you see that we have defeated the infidels and made them flee, even then you should not leave your place till I send for you.” Then the infidels were defeated. By Allah, I saw the women fleeing lifting up their clothes revealing their leg-bangles and their legs. So, the companions of 'Abdullah bin Jubair said, “The booty! O people, the booty ! Your companions have become victorious, what are you waiting for now?” 'Abdullah bin Jubair said, “Have you forgotten what Allah's Apostle said to you?” They replied, “By Allah! We will go to the people (i.e. the enemy) and collect our share from the war booty.” But when they went to them, they were forced to turn back defeated. At that time Allah's Apostle in their rear was calling them back. Only twelve men remained with the Prophet and the infidels martyred seventy men from us.

On the day (of the battle) of Badr, the Prophet and his companions had caused the 'Pagans to lose 140 men, seventy of whom were captured and seventy were killed. Then Abu Sufyan asked thrice, “Is Muhammad present amongst these people?” The Prophet ordered his companions not to answer him. Then he asked thrice, “Is the son of Abu Quhafa present amongst these people?” He asked again thrice, “Is the son of Al-Khattab present amongst these people?” He then returned to his companions and said, “As for these (men), they have been killed.” 'Umar could not control himself and said (to Abu Sufyan), “You told a lie, by Allah! O enemy of Allah! All those you have mentioned are alive, and the thing which will make you unhappy is still there.” Abu Sufyan said, “Our victory today is a counterbalance to yours in the battle of Badr, and in war (the victory) is always undecided and is shared in turns by the belligerents, and you will find some of your (killed) men mutilated, but I did not urge my men to do so, yet I do not feel sorry for their deed” After that he started reciting cheerfully, “O Hubal, be high! (1) On that the Prophet said (to his companions), ”Why don't you answer him back?“ They said, ”O Allah's Apostle What shall we say?“ He said, ”Say, Allah is Higher and more Sublime.“ (Then) Abu Sufyan said, ”We have the (idol) Al Uzza, and you have no Uzza.“ The Prophet said (to his companions), ”Why don't you answer him back?“ They asked, ”O Allah's Apostle! What shall we say?“ He said, ”Says Allah is our Helper and you have no helper."


## Hadith 4:277

_Narrated Anas:_

Allah's Apostle was the (most handsome), most generous and the bravest of all the people. Once the people of Medina got frightened having heard an uproar at night. So, the Prophet met the people while he was riding an unsaddled horse belonging to Abu Talha and carrying his sword (slung over his shoulder). He said (to them), “Don't get scared, don't get scared.” Then he added, “I found it (i.e the horse) very fast.”


## Hadith 4:278

_Narrated Salama:_

I went out of Medina towards Al-Ghaba. When I reached the mountain path of Al-Ghaba, a slave of 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf met me. I said to him, “Woe to you! What brought you here?” He replied, “The she-camels of the Prophet have been taken away.” I said, “Who took them?” He said, “Ghatafan and Fazara.” So, I sent three cries, “O Sabaha-h ! O Sabahah !” so loudly that made the people in between its (i.e. Medina's) two mountains hear me. Then I rushed till I met them after they had taken the camels away. I started throwing arrows at them saying, “I am the son of Al-Akwa”; and today perish the mean people!“ So, I saved the she-camels from them before they (i.e. the robbers) could drink water. When I returned driving the camels, the Prophet met me, I said, ”O Allah's Apostle Those people are thirsty and I have prevented them from drinking water, so send some people to chase them.“ The Prophet said, ”O son of Al-Akwa', you have gained power (over your enemy), so forgive (them). (Besides) those people are now being entertained by their folk."


## Hadith 4:279

_Narrated Abu Ishaq:_

A man asked Al-Bara “O Abu 'Umara! Did you flee on the day (of the battle) of Hunain?” Al-Bara replied while I was listening, "As for Allah's Apostle he did not flee on that day. Abu Sufyan bin Al-Harith was holding the reins of his mule and when the pagans attacked him, he dismounted and started saying, 'I am the Prophet, and there is no lie about it; I am the son of 'Abdul Muttalib.' On that day nobody was seen braver than the Prophet


## Hadith 4:280

_Narrated Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:_

When the tribe of Bani Quraiza was ready to accept Sad's judgment, Allah's Apostle sent for Sad who was near to him. Sad came, riding a donkey and when he came near, Allah's Apostle said (to the Ansar), “Stand up for your leader.” Then Sad came and sat beside Allah's Apostle who said to him. “These people are ready to accept your judgment.” Sad said, “I give the judgment that their warriors should be killed and their children and women should be taken as prisoners.” The Prophet then remarked, “O Sad! You have judged amongst them with (or similar to) the judgment of the King Allah.”


## Hadith 4:281

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle sent a Sariya of ten men as spies under the leadership of 'Asim bin Thabit al-Ansari, the grandfather of 'Asim bin Umar Al-Khattab. They proceeded till they reached Hadaa, a place between 'Usfan, and Mecca, and their news reached a branch of the tribe of Hudhail called Bani Lihyan. About two-hundred men, who were all archers, hurried to follow their tracks till they found the place where they had eaten dates they had brought with them from Medina. They said, “These are the dates of Yathrib (i.e. Medina), ”and continued following their tracks When 'Asim and his companions saw their pursuers, they went up a high place and the infidels circled them. The infidels said to them, “Come down and surrender, and we promise and guarantee you that we will not kill any one of you” 'Asim bin Thabit; the leader of the Sariya said, “By Allah! I will not come down to be under the protection of infidels. O Allah! Convey our news to Your Prophet. Then the infidels threw arrows at them till they martyred 'Asim along with six other men, and three men came down accepting their promise and convention, and they were Khubaib-al-Ansari and Ibn Dathina and another man So, when the infidels captured them, they undid the strings of their bows and tied them. Then the third (of the captives) said, ”This is the first betrayal. By Allah! I will not go with you. No doubt these, namely the martyred, have set a good example to us." So, they dragged him and tried to compel him to accompany them, but as he refused, they killed him. They took Khubaid and Ibn Dathina with them and sold them (as slaves) in Mecca (and all that took place) after the battle of Badr. Khubaib was bought by the sons of Al-Harith bin 'Amir bin Naufal bin 'Abd Manaf. It was Khubaib who had killed Al-Harith bin 'Amir on the day (of the battle of) Badr. So, Khubaib remained a prisoner with those people.

Al-Harith had told him, “When those people gathered (to kill Khubaib) he borrowed a razor from me to shave his pubes and I gave it to him. Then he took a son of mine while I was unaware when he came upon him. I saw him placing my son on his thigh and the razor was in his hand. I got scared so much that Khubaib noticed the agitation on my face and said, 'Are you afraid that I will kill him? No, I will never do so.' By Allah, I never saw a prisoner better than Khubaib. By Allah, one day I saw him eating of a bunch of grapes in his hand while he was chained in irons, and there was no fruit at that time in Mecca.” The daughter of Al-Harith used to say, “It was a boon Allah bestowed upon Khubaib.” When they took him out of the Sanctuary (of Mecca) to kill him outside its boundaries, Khubaib requested them to let him offer two Rakat (prayer). They allowed him and he offered Two Rakat and then said, “Hadn't I been afraid that you would think that I was afraid (of being killed), I would have prolonged the prayer. O Allah, kill them all with no exception.” (He then recited the poetic verse):— “I being martyred as a Muslim, Do not mind how I am killed in Allah's Cause, For my killing is for Allah's Sake, And if Allah wishes, He will bless the amputated parts of a torn body” Then the son of Al Harith killed him. So, it was Khubaib who set the tradition for any Muslim sentenced to death in captivity, to offer a two-Rak'at prayer (before being killed). Allah fulfilled the invocation of Asim bin Thabit on that very day on which he was martyred. The Prophet informed his companions of their news and what had happened to them. Later on when some infidels from Quraish were informed that Asim had been killed, they sent some people to fetch a part of his body (i.e. his head) by which he would be recognized. (That was because) 'Asim had killed one of their chiefs on the day (of the battle) of Badr. So, a swarm of wasps, resembling a shady cloud, were sent to hover over Asim and protect him from their messenger and thus they could not cut off anything from his flesh.


## Hadith 4:282

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

The Prophet said, “Free the captives, feed the hungry and pay a visit to the sick.”


## Hadith 4:283

_Narrated Abu Juhaifa:_

I asked Ali, “Do you have the knowledge of any Divine Inspiration besides what is in Allah's Book?” 'Ali replied, “No, by Him Who splits the grain of corn and creates the soul. I don't think we have such knowledge, but we have the ability of understanding which Allah may endow a person with, so that he may understand the Qur'an, and we have what is written in this paper as well.” I asked, “What is written in this paper?” He replied, “(The regulations of) blood-money, the freeing of captives, and the judgment that no Muslim should be killed for killing an infidel.”


## Hadith 4:284

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Some Ansari men asked permission from Allah's Apostle saying, “O Allah's Apostle! Allow us not to take the ransom of our nephew Al Abbas. The Prophet replied, ”Do not leave a single Dirham thereof."

(In another narration) Anas said, “Some wealth was brought to the Prophet from Bahrain. Al Abbas came to him and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Give me (some of it), as I have paid my and 'Aqil's ransom.' The Prophet said, 'Take,' and gave him in his garment.”


## Hadith 4:285

_Narrated Jubair:_

(who was among the captives of the Battle of Badr) I heard the Prophet reciting 'Surat-at-Tur' in the Maghrib prayer.


## Hadith 4:286

_Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:_

“An infidel spy came to the Prophet while he was on a journey. The spy sat with the companions of the Prophet and started talking and then went away. The Prophet said (to his companions), 'Chase and kill him.' So, I killed him.” The Prophet then gave him the belongings of the killed spy (in addition to his share of the war booty).


## Hadith 4:287

_Narrated 'Amr bin Maimun:_

Umar (after he was stabbed), instructed (his would-be-successor) saying, “I urge him (i.e. the new Caliph) to take care of those non-Muslims who are under the protection of Allah and His Apostle in that he should observe the convention agreed upon with them, and fight on their behalf (to secure their safety) and he should not over-tax them beyond their capability.”


## Hadith 4:288

_Narrated Said bin Jubair:_

Ibn 'Abbas said, “Thursday! What (great thing) took place on Thursday!” Then he started weeping till his tears wetted the gravels of the ground . Then he said, “On Thursday the illness of Allah's Apostle was aggravated and he said, ”Fetch me writing materials so that I may have something written to you after which you will never go astray.“ The people (present there) differed in this matter and people should not differ before a prophet. They said, ”Allah's Apostle is seriously sick.' The Prophet said, “Let me alone, as the state in which I am now, is better than what you are calling me for.” The Prophet on his death-bed, gave three orders saying, “Expel the pagans from the Arabian Peninsula, respect and give gifts to the foreign delegates as you have seen me dealing with them.” I forgot the third (order)“ (Ya'qub bin Muhammad said, ”I asked Al-Mughira bin 'Abdur-Rahman about the Arabian Peninsula and he said, 'It comprises Mecca, Medina, Al-Yama-ma and Yemen.“ Ya'qub added, ”And Al-Arj, the beginning of Tihama.")


## Hadith 4:289

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

'Umar saw a silken cloak being sold in the market and he brought it to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Buy this cloak and adorn yourself with it on the 'Id festivals and on meeting the delegations.” Allah's Apostle replied, “This is the dress for the one who will have no share in the Hereafter (or, this is worn by one who will have no share in the Hereafter).” After sometime had passed, Allah's Apostle sent a silken cloak to 'Umar. 'Umar took it and brought it to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! You have said that this is the dress of that who will have no share in the Hereafter (or, this is worn by one who will have no share in the Hereafter), yet you have sent me this!” The Prophet said,“ I have sent it) so that you may sell it or fulfill with it some of your needs.”


## Hadith 4:290

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Umar and a group of the companions of the Prophet set out with the Prophet to Ibn Saiyad. He found him playing with some boys near the hillocks of Bani Maghala. Ibn Saiyad at that time was nearing his puberty. He did not notice (the Prophet's presence) till the Prophet stroked him on the back with his hand and said, “Ibn Saiyad! Do you testify that I am Allah's Apostle?” Ibn Saiyad looked at him and said, “I testify that you are the Apostle of the illiterates.”

Then Ibn Saiyad asked the Prophet. “Do you testify that I am the apostle of Allah?” The Prophet said to him, “I believe in Allah and His Apostles.” Then the Prophet said (to Ibn Saiyad). “What do you see?” Ibn Saiyad replied, “True people and false ones visit me.” The Prophet said, “Your mind is confused as to this matter.” The Prophet added, “ I have kept something (in my mind) for you.” Ibn Saiyad said, “It is Ad-Dukh.” The Prophet said (to him), “Shame be on you! You cannot cross your limits.” On that 'Umar said, “O Allah's Apostle! Allow me to chop his head off.” The Prophet said, “If he should be him (i.e. Ad-Dajjal) then you cannot overpower him, and should he not be him, then you are not going to benefit by murdering him.”


## Hadith 4:290

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

(Later on) Allah's Apostle (once again) went along with Ubai bin Ka'b to the garden of date-palms where Ibn Saiyad was staying. When the Prophet entered the garden, he started hiding himself behind the trunks of the date-palms as he wanted to hear something from the Ibn Saiyad before the latter could see him. Ibn Saiyad was lying in his bed, covered with a velvet sheet from where his murmurs were heard. Ibn Saiyad's mother saw the Prophet while he was hiding himself behind the trunks of the date-palms. She addressed Ibn Saiyad, “O Saf!” (And this was his name). Ibn Saiyad got up. The Prophet said, “Had this woman let him to himself, he would have revealed the reality of his case.” Then the Prophet got up amongst the people, glorifying Allah as He deserves, he mentioned Ad-Dajjal, saying, “I warn you about him (i.e. Ad-Dajjal) and there is no prophet who did not warn his nation about him, and Noah warned his nation about him, but I tell you a statement which no prophet informed his nation of. You should understand that he is a one-eyed man and Allah is not one-eyed.”


## Hadith 4:291

_Narrated Usama bin Zaid:_

I asked the Prophet during his Hajj, “O Allah's Apostle! Where will you stay tomorrow?” He said, “Has Aqil left for us any house?” He then added, “Tomorrow we will stay at Khaif Bani Kinana, i.e. Al-Muhassab, where (the Pagans of) Quraish took an oath of Kufr (i.e. to be loyal to heathenism) in that Bani Kinana got allied with Quraish against Bani Hashim on the terms that they would not deal with the members of the is tribe or give them shelter.” (Az-Zuhri said, “Khaif means valley.”) (See Hadith No. 659, Vol. 2)


## Hadith 4:292

_Narrated Aslam:_

Umar bin Al-Khattab appointed a freed slave of his, called Hunai, manager of the Hima (i.e. a pasture devoted for grazing the animals of the Zakat or other specified animals). He said to him, “O Hunai! Don't oppress the Muslims and ward off their curse (invocations against you) for the invocation of the oppressed is responded to (by Allah); and allow the shepherd having a few camels and those having a few sheep (to graze their animals), and take care not to allow the livestock of 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf and the livestock of ('Uthman) bin 'Affan, for if their livestock should perish, then they have their farms and gardens, while those who own a few camels and those who own a few sheep, if their livestock should perish, would bring their dependents to me and appeal for help saying, 'O chief of the believers! O chief of the believers!' Would I then neglect them? (No, of course). So, I find it easier to let them have water and grass rather than to give them gold and silver (from the Muslims' treasury). By Allah, these people think that I have been unjust to them. This is their land, and during the pre-lslamic period, they fought for it and they embraced Islam (willingly) while it was in their possession. By Him in Whose Hand my life is! Were it not for the animals (in my custody) which I give to be ridden for striving in Allah's Cause, I would not have turned even a span of their land into a Hima.”


## Hadith 4:293

_Narrated Hudhaifa:_

The Prophet said (to us), “ List the names of those people who have announced that they are Muslims.” So, we listed one thousand and five hundred men. Then we wondered, “Should we be afraid (of infidels) although we are one thousand and five hundred in number?” No doubt, we witnessed ourselves being afflicted with such bad trials that one would have to offer the prayer alone in fear.


## Hadith 4:294

_Narrated Al-Amash:_

“We (listed the Muslims and) found them five hundred.” And Abu Muawiya said, “Between six-hundred to seven-hundred.”


## Hadith 4:295

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

A man came to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have enlisted in the army for such-and-such Ghazwa, and my wife is leaving for Hajj.” Allah's Apostle said, “Go back and perform Hajj with your wife.”


## Hadith 4:296

_Narrated Az-Zuhri:_

as follows in Hadith 297.


## Hadith 4:297

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

We were in the company of Allah's Apostle in a Ghazwa, and he remarked about a man who claimed to be a Muslim, saying, “This (man) is from the people of the (Hell) Fire.” When the battle started, the man fought violently till he got wounded. Somebody said, “O Allah's Apostle! The man whom you described as being from the people of the (Hell) Fire fought violently today and died.” The Prophet said, “He will go to the (Hell) Fire.” Some people were on the point of doubting (the truth of what the Prophet had said) while they were in this state, suddenly someone said that he was still alive but severely wounded. When night fell, he lost patience and committed suicide. The Prophet was informed of that, and he said, “Allah is Greater! I testify that I am Allah's Slave and His Apostle.” Then he ordered Bilal to announce amongst the people: 'None will enter Paradise but a Muslim, and Allah may support this religion (i.e. Islam) even with a disobedient man.'


## Hadith 4:298

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

Allah's Apostle delivered a sermon and said, “Zaid received the flag and was martyred, then Ja'far took it and was martyred, then 'Abdullah bin Rawaha took it and was martyred, and then Khalid bin Al-Walid took it without being appointed, and Allah gave him victory.” The Prophet added, “I am not pleased (or they will not be pleased) that they should remain (alive) with us,” while his eyes were shedding tears.


## Hadith 4:299

_Narrated Anas:_

The people of the tribes of Ril, Dhakwan, 'Usiya and Bani Lihyan came to the Prophet and claimed that they had embraced Islam, and they requested him to support them with some men to fight their own people. The Prophet supported them with seventy men from the Ansar whom we used to call Al-Qurra'(i.e. Scholars) who (out of piety) used to cut wood during the day and pray all the night. So, those people took the (seventy) men till they reached a place called Bi'r-Ma'ana where they betrayed and martyred them. So, the Prophet invoked evil on the tribe of Ril, Dhakwan and Bani Lihyan for one month in the prayer.

a Quranic Verse concerning those martyrs which was:— “O Allah! Let our people be informed on our behalf that we have met our Lord Who has got pleased with us and made us pleased.” Then the Verse was cancelled.


## Hadith 4:300

_Narrated Abu Talha:_

Whenever the Prophet conquered some people, he would stay in their town for three days.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_200">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:101 to 4:200</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_400">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:301 to 4:400</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
