---
title: "Hadith 4:301 to 4:400"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_300">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:201 to 4:300</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_500">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:401 to 4:500</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 4:301

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet performed 'Umra, setting out from Al-Jarana where he distributed the war booty of Hunain.


## Hadith 4:302

_Narrated Nafi:_

Once a slave of Ibn 'Umar fled and joined the Byzantine. Khalid bin Al-Walid got him back and returned him to 'Abdullah (bin 'Umar). Once a horse of Ibn 'Umar also ran away and followed the Byzantines, and he (i.e. Khalid) got it back and returned it to 'Abdullah.


## Hadith 4:303

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

That he was riding a horse on the day, the Muslims fought (against the Byzantines), and the commander of the Muslim army was Khalid bin Al-Walid who had been appointed by Abu Bakr. The enemy took the horse away, and when the enemy was defeated, Khalid returned the horse to him.


## Hadith 4:304

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:_

I said, “O Allah's Apostle! We have slaughtered a young sheep of ours and have ground one Sa of barley. So, I invite you along with some persons.” So, the Prophet said in a loud voice, “O the people of the Trench! Jabir had prepared ”Sur“ so come along.”


## Hadith 4:305

_Narrated Um Khalid:_

(the daughter of Khalid bin Said) I went to Allah's Apostle with my father and I was Nearing a yellow shirt. Allah's Apostle said, “Sanah, Sanah!” ('Abdullah, the narrator, said that 'Sanah' meant 'good' in the Ethiopian language). I then started playing with the seal of Prophethood (in between the Prophet's shoulders) and my father rebuked me harshly for that. Allah's Apostle said. “Leave her,” and then Allah's Apostle (invoked Allah to grant me a long life) by saying (thrice), “Wear this dress till it is worn out and then wear it till it is worn out, and then wear it till it is worn out.” (The narrator adds, “It is said that she lived for a long period, wearing that (yellow) dress till its color became dark because of long wear.”)


## Hadith 4:306

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Al-Hasan bin 'All took a date from the dates of the Sadaqa and put it in his mouth. The Prophet said (to him) in Persian, “Kakh, kakh! (i.e. Don't you know that we do not eat the Sadaqa (i.e. what is given in charity) (charity is the dirt of the people)).”


## Hadith 4:307

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet got up amongst us and mentioned Al Ghulul, emphasized its magnitude and declared that it was a great sin saying, “Don't commit Ghulul for I should not like to see anyone amongst you on the Day of Ressurection, carrying over his neck a sheep that will be bleating, or carrying over his neck a horse that will be neighing. Such a man will be saying: 'O Allah's Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me,' and I will reply, 'I can't help you, for I have conveyed Allah's Message to you Nor should I like to see a man carrying over his neck, a camel that will be grunting. Such a man will say, 'O Allah's Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me, and I will say, 'I can't help you for I have conveyed Allah's Message to you,' or one carrying over his neck gold and silver and saying, 'O Allah's Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me,' and I will say, 'I can't help you for I have conveyed Allah's Message to you,' or one carrying clothes that will be fluttering, and the man will say, 'O Allah's Apostle! Intercede with Allah for me.' And I will say, 'I can't help you, for I have conveyed Allah's Message to you.”


## Hadith 4:308

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:_

There was a man who looked after the family and the belongings of the Prophet and he was called Karkara. The man died and Allah's Apostle said, “He is in the '(Hell) Fire.” The people then went to look at him and found in his place, a cloak he had stolen from the war booty.


## Hadith 4:309

_Narrated Abaya bin Rifaa:_

My grandfather, Rafi said, “We were in the company of the Prophet at DhulHulaifa, and the people suffered from hunger. We got some camels and sheep (as booty) and the Prophet was still behind the people. They hurried and put the cooking pots on the fire. (When he came) he ordered that the cooking pots should be upset and then he distributed the booty (amongst the people) regarding ten sheep as equal to one camel then a camel fled and the people chased it till they got tired, as they had a few horses (for chasing it). So a man threw an arrow at it and caused it to stop (with Allah's Permission). On that the Prophet said, 'Some of these animals behave like wild beasts, so, if any animal flee from you, deal with it in the same way.” My grandfather asked (the Prophet ), “We hope (or are afraid) that we may meet the enemy tomorrow and we have no knives. Can we slaughter our animals with canes?” Allah's Apostle replied, “If the instrument used for killing causes the animal to bleed profusely and if Allah's Name is mentioned on killing it, then eat its meat (i.e. it is lawful) but won't use a tooth or a nail and I am telling you the reason: A tooth is a bone (and slaughtering with a bone is forbidden ), and a nail is the slaughtering instrument of the Ethiopians.”


## Hadith 4:310

_Narrated Qais:_

Jarir bin 'Abdullah said to me, “Allah's Apostle said to me, 'Won't you relieve me from Dhul-Khalasa?' Dhul-Khalasa was a house where the tribe of Khatham used to stay, and it used to be called Ka'bat-ul Yamaniya. So I proceeded with one hundred-and-fifty (men) from the tribe of Ahmas who were good cavalry. I informed the Prophet that I could not sit firm on horses, so he stroke me on the chest with his hand and I noticed his finger marks on my chest. He invoked, 'O Allah! Make him firm and a guiding and rightly-guided man.” Jarir set out towards that place, dismantled and burnt it, and then sent the good news to Allah's Apostle . The messenger of Jarir said to Allah's Apostle. “O Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with the Truth, I did not come to you till it (i.e. the house) had been turned (black) like a scabby camel (covered with tar).” So the Prophet invokes Allah to Bless the horses of the men of Ahmas five times.


## Hadith 4:311

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, on the day of the Conquest of Mecca, “There is no migration (after the Conquest), but Jihad and good intentions, and when you are called for Jihad, you should immediately respond to the call.”


## Hadith 4:312

_Narrated Abu Uthman An-Nahdi:_

Mujashi (bin Mas'ud) took his brother Mujalid bin Musud to the Prophet and said, “This is Mujalid and he will give a pledge of allegiance to you for migration.” The Prophet said, “There is no migration after the Conquest of Mecca, but I will take his pledge of allegiance for Islam.”


## Hadith 4:313

_Narrated 'Ata':_

I and 'Ubai bin 'Umar went to 'Aisha while she was staying near Thabir (i.e. a mountain). She said, “There is no Migration after Allah gave His Prophet victory over Mecca.”


## Hadith 4:314

_Narrated Sad bin 'Ubaida:_

Abu Abdur-Rahman who was one of the supporters of Uthman said to Abu Talha who was one of the supporters of Ali, “I perfectly know what encouraged your leader (i.e. 'Ali) to shed blood. I heard him saying: Once the Prophet sent me and Az-Zubair saying, 'Proceed to such-and-such Ar-Roudah (place) where you will find a lady whom Hatib has given a letter. So when we arrived at Ar-Roudah, we requested the lady to hand over the letter to us. She said, 'Hatib has not given me any letter.' We said to her. 'Take out the letter or else we will strip off your clothes.' So she took it out of her braid. So the Prophet sent for Hatib, (who came) and said, 'Don't hurry in judging me, for, by Allah, I have not become a disbeliever, and my love to Islam is increasing. (The reason for writing this letter was) that there is none of your companions but has relatives in Mecca who look after their families and property, while I have nobody there, so I wanted to do them some favor (so that they might look after my family and property).' The Prophet believed him. 'Umar said, 'Allow me to chop off his (i.e. Hatib's) neck as he has done hypocrisy.' The Prophet said, (to 'Umar), 'Who knows, perhaps Allah has looked at the warriors of Badr and said (to them), 'Do whatever you like, for I have forgiven you.' ” 'Abdur-Rahman added, “So this is what encouraged him (i.e. Ali).”


## Hadith 4:315

_Narrated Ibn Abi Mulaika:_

Ibn Az-Zubair said to Ibn Ja'far “Do you remember when I, you and Ibn 'Abbas went out to receive Allah's Apostle?” Ibn Ja'far replied in the affirmative. Ibn Az-Zubair added, “And Allah's Apostle made us (i.e. I and Ibn 'Abbas) ride along with him and left you.”


## Hadith 4:316

_Narrated As-Sa'ib bin Yazid:_

I along with some boys went out to receive Allah's Apostle at Thaniyatal-Wada'.


## Hadith 4:317

_Narrated Abdullah:_

When the Prophet returned (from Jihad), he would say Takbir thrice and add, “We are returning, if Allah wishes, with repentance and worshipping and praising (our Lord) and prostrating ourselves before our Lord. Allah fulfilled His Promise and helped His Slave, and He Alone defeated the (infidel) clans.”


## Hadith 4:318

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

We were in the company of the Prophet while returning from 'Usfan, and Allah's Apostle was riding his she-camel keeping Safiya bint Huyay riding behind him. His she-camel slipped and both of them fell down. Abu Talha jumped from his camel and said, “O Allah's Apostle! May Allah sacrifice me for you.” The Prophet said, “Take care of the lady.” So, Abu Talha covered his face with a garment and went to Safiya and covered her with it, and then he set right the condition of their shecamel so that both of them rode, and we were encircling Allah's Apostle like a cover. When we approached Medina, the Prophet said, “We are returning with repentance and worshipping and praising our Lord.” He kept on saying this till he entered Medina.


## Hadith 4:319

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

That he and Abu Talha came in the company of the Prophet and Safiya was accompanying the Prophet, who let her ride behind him on his she-camel. During the journey, the she-camel slipped and both the Prophet and (his) wife fell down. Abu Talha (the sub-narrator thinks that Anas said that Abu Talha jumped from his camel quickly) said, “O Allah's Apostle! May Allah sacrifice me for your sake! Did you get hurt?” The Prophet replied,“No, but take care of the lady.” Abu Talha covered his face with his garment and proceeded towards her and covered her with his garment, and she got up. He then set right the condition of their she-camel and both of them (i.e. the Prophet and his wife) rode and proceeded till they approached Medina. The Prophet said, “We are returning with repentance and worshipping and praising our Lord.” The Prophet kept on saying this statement till he entered Medina.


## Hadith 4:320

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

I was on a journey in the company of the Prophet and when we reached Medina, he said to me, “Enter the Mosque and offer two Rakat.”


## Hadith 4:321

_Narrated Ka'b:_

Whenever the Prophet returned from a journey in the forenoon, he would enter the Mosque and offer two Rakat before sitting.


## Hadith 4:322

_Narrated Muharib bin Dithar:_

Jabir bin 'Abdullah said, “When Allah's Apostle arrived at Medina, he slaughtered a camel or a cow.” Jabir added, “The Prophet bought a camel from me for two Uqiyas (of gold) and one or two Dirhams. When he reached Sirar, he ordered that a cow be slaughtered and they ate its meat. When he arrived at Medina, he ordered me to go to the Mosque and offer two Rakat, and weighed (and gave) me the price of the camel.”


## Hadith 4:323

_Narrated Jabir:_

Once I returned from a journey and the Prophet said (to me) “Offer two Rakat.” (Sirar is a place near Medina).


## Hadith 4:324

_Narrated Ali:_

I got a she-camel in my share of the war booty on the day (of the battle) of Badr, and the Prophet had given me a she-camel from the Khumus. When I intended to marry Fatima, the daughter of Allah's Apostle, I had an appointment with a goldsmith from the tribe of Bani Qainuqa' to go with me to bring Idhkhir (i.e. grass of pleasant smell) and sell it to the goldsmiths and spend its price on my wedding party. I was collecting for my she-camels equipment of saddles, sacks and ropes while my two she-camels were kneeling down beside the room of an Ansari man. I returned after collecting whatever I collected, to see the humps of my two she-camels cut off and their flanks cut open and some portion of their livers was taken out. When I saw that state of my two she-camels, I could not help weeping. I asked, “Who has done this?” The people replied, “Hamza bin Abdul Muttalib who is staying with some Ansari drunks in this house.” I went away till I reached the Prophet and Zaid bin Haritha was with him. The Prophet noticed on my face the effect of what I had suffered, so the Prophet asked. “What is wrong with you.” I replied, “O Allah's Apostle! I have never seen such a day as today. Hamza attacked my two she-camels, cut off their humps, and ripped open their flanks, and he is sitting there in a house in the company of some drunks.” The Prophet then asked for his covering sheet, put it on, and set out walking followed by me and Zaid bin Haritha till he came to the house where Hamza was. He asked permission to enter, and they allowed him, and they were drunk. Allah's Apostle started rebuking Hamza for what he had done, but Hamza was drunk and his eyes were red. Hamza looked at Allah's Apostle and then he raised his eyes, looking at his knees, then he raised up his eyes looking at his umbilicus, and again he raised up his eyes look in at his face. Hamza then said, “Aren't you but the slaves of my father?” Allah's Apostle realized that he was drunk, so Allah's Apostle retreated, and we went out with him.


## Hadith 4:325

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(mother of the believers) After the death of Allah 's Apostle Fatima the daughter of Allah's Apostle asked Abu Bakr As-Siddiq to give her, her share of inheritance from what Allah's Apostle had left of the Fai (i.e. booty gained without fighting) which Allah had given him. Abu Bakr said to her, “Allah's Apostle said, 'Our property will not be inherited, whatever we (i.e. prophets) leave is Sadaqa (to be used for charity).” Fatima, the daughter of Allah's Apostle got angry and stopped speaking to Abu Bakr, and continued assuming that attitude till she died. Fatima remained alive for six months after the death of Allah's Apostle.

She used to ask Abu Bakr for her share from the property of Allah's Apostle which he left at Khaibar, and Fadak, and his property at Medina (devoted for charity). Abu Bakr refused to give her that property and said, “I will not leave anything Allah's Apostle used to do, because I am afraid that if I left something from the Prophet's tradition, then I would go astray.” (Later on) Umar gave the Prophet's property (of Sadaqa) at Medina to 'Ali and 'Abbas, but he withheld the properties of Khaibar and Fadak in his custody and said, “These two properties are the Sadaqa which Allah's Apostle used to use for his expenditures and urgent needs. Now their management is to be entrusted to the ruler.” (Az-Zuhrl said, “They have been managed in this way till today.”)


## Hadith 4:326

_Narrated Malik bin Aus:_

While I was at home, the sun rose high and it got hot. Suddenly the messenger of 'Umar bin Al-Khattab came to me and said, “The chief of the believers has sent for you.” So, I went along with him till I entered the place where 'Umar was sitting on a bedstead made of date-palm leaves and covered with no mattress, and he was leaning over a leather pillow. I greeted him and sat down. He said, “O Malik! Some persons of your people who have families came to me and I have ordered that a gift should be given to them, so take it and distribute it among them.” I said, “O chief of the believers! I wish that you order someone else to do it.” He said, “O man! Take it.” While I was sitting there with him, his doorman Yarfa' came saying, “'Uthman, 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf, Az-Zubair and Sad bin Abi Waqqas are asking your permission (to see you); may I admit them?” 'Umar said, “Yes”, So they were admitted and they came in, greeted him, and sat down. After a while Yarfa' came again and said, “May I admit 'Ali and 'Abbas?” 'Umar said, “yes.” So, they were admitted and they came in and greeted (him) and sat down. Then 'Abbas said, “O chief of the believers! Judge between me and this (i.e. 'Ali).” They had a dispute regarding the property of Bani An-Nadir which Allah had given to His Apostle as Fai. The group (i.e. 'Uthman and his companions) said, “O chief of the believers! Judge between them and relieve both of them front each other.” 'Umar said, “Be patient! I beseech you by Allah by Whose Permission the Heaven and the Earth exist, do you know that Allah's Apostle said, 'Our (i.e. prophets') property will not be inherited, and whatever we leave, is Sadaqa (to be used for charity),' and Allah's Apostle meant himself (by saying ”we'')?“ The group said, ”He said so.“ 'Umar then turned to 'Ali and 'Abbas and said, ”I beseech you by Allah, do you know that Allah's Apostle said so?“ They replied, ” He said so.“ 'Umar then said, ”So, I will talk to you about this matter. Allah bestowed on His Apostle with a special favor of something of this Fai (booty) which he gave to nobody else.“ 'Umar then recited the Holy Verses: ”What Allah bestowed as (Fai) Booty on his Apostle (Muhammad) from them —- for this you made no expedition with either cavalry or camelry: But Allah gives power to His Apostles over whomever He will 'And Allah is able to do all things." 9:6)

'Umar added “So this property was especially given to Allah's Apostle, but, by Allah, neither did he take possession of it and leave your, nor did he favor himself with it to your exclusion, but he gave it to all of you and distributed it amongst you till this property remained out of it. Allah's Apostle used to spend the yearly expenses of his family out of this property and used to keep the rest of its revenue to be spent on Allah 's Cause. Allah 's Apostle kept on doing this during all his lifetime. I ask you by Allah do you know this?” They replies in the affirmative. 'Umar then said to 'Ali and 'Abbas. “I ask you by Allah, do you know this?” 'Umar added, “When Allah had taken His Prophet unto Him, 'Abu Bakr said, 'I am the successor of Allah's Apostle so, Abu Bakr took over that property and managed it in the same way as Allah's Apostle used to do, and Allah knows that he was true, pious and rightly-guided, and he was a follower of what was right. Then Allah took Abu Bakr unto Him and I became Abu Bakr's successor, and I kept that property in my possession for the first two years of my Caliphate, managing it in the same way as Allah's Apostle used to do and as Abu Bakr used to do, and Allah knows that I have been true, pious, rightly guided, and a follower of what is right. Now you both (i.e. 'Ah and 'Abbas) came to talk to me, bearing the same claim and presenting the same case; you, 'Abbas, came to me asking for your share from your nephew's property, and this man, i.e. 'Ali, came to me asking for his wife's share from her father's property. I told you both that Allah's Apostle said, 'Our (prophets') properties are not to be inherited, but what we leave is Sadaqa (to be used for charity).' When I thought it right that I should hand over this property to you, I said to you, 'I am ready to hand over this property to you if you wish, on the condition that you would take Allah's Pledge and Convention that you would manage it in the same way as Allah's Apostle used to, and as Abu Bakr used to do, and as I have done since I was in charge of it.' So, both of you said (to me), 'Hand it over to us,' and on that condition I handed it over to you. So, I ask you by Allah, did I hand it over to them on this condition?” The group aid, “Yes.” Then 'Umar faced 'Ali and Abbas saying, “I ask you by Allah, did I hand it over to you on this condition?” They said, “Yes. ” He said, “ Do you want now to give a different decision? By Allah, by Whose Leave both the Heaven and the Earth exist, I will never give any decision other than that (I have already given). And if you are unable to manage it, then return it to me, and I will do the job on your behalf.”


## Hadith 4:327

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The delegates of the tribe of 'Abdul-Qais came and said, “O Allah's Apostle! We are from the tribe of Rabi'a, and there is the infidels of the tribe of Mudar intervening between you and us, so we cannot come to you except in the Sacred Months. So please order us some instructions that we may apply it to ourselves and also invite our people whom we left behind us to observe as well.” The Prophet said, “I order you (to do) four (things) and forbid you (to do) four: I order you to believe in Allah, that is, to testify that None has the right to be worshipped but Allah (the Prophet pointed with his hand); to offer prayers perfectly; to pay Zakat; to fast the month of Ramadan, and to pay the Khumus (i.e. one-fifth) of the war booty to Allah and I forbid you to use Ad-dubba', An-Naqir, Al-Hantam and Al-Muzaffat (i.e. utensils used for preparing alcoholic drinks).” (See Hadith No. 50, Vol. 1).


## Hadith 4:328

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “My heirs should not take even a single Dinar (i.e. anything from my property), and whatever I leave, excluding the expenditure of my wives and my laborers, will be Sadaqa (i.e. be used for charity).”'


## Hadith 4:329

_Narrated Aisha:_

Allah's Apostle died, and there was nothing in my house that a living being could eat, except some barley Lying on a shelf. So, I ate of it for a long period and measured it, and (after a short period) it was consumed.


## Hadith 4:330

_Narrated 'Amr bin Al-Harith:_

The Prophet did not leave anything (after his death) except his arms, a white mule, and a (piece of) land which he had given as Sadaqa.


## Hadith 4:331

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) When the sickness of Allah's Apostle got aggravated, he asked the permission of his wives that he should be treated in my house, and they permitted him.


## Hadith 4:332

_Narrated Ibn Abu Mulaika:_

'Aisha said, “The Prophet died in my house on the day of my turn while he was leaning on my chest closer to my neck, and Allah made my saliva mix with his Saliva.” 'Aisha added, “'AbdurRahman came with a Siwak and the Prophet was too weak to use it so I took it, chewed it and then (gave it to him and he) cleaned his teeth with it.”


## Hadith 4:333

_Narrated Safiya:_

(the wife of the Prophet) That she came to visit Allah's Apostle while he was in Itikaf(i.e. seclusion in the Mosque during the last ten days of Ramadan. When she got up to return, Allah's Apostle got up with her and accompanied her, and when he reached near the gate of the Mosque close to the door (of the house) of Um Salama, the wife of the Prophet, two Ansari men passed by them and greeted Allah's Apostle and then went away. Allah's Apostle addressed them saying, “Don't hurry! (She is my wife),” They said, “Glorified be Allah! O Allah's Apostle (You are far away from any suspicion),” and his saying was hard on them. Allah's Apostle said, “Satan circulates in the mind of a person as blood does (in his body). I was afraid that Satan might put some (evil) thoughts in your minds.”


## Hadith 4:334

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Once I went upstairs in Hafsa's house and saw the Prophet answering the call of nature with his back towards the Qibla and facing Sham.


## Hadith 4:335

_Narrated Aisha:_

That Allah's Apostle used to offer the 'Asr prayer while the sun was still shining in her Hujra (i.e. her dwelling place).


## Hadith 4:336

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet stood up and delivered a sermon, and pointing to 'Aisha's house (i.e. eastwards), he said thrice, “Affliction (will appear from) here,” and, “from where the side of the Satan's head comes out (i.e. from the East).”


## Hadith 4:337

_Narrated 'Amra bint Abdur-Rahman:_

'Aisha, the wife of the Prophet told her that once Allah's Apostle was with her and she heard somebody asking permission to enter Hafsa's house. She said, “O Allah's Apostle! This man is asking permission to enter your house.” Allah's Apostle replied, “I think he is so-and-so (meaning the foster uncle of Hafsa). What is rendered illegal because of blood relations, is also rendered illegal because of the corresponding foster-relations.”


## Hadith 4:338

_Narrated Anas:_

That when Abu Bakr became the Caliph, he sent him to Bahrain and wrote this letter for him, and stamped it with the Ring of the Prophet. Three lines were engraved on the Ring, (the word) 'Muhammad' was in a line, 'Apostle' was in another line, and 'Allah' in a third.


## Hadith 4:339

_Narrated 'Isa bin Tahman:_

Anas brought out to us two worn out leather shoes without hair and with pieces of leather straps. Later on Thabit Al-Banani told me that Anas said that they were the shoes of the Prophet.


## Hadith 4:340

_Narrated Abu Burda:_

'Aisha brought out to us a patched wool Len garment, and she said, “(It chanced that) the soul of Allah's Apostle was taken away while he was wearing this.” Abu-Burda added, “Aisha brought out to us a thick waist sheet like the ones made by the Yemenites, and also a garment of the type called Al-Mulabbada.”


## Hadith 4:341

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

When the cup of Allah's Apostle got broken, he fixed it with a silver wire at the crack. (The sub-narrator, 'Asim said, “I saw the cup and drank (water) in it.”)


## Hadith 4:342

_Narrated 'Ali bin Al-Husain:_

That when they reached Medina after returning from Yazid bin Mu'awaiya after the martyrdom of Husain bin 'Ali (may Allah bestow His Mercy upon him), Al-Miswar bin Makhrama met him and said to him, “Do you have any need you may order me to satisfy?” 'Ali said, “No.” Al-Miswar said, Will you give me the sword of Allah's Apostle for I am afraid that people may take it from you by force? By Allah, if you give it to me, they will never be able to take it till I die.“ When Ali bin Abu Talib demanded the hand of the daughter of Abi Jahal to be his wife besides Fatima, I heard Allah's Apostle on his pulpit delivering a sermon in this connection before the people, and I had then attained my age of puberty. Allah's Apostle said, ”Fatima is from me, and I am afraid she will be subjected to trials in her religion (because of jealousy).“ The Prophet then mentioned one of his son-in-law who was from the tribe of 'Abu Shams, and he praised him as a good son-in-law, saying, ”Whatever he said was the truth, and he promised me and fulfilled his promise. I do not make a legal thing illegal, nor do I make an illegal thing legal, but by Allah, the daughter of Allah's Apostle and the daughter of the enemy of Allah, (i.e. Abu Jahl) can never get together (as the wives of one man) (See Hadith No. 76, Vo. 5).


## Hadith 4:343

_Narrated Ibn Al-Hanafiya:_

If Ali had spoken anything bad about 'Uthman then he would have mentioned the day when some persons came to him and complained about the Zakat officials of 'Uthman. 'Ali then said to me, “Go to 'Uthman and say to him, 'This document contains the regulations of spending the Sadaqa of Allah's Apostle so order your Zakat officials to act accordingly.” I took the document to 'Uthman. 'Uthman said, “Take it away, for we are not in need of it.” I returned to 'Ali with it and informed him of that. He said, “Put it whence you took it.”

Hanafiya who said, “My father sent me saying, 'Take this letter to 'Uthman for it contains the orders of the Prophet concerning the Sadaqa.' ”


## Hadith 4:344

_Narrated 'Ali:_

Fatima complained of what she suffered from the hand mill and from grinding, when she got the news that some slave girls of the booty had been brought to Allah's Apostle. She went to him to ask for a maid-servant, but she could not find him, and told 'Aisha of her need. When the Prophet came, Aisha informed him of that. The Prophet came to our house when we had gone to our beds. (On seeing the Prophet) we were going to get up, but he said, 'Keep at your places,' I felt the coolness of the Prophet's feet on my chest. Then he said, “Shall I tell you a thing which is better than what you asked me for? When you go to your beds, say: 'Allahu Akbar (i.e. Allah is Greater)' for 34 times, and 'Alhamdu Lillah (i.e. all the praises are for Allah)' for 33 times, and Subhan Allah (i.e. Glorified be Allah) for 33 times. This is better for you than what you have requested.”


## Hadith 4:345

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah Al-Ansari:_

A man amongst us begot a boy whom he named Al-Qasim. On that the Ansar said, (to the man), “We will never call you Abu-al-Qasim and will never please you with this blessed title.” So, he went to the Prophet and said, “O Allah's Apostle! I have begotten a boy whom I named Al-Qasim and the Ansar said, 'We will never call you Abu-al-Qasim, nor will we please you with this title.' ” The Prophet said, “The Ansar have done well. Name by my name, but do not name by my Kunya, for I am Qasim.”


## Hadith 4:346

_Narrated Muawiya:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If Allah wants to do good for somebody, he makes him comprehend the Religion (i.e. Islam), and Allah is the Giver and I am Al-Qasim (i.e. the distributor), and this (Muslim) nation will remain victorious over their opponents, till Allah's Order comes and they will still be victorious ”

(anything) nor withhold (anything) from you, but I am just a distributor (i.e. Qasim), and I give as I am ordered."


## Hadith 4:347

_Narrated Khaula Al-Ansariya:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “Some people spend Allah's Wealth (i.e. Muslim's wealth) in an unjust manner; such people will be put in the (Hell) Fire on the Day of Resurrection.”


## Hadith 4:348

_Narrated 'Urwa-al-Bariqi:_

The Prophet said, “Horses are always the source of good, namely, rewards (in the Hereafter) and booty, till the Day of Resurrection.”


## Hadith 4:349

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When Khosrau is ruined, there will be no Khosrau after him; and when Caesar is ruined, there will be no Caesar after him. By Him in Whose Hands my life is, you will spend their treasures in Allah's Cause.”


## Hadith 4:350

_Narrated Jabir bin Samura:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When Khosrau is ruined, there will be no Khosrau after him; and when Caesar is ruined, their will be no Caesar after him. By Him in Whose Hands my life is, you will spend their treasures in Allah's Cause.”


## Hadith 4:351

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Booty has been made legal for me.”


## Hadith 4:352

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Allah guarantees him who strives in His Cause and whose motivation for going out is nothing but Jihad in His Cause and belief in His Word, that He will admit him into Paradise (if martyred) or bring him back to his dwelling place, whence he has come out, with what he gains of reward and booty.”


## Hadith 4:353

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, "A prophet amongst the prophets carried out a holy military expedition, so he said to his followers, 'Anyone who has married a woman and wants to consummate the marriage, and has not done so yet, should not accompany me; nor should a man who has built a house but has not completed its roof; nor a man who has sheep or shecamels and is waiting for the birth of their young ones.' So, the prophet carried out the expedition and when he reached that town at the time or nearly at the time of the 'Asr prayer, he said to the sun, 'O sun! You are under Allah's Order and I am under Allah's Order O Allah! Stop it (i.e. the sun) from setting.' It was stopped till Allah made him victorious.

Then he collected the booty and the fire came to burn it, but it did not burn it. He said (to his men), 'Some of you have stolen something from the booty. So one man from every tribe should give me a pledge of allegiance by shaking hands with me.' (They did so and) the hand of a man got stuck over the hand of their prophet. Then that prophet said (to the man), 'The theft has been committed by your people. So all the persons of your tribe should give me the pledge of allegiance by shaking hands with me.' The hands of two or three men got stuck over the hand of their prophet and he said, “You have committed the theft.' Then they brought a head of gold like the head of a cow and put it there, and the fire came and consumed the booty. The Prophet added: Then Allah saw our weakness and disability, so he made booty legal for us.”


## Hadith 4:354

_Narrated Aslam:_

'Umar said, “Were it not for those Muslims who have not come to existence yet, I would have distributed (the land of) every town I conquer among the fighters as the Prophet distributed the land of Khaibar.”


## Hadith 4:355

_Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:_

A bedouin asked the Prophet, “A man may fight for the sake of booty, and another may fight so that he may be mentioned by the people, and a third may fight to show his position (i.e. bravery); which of these regarded as fighting in Allah's Cause?” The Prophet said, “He who fights so that Allah's Word (i.e. Islam) should be superior, fights for Allah's Cause.”


## Hadith 4:356

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Mulaika:_

Some silken cloaks with golden buttons were presented to the Prophet. He distributed them amongst his companions and kept one for Makhrama, bin Naufal. Later on Makhrama came along with his son Al-Miswar bin Makhrama, and stood up at the gate and said (to his son). “Call him (i.e. the Prophet) to me.” The Prophet heard his voice, took a silken cloak and brought it to him, placing those golden buttons in front of him saying, “O Abu-al-Miswar! I have kept this aside for you! O Abu-al Miswar! I have kept this aside for you!” Makhrama was a bad-tempered man.


## Hadith 4:357

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

People used to give some of their datepalms to the Prophet (as a gift), till he conquered Bani Quraiza and Bani An-Nadir, whereupon he started returning their favors.


## Hadith 4:358

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair:_

When Az-Zubair got up during the battle of Al-Jamal, he called me and I stood up beside him, and he said to me, “O my son! Today one will be killed either as an oppressor or as an oppressed one. I see that I will be killed as an oppressed one. My biggest worry is my debts. Do you think, if we pay the debts, there will be something left for us from our money?” Az-Zubair added, “O my son! Sell our property and pay my debts.” Az-Zubair then willed one-third of his property and willed one-third of that portion to his sons; namely, 'Abdullah's sons. He said, “One-third of the one third. If any property is left after the payment of the debts, one-third (of the one-third of what is left) is to be given to your sons.” (Hisham, a sub-narrator added, “Some of the sons of 'Abdullah were equal in age to the sons of Az-Zubair e.g. Khubaib and 'Abbas. 'Abdullah had nine sons and nine daughters at that time.” (The narrator 'Abdullah added:) My father (Az-Zubair) went on drawing my attention to his debts saying, “If you should fail to pay part of the debts, appeal to my Master to help you.” By Allah! I could not understand what he meant till I asked, “O father! Who is your Master?” He replied, “Allah (is my Master).” By Allah, whenever I had any difficulty regarding his debts, I would say, “Master of Az-Zubair! Pay his debts on his behalf .” and Allah would (help me to) pay it. Az-Zubair was martyred leaving no Dinar or Dirham but two pieces of land, one of which was (called) Al-Ghaba, and eleven houses in Medina, two in Basra, one in Kufa and one in Egypt. In fact, the source of the debt which he owed was, that if somebody brought some money to deposit with him. Az Zubair would say, “No, (i won't keep it as a trust), but I take it as a debt, for I am afraid it might be lost.” Az-Zubair was never appointed governor or collector of the tax of Kharaj or any other similar thing, but he collected his wealth (from the war booty he gained) during the holy battles he took part in, in the company of the Prophet, Abu Bakr, 'Umar, and 'Uthman. ('Abdullah bin Az-Zubair added:) When I counted his debt, it turned to be two million and two hundred thousand. (The sub-narrator added:) Hakim bin Hizam met Abdullah bin Zubair and asked, “O my nephew! How much is the debt of my brother?” 'Abdullah kept it as a secret and said, “One hundred thousand,” Hakim said, “By Allah! I don't think your property will cover it.” On that 'Abdullah said to him, “What if it is two million and two hundred thousand?” Hakim said, “I don't think you can pay it; so if you are unable to pay all of it, I will help you.” Az-Zubair had already bought Al-Ghaba for one hundred and seventy thousand. 'Abdullah sold it for one million and six hundred thousand. Then he called the people saying, “Any person who has any money claim on Az-Zubair should come to us in Al-Ghaba.” There came to him 'Abdullah bin Ja'far whom Az-Zubair owed four hundred thousand. He said to 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair, “If you wish I will forgive you the debt.” 'Abdullah (bin Az-Zubair) said, “No.” Then Ibn Ja'far said, “If you wish you can defer the payment if you should defer the payment of any debt.” Ibn Az-Zubair said, “No.” 'Abdullah bin Ja'far said, “Give me a piece of the land.” 'Abdullah bin AzZubair said (to him), “Yours is the land extending from this place to this place.” So, 'Abdullah bin Az-Zubair sold some of the property (including the houses) and paid his debt perfectly, retaining four and a half shares from the land (i.e. Al-Ghaba). He then went to Mu'awlya while 'Amr bin 'Uthman, Al-Mundhir bin Az-Zubair and Ibn Zam'a were sitting with him. Mu'awiya asked, “At what price have you appraised Al-Ghaba?” He said, “One hundred thousand for each share,” Muawiya asked, “How many shares have been left?” 'Abdullah replied, “Four and a half shares.” Al-Mundhir bin Az-Zubair said, “I would like to buy one share for one hundred thousand.” 'Amr bin 'Uthman said, “I would like to buy one share for one hundred thousand.” Ibn Zam'a said, “I would like to buy one share for one hundred thousand.” Muawiya said, “How much is left now?” 'Abdullah replied, “One share and a half.” Muawiya said, “I would like to buy it for one hundred and fifty thousand.” 'Abdullah also sold his part to Muawiya six hundred thousand. When Ibn AzZubair had paid all the debts. Az-Zubair's sons said to him, “Distribute our inheritance among us.” He said, “No, by Allah, I will not distribute it among you till I announce in four successive Hajj seasons, 'Would those who have money claims on Az-Zubair come so that we may pay them their debt.” So, he started to announce that in public in every Hajj season, and when four years had elapsed, he distributed the inheritance among the inheritors. Az-Zubair had four wives, and after the one-third of his property was excluded (according to the will), each of his wives received one million and two hundred thousand. So the total amount of his property was fifty million and two hundred thousand.


## Hadith 4:359

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

'Uthman did not join the Badr battle because he was married to one of the daughters of Allah's Apostle and she was ill. So, the Prophet said to him. “You will get a reward and a share (from the war booty) similar to the reward and the share of one who has taken part in the Badr battle.”


## Hadith 4:360

_Narrated Marwan bin Al-Hakim and Miswar bin Makhrama:_

When the Hawazin delegation came to Allah's Apostle after they had embraced Islam and requested him to return their properties and war prisoners to them, Allah's Apostle said, “To me the best talk is the truest, so you may choose either of two things; the war prisoners or the wealth, for I have delayed their distribution.” Allah's Apostle had waited for them for over ten days when he returned from Ta'if. So, when those people came to know that Allah's Apostle was not going to return to them except one of the two things the said, “We choose our war Prisoners 'Allah's Apostle stood up amongst the Muslims, and after glorifying Allah as He deserved, he said, ”Now then, these brothers of yours have come to us with repentance, and I see it logical that I should return their captives to them, so whoever of you likes to do that as a favor then he can do it, and whoever amongst you likes to stick to his share, let him give up his prisoners and we will compensate him from the very first Fai' (i.e. war booty received without fight) which Allah will give us.“ On that, all the people said. 'O Allah's Apostles We have agreed willingly to do so (return the captives)” Then Allah's Apostle said to them “I do not know who amongst you has agreed to this and who has not. You should return and let your leaders inform me of your agreement.” The people returned and their leaders spoke to them, and then came to Allah's Apostle and said, “All the people have agreed willingly to do so and have given the permission to return the war prisoners (without Compensation)” (Az-Zuhri, the sub-narrator states) This is what has been related to us about the captives of Hawazin.


## Hadith 4:361

_Narrated Zahdam:_

Once we were in the house of Abu Musa who presented a meal containing cooked chicken. A man from the tribe of Bani Taim Allah with red complexion as if he were from the Byzantine war prisoners, was present. Abu Musa invited him to share the meal but he (apologised) saying. “I saw chickens eating dirty things and so I have had a strong aversion to eating them, and have taken an oath that I will not eat chickens.” Abu Musa said, “Come along, I will tell you about this matter (i.e. how to cancel one's oat ). I went to the Prophet in the company of a group of Al-Ashariyin, asked him to provide us with means of conveyance. He said, 'By Allah, I will not provide you with any means of conveyance and I have nothing to make you ride on.' Then some camels as booty were brought to Allah's Apostle and he asked for us saying. 'Where are the group of Al-Ash'ariyun?' Then he ordered that we should be given five camels with white humps. When we set out we said, 'What have we done? We will never be blessed (with what we have been given).' So, we returned to the Prophet and said, 'We asked you to provide us with means of conveyance, but you took an oath that you would not provide us with any means of conveyance. Did you forget (your oath when you gave us the camels)? He replied. 'I have not provided you with means of conveyance, but Allah has provided you with it, and by Allah, Allah willing, if ever I take an oath to do something, and later on I find that it is more beneficial to do something different, I will do the thing which is better, and give expiation for my oath.”


## Hadith 4:362

_Narrated Nafi from Ibn Umar:_

Allah's Apostle sent a Sariya towards Najd, and Abdullah bin 'Umar was in the Sariya. They gained a great number of camels as war booty. The share of each one of them was twelve or eleven camels, and they were given an extra camel each.


## Hadith 4:363

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle used to give extra share to some of the members of the Sariya he used to send, in addition to the shares they shared with the army in general.


## Hadith 4:364

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

We got the news of the migration of the Prophet while we were in Yemen, so we set out migrating to him. We were, I and my two brothers, I being the youngest, and one of my brothers was Abu Burda and the other was Abu Ruhm. We were over fifty (or fifty-three or fifty two) men from our people. We got on board a ship which took us to An-Najashi in Ethiopia, and there we found Ja'far bin Abu Talib and his companions with An-Najaishi. Ja'far said (to us), “Allah's Apostle has sent us here and ordered us to stay here, so you too, stay with us.” We stayed with him till we all left (Ethiopia) and met the Prophet at the time when he had conquered Khaibar. He gave us a share from its booty (or gave us from its booty). He gave only to those who had taken part in the Ghazwa with him. but he did not give any share to any person who had not participated in Khaibar's conquest except the people of our ship, besides Ja'far and his companions, whom he gave a share as he did them (i.e. the people of the ship).


## Hadith 4:365

_Narrated Jabir:_

Allah's Apostle said (to me), “If the property of Bahrain had come to us, I would have given you so much and so much.” But the Bahrain property did not come till the Prophet had died. When the Bahrain property came. Abu Bakr ordered somebody to announce, “Any person who has money claim on Allah's Apostle or whom Allah's Apostle had promised something, should come to us.” So, I went to him and said, “Allah's Apostle had promised to give me so much an so much.” Abu Bakr scooped up money with both hands thrice for me.“ (The sub-narrator Sufyan illustrated this action by scooping up with both hands and said, ”Ibn Munkadir, another sub-narrator, used to illustrate it in this way.")

did not give me, and I went to him again, but he did not give me, so I went to him for the third time and said, “I asked you, but you did not give me; then I asked you (for the second time) and you did not give me; then I asked you (for the third time) but you did not give me. You should either give me or allow yourself to be considered a miser regarding my case.” Abu Bakr said, “You tell me that I am a miser with regard to you. But really, whenever I rejected your request, I had the inclination to give you.”

(In another narration Jabir added:) So, Abu Bakr scooped up money with both hands for me and asked me to count it. I found out that It was five hundred. Abu Bakr told me to take twice that amount.


## Hadith 4:366

_Narrated Jabir bin Abdullah:_

While Allah's Apostle was distributing the booty at Al-Ja'rana, somebody said to him “Be just (in your distribution).” The Prophet replied, “Verily I would be miserable if I did not act justly.”


## Hadith 4:367

_Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:_

The Prophet talked about war prisoners of Badr saying, “Had Al-Mutim bin Adi been alive and interceded with me for these mean people, I would have freed them for his sake.”


## Hadith 4:368

_Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:_

I and 'Uthman bin 'Affan went to Allah's Apostle and said, “O Allah's Apostle! You have given to Bani Al-Muttalib and left us although they and we are of the same kinship to you.” Allah's Apostle said, “Bani Muttalib and Bani Hashim are one and the same.” The Prophet did not give a share to Bani Abd Shams and Bani Naufai. (Ibn Ishaq said, "Abd Shams and Hashim and Al-Muttalib were maternal brothers and their mother was 'Atika bint Murra and Naufal was their paternal brother.)


## Hadith 4:369

_Narrated 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf:_

While I was standing in the row on the day (of the battle) of Badr, I looked to my right and my left and saw two young Ansari boys, and I wished I had been stronger than they. One of them called my attention saying, “O Uncle! Do you know Abu Jahl?” I said, “Yes, What do you want from him, O my nephew?” He said, “I have been informed that he abuses Allah's Apostle. By Him in Whose Hands my life is, if I should see him, then my body will not leave his body till either of us meet his fate.” I was astonished at that talk. Then the other boy called my attention saying the same as the other had said. After a while I saw Abu Jahl walking amongst the people. I said (to the boys), “Look! This is the man you asked me about.” So, both of them attacked him with their swords and struck him to death and returned to Allah'S Apostle to inform him of that. Allah's Apostle asked, “Which of you has killed him?” Each of them said, “I Have killed him.” Allah's Apostle asked, “Have you cleaned your swords?” They said, “No. ” He then looked at their swords and said, “No doubt, you both have killed him and the spoils of the deceased will be given to Muadh bin Amr bin Al-Jamuh.” The two boys were Muadh bin 'Afra and Muadh bin Amr bin Al-Jamuh.


## Hadith 4:370

_Narrated Abu Qatada:_

We set out in the company of Allah's Apostle on the day (of the battle) of Hunain. When we faced the enemy, the Muslims retreated and I saw a pagan throwing himself over a Muslim. I turned around and came upon him from behind and hit him on the shoulder with the sword He (i.e. the pagan) came towards me and seized me so violently that I felt as if it were death itself, but death overtook him and he released me. I followed 'Umar bin Al Khattab and asked (him), “What is wrong with the people (fleeing)?” He replied, “This is the Will of Allah,” After the people returned, the Prophet sat and said, “Anyone who has killed an enemy and has a proof of that, will posses his spoils.” I got up and said, “Who will be a witness for me?” and then sat down. The Prophet again said, “Anyone who has killed an enemy and has proof of that, will possess his spoils.” I (again) got up and said, “Who will be a witness for me?” and sat down. Then the Prophet said the same for the third time. I again got up, and Allah's Apostle said, “O Abu Qatada! What is your story?” Then I narrated the whole story to him. A man (got up and) said, “O Allah's Apostle! He is speaking the truth, and the spoils of the killed man are with me. So please compensate him on my behalf.” On that Abu Bakr As-Siddiq said, “No, by Allah, he (i.e. Allah's Apostle ) will not agree to give you the spoils gained by one of Allah's Lions who fights on the behalf of Allah and His Apostle.” The Prophet said, “Abu Bakr has spoken the truth.” So, Allah's Apostle gave the spoils to me. I sold that armor (i.e. the spoils) and with its price I bought a garden at Bani Salima, and this was my first property which I gained after my conversion to Islam.


## Hadith 4:371

_Narrated Urwa bin Az-Zubair:_

Hakim bin Hizam said, “I asked Allah's Apostle for something, and he gave me. I asked him again, and he gave me, and said to me. 'O Hakim! This wealth is like green sweet (i.e. fruit), and if one takes it without greed, then one is blessed in it, and if one takes it with greediness, then one is not blessed in it, and will be like the one who eats without satisfaction. And an upper (i.e. giving) hand is better than a lower (i.e. taking) hand,' I said, 'O Allah's Apostle! By Him Who has sent you with the Truth. I will not ask anyone for anything after you till I leave this world.” So, when Abu Bakr during his Caliphate, called Hakim to give him (some money), Hakim refused to accept anything from him. Once 'Umar called him (during his Caliphate) in order to give him something, but Hakim refused to accept it, whereupon 'Umar said, “O Muslims! I give him (i.e. Haklm) his right which Allah has assigned to him) from this Fai '(booty), but he refuses to take it.” So Haklm never took anything from anybody after the Prophet till he died.


## Hadith 4:372

_Narrated Nafi:_

'Umar bin Al-Khattab said, “O Allah's Apostle! I vowed to observe Itikaf for one day during the Pre-lslamic period.” The Prophet ordered him to fulfill his vow. 'Umar gained two lady captives from the war prisoners of Hunain and he left them in some of the houses at Mecca. When Allah's Apostle freed the captives of Hunain without ransom, they came out walking in the streets. 'Umar said (to his son), “O Abdullah! See what is the matter.” 'Abdullah replied, “Allah's Apostle has freed the captives without ransom.” He said (to him), “Go and set free those two slave girls.” (Nafi added:) Allah's Apostle did not perform the 'Umra from Al-Jarana, and if he had performed the 'Umra, it would not have been hidden from 'Abdullah.


## Hadith 4:373

_Narrated 'Amr bin Taghlib:_

Allah's Apostle gave (gifts) to some people to the exclusion of some others. The latter seemed to be displeased by that. The Prophet said, “I give to some people, lest they should deviate from True Faith or lose patience, while I refer other people to the goodness and contentment which Allah has put in their hearts, and 'Amr bin Taghlib is amongst them.” 'Amr bin Taghlib said, “The statement of Allah's Apostle is dearer to me than red camels.”

some property or some war prisoners and he distributed them in the above way (i.e. giving to some people to the exclusion of others) .


## Hadith 4:374

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “I give to Quraish people in order to let them adhere to Islam, for they are near to their life of Ignorance (i.e. they have newly embraced Islam and it is still not strong in their hearts.”


## Hadith 4:375

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

When Allah favored His Apostle with the properties of Hawazin tribe as Fai (booty), he started giving to some Quarries men even up to one-hundred camels each, whereupon some Ansari men said about Allah's Apostle, “May Allah forgive His Apostle! He is giving to (men of) Quraish and leaves us, in spite of the fact that our swords are still dropping blood (of the infidels)” When Allah's Apostle was informed of what they had said, he called the Ansar and gathered them in a leather tent and did not call anybody else along, with them. When they gathered, Allah's Apostle came to them and said, “What is the statement which, I have been informed, and that which you have said?” The learned ones among them replied,“ O Allah's Apostle! The wise ones amongst us did not say anything, but the youngsters amongst us said, 'May Allah forgive His Apostle; he gives the Quarish and leaves the Ansar, in spite of the fact that our swords are still dribbling (wet) with the blood of the infidels.' ” Allah's Apostle replied, I give to such people as are still close to the period of Infidelity (i.e. they have recently embraced Islam and Faith is still weak in their hearts). Won't you be pleased to see people go with fortune, while you return with Allah's Apostle to your houses? By Allah, what you will return with, is better than what they are returning with.“ The Ansar replied, ”Yes, O Allah's Apostle, we are satisfied' Then the Prophet said to them.“ You will find after me, others being preferred to you. Then be patient till you meet Allah and meet His Apostle at Al-Kauthar (i.e. a fount in Paradise).” (Anas added:) But we did not remain patient.


## Hadith 4:376

_Narrated Jubair bin Mutim:_

That while he was with Allah's Apostle who was accompanied by the people on their way back from Hunain, the bedouins started begging things of Allah's Apostle so much so that they forced him to go under a Samura tree where his loose outer garment was snatched away. On that, Allah's Apostle stood up and said to them, “Return my garment to me. If I had as many camels as these trees, I would have distributed them amongst you; and you will not find me a miser or a liar or a coward.”


## Hadith 4:377

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

While I was walking with the Prophet who was wearing a Najrani outer garment with a thick hem, a bedouin came upon the Prophet and pulled his garment so violently that I could recognize the impress of the hem of the garment on his shoulder, caused by the violence of his pull. Then the bedouin said, “Order for me something from Allah's Fortune which you have.” The Prophet turned to him and smiled, and ordered that a gift be given to him.


## Hadith 4:378

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

On the day (of the battle) of Hunain, Allah's Apostle favored some people in the distribution of the booty (to the exclusion of others); he gave Al-Aqra' bin Habis one-hundred camels and he gave 'Uyaina the same amount, and also gave to some of the eminent Arabs, giving them preference in this regard. Then a person came and said, “By Allah, in this distribution justice has not been observed, nor has Allah's Pleasure been aimed at.” I said (to him), “By Allah, I will inform the Prophet (of what you have said), ”I went and informed him, and he said, “If Allah and His Apostle did not act justly, who else would act justly. May Allah be merciful to Moses, for he was harmed with more than this, yet he kept patient.”


## Hadith 4:379

_Narrated Asma bint Abu Bakr:_

I used to carry the date stones on my head from the land of Az-Zubair which Allah's Apostle had given to him, and it was at a distance of 2/3 of a Farsakh from my house.

from the property of Bani An-Nadir (gained as war booty).


## Hadith 4:380

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Umar bin Al-Khattab expelled all the Jews and Christians from the land of Hijaz. Allah's Apostle after conquering Khaibar, thought of expelling the Jews from the land which, after he conquered it belonged to Allah, Allah's Apostle and the Muslims. But the Jews requested Allah's Apostle to leave them there on the condition that they would do the labor and get half of the fruits (the land would yield). Allah's Apostle said, “We shall keep you on these terms as long as we wish.” Thus they stayed till the time of 'Umar's Caliphate when he expelled them to Taima and Ariha.


## Hadith 4:381

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mughaffal:_

While we were besieging the fort of Khaibar, a person threw a leather container containing fat, and I ran to take it, but when I turned I saw the Prophet (standing behind), so I felt embarrassed in front of him.


## Hadith 4:382

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

In our holy battles, we used to get honey and grapes, as war booty which we would eat and would not store.


## Hadith 4:383

_Narrated Ibn Abi Aufa:_

We were afflicted with hunger during the besiege of Khaibar, and when it was the day of (the battle of) Khaibar, we slaughtered the donkeys and when the pots got boiling (with their meat). Allah's Apostle made an announcement that all the pots should be upset and that nobody should eat anything of the meat of the donkeys. We thought that the Prophet prohibited that because the Khumus had not been taken out of the booty (i.e. donkeys); other people said, “He prohibited eating them for ever.” The sub-narrator added, “I asked Said bin Jubair who said, 'He has made the eating of donkeys' meat illegal for ever.”)


## Hadith 4:384

_Narrated 'Umar bin Dinar:_

I was sitting with Jabir bin Zaid and 'Amr bin Aus, and Bjalla was narrating to them in 70 A.H. the year when Musab bin Az-Zubair was the leader of the pilgrims of Basra. We were sitting at the steps of Zam-zam well and Bajala said, “I was the clerk of Juz bin Muawiya, Al-Ahnaf's paternal uncle. A letter came from 'Umar bin Al-Khattab one year before his death; and it was read:— ”Cancel every marriage contracted among the Magians between relatives of close kinship (marriages that are regarded illegal in Islam: a relative of this sort being called Dhu-Mahram.)" 'Umar did not take the Jizya from the Magian infidels till 'Abdur-Rahman bin 'Auf testified that Allah's Apostle had taken the Jizya from the Magians of Hajar.


## Hadith 4:385

_Narrated 'Amr bin 'Auf Al-Ansari:_

(who was an ally of Bam 'Amr bin Lu'ai and one of those who had taken part in (the Ghazwa of) Badr): Allah's Apostle sent Abu 'Ubaida bin Al-Jarreh to Bahrain to collect the Jizya. Allah's Apostle had established peace with the people of Bahrain and appointed Al-'Ala' bin Al-Hadrami as their governor. When Abu 'Ubaida came from Bahrain with the money, the Ansar heard of Abu 'Ubaida's arrival which coincided with the time of the morning prayer with the Prophet. When Allah's Apostle led them in the morning prayer and finished, the Ansar approached him, and he looked at them and smiled on seeing them and said, “I feel that you have heard that Abu. 'Ubaida has brought something?” They said, “Yes, O Allah's Apostle' He said, ”Rejoice and hope for what will please you! By Allah, I am not afraid of your poverty but I am afraid that you will lead a life of luxury as past nations did, whereupon you will compete with each other for it, as they competed for it, and it will destroy you as it destroyed them."


## Hadith 4:386

_Narrated Jubair bin Haiya:_

'Umar sent the Muslims to the great countries to fight the pagans. When Al-Hurmuzan embraced Islam, 'Umar said to him. “I would like to consult you regarding these countries which I intend to invade.” Al-Hurmuzan said, “Yes, the example of these countries and their inhabitants who are the enemies. of the Muslims, is like a bird with a head, two wings and two legs; If one of its wings got broken, it would get up over its two legs, with one wing and the head; and if the other wing got broken, it would get up with two legs and a head, but if its head got destroyed, then the two legs, two wings and the head would become useless. The head stands for Khosrau, and one wing stands for Caesar and the other wing stands for Faris. So, order the Muslims to go towards Khosrau.” So, 'Umar sent us (to Khosrau) appointing An-Numan bin Muqrin as our commander. When we reached the land of the enemy, the representative of Khosrau came out with forty-thousand warriors, and an interpreter got up saying, “Let one of you talk to me!” Al-Mughira replied, “Ask whatever you wish.” The other asked, “Who are you?” Al-Mughira replied, “We are some people from the Arabs; we led a hard, miserable, disastrous life: we used to suck the hides and the date stones from hunger; we used to wear clothes made up of fur of camels and hair of goats, and to worship trees and stones. While we were in this state, the Lord of the Heavens and the Earths, Elevated is His Remembrance and Majestic is His Highness, sent to us from among ourselves a Prophet whose father and mother are known to us. Our Prophet, the Messenger of our Lord, has ordered us to fight you till you worship Allah Alone or give Jizya (i.e. tribute); and our Prophet has informed us that our Lord says:— ”Whoever amongst us is killed (i.e. martyred), shall go to Paradise to lead such a luxurious life as he has never seen, and whoever amongst us remain alive, shall become your master.“ (Al-Mughira, then blamed An-Numan for delaying the attack and) An-Nu' man said to Al-Mughira, ”If you had participated in a similar battle, in the company of Allah's Apostle he would not have blamed you for waiting, nor would he have disgraced you. But I accompanied Allah's Apostle in many battles and it was his custom that if he did not fight early by daytime, he would wait till the wind had started blowing and the time for the prayer was due (i.e. after midday)."


## Hadith 4:387

_Narrated Abu Humaid As-Saidi:_

We accompanied the Prophet in the Ghazwa of Tabuk and the king of 'Aila presented a white mule and a cloak as a gift to the Prophet. And the Prophet wrote to him a peace treaty allowing him to keep authority over his country.


## Hadith 4:388

_Narrated Juwairiya bin Qudama At-Tamimi:_

We said to 'Umar bin Al-Khattab, Jo Chief of the believers! Advise us.“ He said, ”I advise you to fulfill Allah's Convention (made with the Dhimmis) as it is the convention of your Prophet and the source of the livelihood of your dependents (i.e. the taxes from the Dhimmis.) "


## Hadith 4:389

_Narrated Yahya bin Said:_

Once the Prophet called the Ansar in order to grant them part of the land of Bahrain. On that they said, “No! By Allah, we will not accept it unless you grant a similar thing to our Quarries brothers as well.” He said, “That will be their's if Allah wishes.” But when the Ansar persisted in their request, he said, “After me you will see others given preference over you in this respect (in which case) you should be patient till you meet me at the Tank (of Al-Kauthar).”


## Hadith 4:390

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle once said to me, “If the revenue of Bahrain came, I would give you this much and this much.” When Allah's Apostle had died, the revenue of Bahrain came, and Abu Bakr announced, “ Let whoever was promised something by Allah's Apostle come to me.” So, I went to Abu Bakr and said, “Allah's Apostle said to me, 'If the revenue of Bahrain came, I would give you this much and this. much.” On that Abu Bakr said to me, “Scoop (money) with both your hands.” I scooped money with both my hands and Abu Bakr asked me to count it. I counted it and it was five-hundred (gold pieces). The total amount he gave me was one thousand and five hundred (gold pieces.)

said, “Spread it in the Mosque.” It was the biggest amount that had ever been brought to Allah's Apostle . In the meantime Al-'Abbas came to him and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Give me, for I gave the ransom of myself and Aqil.” The Prophet said (to him), “Take.” He scooped money with both hands and poured it in his garment and tried to lift it, but he could not and appealed to the Prophet, “Will you order someone to help me in lifting it?” The Prophet said, “No.” Then Al-'Abbas said, “Then will you yourself help me carry it?” The Prophet said, “No.” Then Al 'Abbas threw away some of the money, but even then he was not able to lift it, and so he gain requested the Prophet “Will you order someone to help me carry it?” The Prophet said, “No.” Then Al-'Abbas said, “Then will you yourself yelp me carry it?” The Prophet said, 'No." So, Al-'Abbas threw away some more money and lifted it on his shoulder and went away. The Prophet kept on looking at him with astonishment at his greediness till he went out of our sight. Allah's Apostle did not get up from there till not a single Dirham remained from that money.


## Hadith 4:391

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:_

The Prophet said, “Whoever killed a person having a treaty with the Muslims, shall not smell the smell of Paradise though its smell is perceived from a distance of forty years.”


## Hadith 4:392

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

While we were in the Mosque, the Prophet came out and said, “Let us go to the Jews” We went out till we reached Bait-ul-Midras. He said to them, “If you embrace Islam, you will be safe. You should know that the earth belongs to Allah and His Apostle, and I want to expel you from this land. So, if anyone amongst you owns some property, he is permitted to sell it, otherwise you should know that the Earth belongs to Allah and His Apostle.”


## Hadith 4:393

_Narrated Said bin Jubair:_

that he heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, “Thursday! And you know not what Thursday is? After that Ibn 'Abbas wept till the stones on the ground were soaked with his tears. On that I asked Ibn 'Abbas, ”What is (about) Thursday?“ He said, ”When the condition (i.e. health) of Allah's Apostle deteriorated, he said, 'Bring me a bone of scapula, so that I may write something for you after which you will never go astray.'The people differed in their opinions although it was improper to differ in front of a prophet, They said, 'What is wrong with him? Do you think he is delirious? Ask him (to understand). The Prophet replied, 'Leave me as I am in a better state than what you are asking me to do.' Then the Prophet ordered them to do three things saying, 'Turn out all the pagans from the Arabian Peninsula, show respect to all foreign delegates by giving them gifts as I used to do.' “ The sub-narrator added, ”The third order was something beneficial which either Ibn 'Abbas did not mention or he mentioned but I forgot.'


## Hadith 4:394

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

When Khaibar was conquered, a roasted poisoned sheep was presented to the Prophets as a gift (by the Jews). The Prophet ordered, “Let all the Jews who have been here, be assembled before me.” The Jews were collected and the Prophet said (to them), “I am going to ask you a question. Will you tell the truth?'' They said, ”Yes.' The Prophet asked, “Who is your father?” They replied, “So-and-so.” He said, “You have told a ie; your father is so-and-so.” They said, “You are right.” He siad, “Will you now tell me the truth, if I ask you about something?” They replied, “Yes, O AbuAl-Qasim; and if we should tell a lie, you can realize our lie as you have done regarding our father.” On that he asked, “Who are the people of the (Hell) Fire?” They said, “We shall remain in the (Hell) Fire for a short period, and after that you will replace us.” The Prophet said, “You may be cursed and humiliated in it! By Allah, we shall never replace you in it.'' Then he asked, ”Will you now tell me the truth if I ask you a question?“ They said, ”Yes, O Ab Li-AI-Qasim.“ He asked, ”Have you poisoned this sheep?“ They said, ”Yes.“ He asked, ”What made you do so?“ They said, ”We wanted to know if you were a liar in which case we would get rid of you, and if you are a prophet then the poison would not harm you."


## Hadith 4:395

_Narrated 'Asim:_

I asked Anas about the Qunut (i.e. invocation in the prayer). Anas said, “It should be recited before bowing.” I said, “So-and-so claims that you say that it should be recited after bowing.” He replied, “He is mistaken.” Then Anas narrated to us that the Prophet invoked evil on the tribe of Bani-Sulaim for one month after bowing. ' Anas Further said, “The Prophet had sent 40 or 70 Qaris (i.e. men well versed in the knowledge of the Qur'an) to some pagans, but the latter struggled with them and martyred them, although there was a peace pact between them and the Prophet I had never seen the Prophet so sorry and worried about anybody as he was about them (i.e. the Qaris).”


## Hadith 4:396

_Narrated Um Hani:_

the daughter of Abu Talib: I went to Allah's Apostle on the day of the conquest of Mecca and found him taking a bath, and his daughter Fatima was screening him. I greeted him and he asked, “Who is that?” I said, “I, Um Hani bint Abi Talib.” He said, “Welcome, O Um Hani.” When he had finished his bath, he stood up and offered eight Rakat while dressed in one garment. I said, “O Allah's Apostle! My brother 'Ali has declared that he will kill a man to whom I have granted asylum. The man is so and-so bin Hubaira.” Allah's Apostle said, “O Um Hani! We will grant asylum to the one whom you have granted asylum.” (Um Hani said, "That (visit) took place in the Duha (i.e. forenoon)).


## Hadith 4:397

_Narrated Ibrahim At-Tamimi's father:_

'Ali delivered a sermon saying, “We have no book to read except the Book of Allah and what is written in this paper which contains verdicts regarding (retaliation for) wounds, the ages of the camels (given as Zakat or as blood money) and the fact that Medina is a sanctuary in between Air mountain to so-and-so (mountain). So, whoever innovates in it an heresy or commits a sin or gives shelter in it, to such an innovator will incur the Curse of Allah, the angels and all the people, and none of his compulsory or optional good deeds of worship will be accepted. And whoever (freed slave) takes as his master (i.e. befriends) other than his real masters will incur the same (Curse). And the asylum granted by any Muslim is to be secured by all the other Muslims, and whoever betrays a Muslim in this respect will incur the same (Curse).”


## Hadith 4:398

_Narrated Sahl bin Abi Hathma:_

'Abdullah bin Sahl and Muhaiyisa bin Mas'ud bin Zaid set out to Khaibar, the inhabitants of which had a peace treaty with the Muslims at that time. They parted and later on Muhaiyisa came upon 'Abdullah bin Sah! and found him murdered agitating in his blood. He buried him and returned to Medina. 'Abdur Rahman bin Sahl, Muhaiyisa and Huwaiuisa, the sons of Mas'ud came to the Prophet and 'Abdur Rahman intended to talk, but the Prophet said (to him), “Let the eldest of you speak.” as 'Abdur-Rahman was the youngest:. 'Abdur-Rahman kept silent and the other two spoke. The Prophet said, “If you swear as to who has committed the murder, you will have the right to take your right from the murderer.” They said, “How should we swear if we did not witness the murder or see the murderer?” The Prophet said, “Then the Jews can clear themselves from the charge by taking Alaska (an oath taken by men that it was not they who committed the murder).” The!y said, “How should we believe in the oaths of infidels?” So, the Prophet himself paid the blood money (of 'Abdullah). (See Hadith No. 36 Vol. 9.)


## Hadith 4:399

_Narrated ' Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

That Abu Sufyan bin Harb Informed him that Heraclius called him and the members of a caravan from Quraish who had gone to Sham as traders, during the truce which Allah's Apostle had concluded with Abu Sufyan and the Quraish infidels.


## Hadith 4:400

_Narrated Aisha:_

Once the Prophet was bewitched so that he began to imagine that he had done a thing which in fact he had not done.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_300">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:201 to 4:300</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_500">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:401 to 4:500</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
