---
title: "Hadith 4:401 to 4:500"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_400">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:301 to 4:400</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_600">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:501 to 4:600</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 4:401

_Narrated Auf bin Mali:_

I went to the Prophet during the Ghazwa of Tabuk while he was sitting in a leather tent. He said, "Count six signs that indicate the approach of the Hour: my death, the conquest of Jerusalem, a plague that will afflict you (and kill you in great numbers) as the plague that afflicts sheep, the increase of wealth to such an extent that even if one is given one hundred Dinars, he will not be satisfied; then an affliction which no Arab house will escape, and then a truce between you and Bani Al-Asfar (i.e. the Byzantines) who will betray you and attack you under eighty flags. Under each flag will be twelve thousand soldiers.


## Hadith 4:402

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Abu Bakr, on the day of Nahr (i.e. slaughtering of animals for sacrifice), sent me in the company of others to make this announcement: “After this year, no pagan will be allowed to perform the Hajj, and none will be allowed to perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba undressed.” And the day of Al-Hajj-ul-Akbar is the day of Nahr, and it called Al-Akbar because the people call the 'Umra Al-Hajj-ul-Asghar (i.e. the minor Hajj). Abu Bakr threw back the pagans' covenant that year, and therefore, no pagan performed the Hajj in the year of Hajj-ul-Wada' of the Prophets.


## Hadith 4:403

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Amr:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whoever has (the following) four characteristics will be a pure hypocrite: ”If he speaks, he tells a lie; if he gives a promise, he breaks it, if he makes a covenant he proves treacherous; and if he quarrels, he behaves in a very imprudent evil insulting manner (unjust). And whoever has one of these characteristics, has one characteristic of a hypocrite, unless he gives it us."


## Hadith 4:404

_Narrated Ali:_

We did not, write anything from the Prophet except the Quran and what is written in this paper, (wherein) the Prophet said, “Medina is a sanctuary from (the mountain of) Air to so and-so, therefore, whoever innovates (in it) an heresy or commits a sin, or gives shelter to such an innovator, will incur the Curse of Allah. the angels and all the people; and none of his compulsory or optional good deeds of worship will be accepted And the asylum granted by any Muslim Is to be secured by all the Muslims even if it is granted by one of the lowest social status among them. And whoever betrays a Muslim in this respect will incur the Curse of Allah, the angels and all the people, and his compulsory and optional good deeds of worship will not be accepted. And any freed slave will take as masters (befriends) people other than his own real masters who freed him without taking the permission of the latter, will incur the Curse of Allah, the angels and all the people, and his compulsory and optional good deeds of worship will not be accepted.”

state be when you can get no Dinar or Dirhan (i.e. taxes from the Dhimmis)?“ on that someone asked him, ”What makes you know that this state will take place, O Abu- Hu raira?“ He said, ”By Him in Whose Hands Abu Huraira's life is, I know it through the statement of the true and truly inspired one (i.e. the Prophet).“ The people asked, ”What does the Statement say?“ He replied, ”Allah and His Apostle's asylum granted to Dhimmis, i.e. non-Muslims living in a Muslim territory) will be outraged, and so Allah will make the hearts of these Dhimmis so daring that they will refuse to pay the Jizya they will be supposed to pay."


## Hadith 4:405

_Narrated Al-Amash:_

I asked Abu Wail, “Did you take part in the battle of Siffin?” He said, 'Yes, and I heard Sahl bin Hunaif (when he was blamed for lack of zeal for fighting) saying, “You'd better blame your wrong opinions. I wish you had seen me on the day of Abu Jandal. If I had the courage to disobey the Prophet's orders, I would have done so. We had kept out swords on our necks and shoulders, for a thing which frightened us. And we did so, we found it easier for us, except in the case of the above battle (of ours).' ”


## Hadith 4:406

_Narrated Abu Wail:_

We were in Siffin and Sahl bin Hunaif got up and said, "O people! Blame yourselves! We were with the Prophet on the day of Hudaibiya, and if we had been called to fight, we would have fought. But 'Umar bin Al Khatab came and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Aren't we in the right and our opponents in the wrongs' Allah's Apostle said, 'Yes.' 'Umar said, 'Aren't our killed persons in Paradise and their's in Hell?' He said, 'Yes.' 'Umar said, 'Then why should we accept hard terms in matters concerning our religion? Shall we return before Allah judges between us and them?' Allah's Apostle said, 'O Ibn Al-Khattab! I am the Apostle of Allah and Allah will never degrade me. Then 'Umar went to Abu Bakr and told him the same as he had told the Prophet.

On that Abu Bakr said (to 'Umar). 'He is the Apostle of Allah and Allah will never degrade him.' Then Surat-al-Fath (i.e. Victory) was revealed and Allah's Apostle recited it to the end in front of 'Umar. On that 'Umar asked, 'O Allah's Apostle! Was it (i.e. the Hudaibiya Treaty) a victory?' Allah's Apostle said, “Yes”


## Hadith 4:407

_Narrated Asma 'bint Abi Bakr:_

During the period of the peace treaty of Quraish with Allah's Apostle, my mother, accompanied by her father, came to visit me, and she was a pagan. I consulted Allah's Apostle, “O Allah's Apostle! My mother has come to me and she desires to receive a reward from me, shall I keep good relation with her?” He said, “Yes, keep good relation with her.”


## Hadith 4:408

_Narrated Al-Bara:_

When the Prophet intended to perform the 'Umra he sent a person to the people of Mecca asking their permission to enter Mecca. They stipulated that he would not stay for more than three days and would not enter it except with sheathed arms and would not preach (Islam) to any of them. So Ali bin Abi-Talib started writing the treaty between them. He wrote, “This is what Muhammad, Apostle of Allah has agreed to.” The (Meccans) said, “If we knew that you (Muhammad) are the Apostle of Allah, then we would not have prevented you and would have followed you. But write, 'This is what Muhammad bin 'Abdullah has agreed to..' ” On that Allah's Apostle said, “By Allah, I am Muhammad bin 'Abdullah, and, by Allah, I am Apostle of 'Allah.” Allah's Apostle used not to write; so he asked 'Ali to erase the expression of Apostle of Allah. On that 'Ali said, “By Allah I will never erase it.” Allah's Apostle said (to 'Ali), “Let me see the paper.” When 'Ali showed him the paper, the Prophet erased the expression with his own hand. When Allah's Apostle had entered Mecca and three days had elapsed, the Meccans came to 'Ali and said, “Let your friend (i.e. the Prophet) quit Mecca.” Ali informed Allah's Apostle about it and Allah's Apostle said, “Yes,” and then he departed.


## Hadith 4:409

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

While the Prophet was in the state of prostration, surrounded by a group of people from Quraish pagans. 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait came and brought the intestines of a camel and threw them on the back of the Prophet . The Prophet did not raise his head from prostration till Fatima (i.e. his daughter) came and removed those intestines from his back, and invoked evil on whoever had done (the evil deed). The Prophet said, “O Allah! Destroy the chiefs of Quraish, O Allah! Destroy Abu Jahl bin Hisham, 'Utba bin Rabi'a, Shaiba bin Rabi'a. 'Uqba bin Abi Mu'ait 'Umaiya bin Khalaf (or Ubai bin Kalaf).” Later on I saw all of them killed during the battle of Badr and their bodies were thrown into a well except the body of Umaiya or Ubai, because he was a fat person, and when he was pulled, the parts of his body got separated before he was thrown into the well.


## Hadith 4:410

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, ''Every betrayer will have a flag on the Day of Resurrection" One of the two sub-narrators said that the flag would be fixed, and the other said that it would be shown on the Day of Resurrection, so that the betrayer might be recognized by it.


## Hadith 4:411

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

The Prophet said, “Every betrayer will have a flag which will be fixed on the Day of Resurrection, and the flag's prominence will be made in order to show the betrayal he committed.”


## Hadith 4:412

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle said on the day of the conquest of Mecca, “There is no migration now, but there is Jihad (i.e.. holy battle) and good intentions. And when you are called for Jihad, you should come out at once” Allah's Apostle also said, on the day of the conquest of Mecca, “Allah has made this town a sanctuary since the day He created the Heavens and the Earth. So, it is a sanctuary by Allah's Decree till the Day of Resurrection. Fighting in it was not legal for anyone before me, and it was made legal for me only for an hour by daytime. So, it (i.e. Mecca) is a sanctuary by Allah's Decree till the Day of Resurrection. Its thorny bushes should not be cut, and its game should not be chased, its fallen property (i.e. Luqata) should not be picked up except by one who will announce it publicly; and its grass should not be uprooted,” On that Al-'Abbas said, “O Allah's Apostle! Except the Idhkhir, because it is used by the goldsmiths and by the people for their houses.” On that the Prophet said, “Except the Idhkhir.”


## Hadith 4:413

_Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:_

Some people of Bani Tamim came to the Prophet and he said (to them), “O Bani Tamim! rejoice with glad tidings.” They said, “You have given us glad tidings, now give us something.” On hearing that the color of his face changed then the people of Yemen came to him and he said, “O people of Yemen ! Accept the good tidings, as Bani Tamim has refused them.” The Yemenites said, “We accept them. Then the Prophet started taking about the beginning of creation and about Allah's Throne. In the mean time a man came saying, ”O 'Imran! Your she-camel has run away!'' (I got up and went away), but l wish I had not left that place (for I missed what Allah's Apostle had said).


## Hadith 4:414

_Narrated Imran bin Husain:_

I went to the Prophet and tied my she-camel at the gate. The people of Bani Tamim came to the Prophet who said “O Bani Tamim! Accept the good tidings.” They said twice, 'You have given us the good tidings, now give us something“ Then some Yemenites came to him and he said, ”Accept the good tidings, O people of Yemem, for Bani Tamim refused them.“ They said, ”We accept it, O Allah's Apostle! We have come to ask you about this matter (i.e. the start of creations).“ He said, ”First of all, there was nothing but Allah, and (then He created His Throne). His throne was over the water, and He wrote everything in the Book (in the Heaven) and created the Heavens and the Earth.“ Then a man shouted, ”O Ibn Husain! Your she-camel has gone away!" So, I went away and could not see the she-camel because of the mirage. By Allah, I wished I had left that she-camel (but not that gathering).

period and informed us about the beginning of creation (and talked about everything in detail) till he mentioned how the people of Paradise will enter their places and the people of Hell will enter their places. Some remembered what he had said, and some forgot it.


## Hadith 4:415

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Allah the Most Superior said, ”The son of Adam slights Me, and he should not slight Me, and he disbelieves in Me, and he ought not to do so. As for his slighting Me, it is that he says that I have a son; and his disbelief in Me is his statement that I shall not recreate him as I have created (him) before."


## Hadith 4:416

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When Allah completed the creation, He wrote in His Book which is with Him on His Throne, ”My Mercy overpowers My Anger."


## Hadith 4:417

_Narrated Muhammad bin Ibrahim bin Al-Harith:_

from Abu Salama bin 'Abdur-Rahman who had a dispute with some people on a piece of land, and so he went to 'Aisha and told her about it. She said, “O Abu Salama, avoid the land, for Allah's Apostle said, 'Any person who takes even a span of land unjustly, his neck shall be encircled with it down seven earths.' ”


## Hadith 4:418

_Narrated Salim's father:_

The Prophet said, “Any person who takes a piece of land unjustly will sink down the seven earths on the Day of Resurrection.”


## Hadith 4:419

_Narrated Abu Bakra:_

The Prophet said. “(The division of time has turned to its original form which was current when Allah created the Heavens and the Earths. The year is of twelve months, out of which four months are sacred: Three are in succession Dhul-Qa' da, Dhul-Hijja and Muharram, and (the fourth is) Rajab of (the tribe of) Mudar which comes between Jumadi-ath-Thaniyah and Sha ban.”


## Hadith 4:420

_Narrated Said bin Zaid bin Amr bin Nufail:_

That Arwa sued him before Marwan for a right, which she claimed, he had deprived her of. On that Said said, “How should I deprive her of her right? I testify that I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'If anyone takes a span of land unjustly, his neck will be encircled with it down seven earths on the Day of Resurrection.”


## Hadith 4:421

_Narrated Abu Dhar:_

The Prophet asked me at sunset, “Do you know where the sun goes (at the time of sunset)?” I replied, “Allah and His Apostle know better.” He said, “It goes (i.e. travels) till it prostrates Itself underneath the Throne and takes the permission to rise again, and it is permitted and then (a time will come when) it will be about to prostrate itself but its prostration will not be accepted, and it will ask permission to go on its course but it will not be permitted, but it will be ordered to return whence it has come and so it will rise in the west. And that is the interpretation of the Statement of Allah: ”And the sun Runs its fixed course For a term (decreed). that is The Decree of (Allah) The Exalted in Might, The All-Knowing." (36.38)


## Hadith 4:422

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The sun and the moon will be folded up (deprived of their light) on the Day of Resurrection.”


## Hadith 4:423

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “The sun and the moon do not eclipse because of someone's death or wife (i.e. birth), but they are two signs amongst the Signs of Allah. So, if you see them (i.e. eclipse) offer the Prayer (of eclipse).”


## Hadith 4:424

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “The sun and the moon are two signs amongst the Signs of Allah. They do not eclipse because of someone's death or life. So, if you see them (i.e. eclipse), celebrate the Praises of Allah (i.e. pray).”


## Hadith 4:425

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

On the day of a solar eclipse, Allah's Apostle stood up (to offer the eclipse prayer). He recited Takbir, recited a long recitation (of Holy Verses), bowed a long bowing, and then he raised h is head saying. “Allah hears him who sends his praises to Him.” Then he stayed standing, recited a long recitation again, but shorter than the former, bowed a long bowing, but shorter than the first, performed a long prostration and then performed the second Rak'a in the same way as he had done the first. By the time he had finished his prayer with Taslim, the solar eclipse had been over. Then he addressed the people referring to the solar and lunar eclipses saying, “These are two signs amongst the Signs of Allah, and they do not eclipse because of anyone's death or life. So, if you see them, hasten for the Prayer.”


## Hadith 4:426

_Narrated Abu Mas'ud:_

The Prophet said, “the sun and the moon do not eclipse because of the death or life of someone, but they are two signs amongst the Signs of Allah. So, if you see them, offer the Prayer (of eclipse).”


## Hadith 4:427

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “I have been made victorious with the Saba (i.e. easterly wind) and the people of 'Ad were destroyed with the Dabur (i.e. westerly wind) .”


## Hadith 4:428

_Narrated Ata:_

'Aisha said If the Prophet saw a cloud In the sky, he would walk to and fro in agitation, go out and come in, and the color of his face would change, and if it rained, he would feel relaxed.“ So 'Aisha knew that state of his. So the Prophet said, I don't know (am afraid), it may be similar to what happened to some people referred to in the Holy Quran in the following Verse: — ”Then when they saw it as a dense cloud coming towards their valleys, they said, 'This is a cloud bringing us rain!' Nay, but, it is that (torment) which you were asking to be hastened a wind wherein is severe torment." (46.24)


## Hadith 4:429

_Narrated Malik bin Sasaa:_

The Prophet said, “While I was at the House in a state midway between sleep and wakefulness, (an angel recognized me) as the man lying between two men. A golden tray full of wisdom and belief was brought to me and my body was cut open from the throat to the lower part of the abdomen and then my abdomen was washed with Zam-zam water and (my heart was) filled with wisdom and belief. Al-Buraq, a white animal, smaller than a mule and bigger than a donkey was brought to me and I set out with Gabriel. When I reached the nearest heaven. Gabriel said to the heaven gate-keeper, 'Open the gate.' The gatekeeper asked, 'Who is it?' He said, 'Gabriel.' The gate-keeper,' Who is accompanying you?' Gabriel said, 'Muhammad.' The gate-keeper said, 'Has he been called?' Gabriel said, 'Yes.' Then it was said, 'He is welcomed. What a wonderful visit his is!' Then I met Adam and greeted him and he said, 'You are welcomed O son and a Prophet.' Then we ascended to the second heaven. It was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel said, 'Gabriel.' It was said, 'Who is with you?' He said, 'Muhammad' It was asked, 'Has he been sent for?' He said, 'Yes.' It was said, 'He is welcomed. What a wonderful visit his is!” Then I met Jesus and Yahya (John) who said, 'You are welcomed, O brother and a Prophet.' Then we ascended to the third heaven. It was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel said, 'Gabriel.' It was asked, 'Who is with you? Gabriel said, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been sent for?' 'Yes,' said Gabriel. 'He is welcomed. What a wonderful visit his is!' (The Prophet added:). There I met Joseph and greeted him, and he replied, 'You are welcomed, O brother and a Prophet!' Then we ascended to the 4th heaven and again the same questions and answers were exchanged as in the previous heavens. There I met Idris and greeted him. He said, 'You are welcomed O brother and Prophet.' Then we ascended to the 5th heaven and again the same questions and answers were exchanged as in previous heavens. there I met and greeted Aaron who said, 'You are welcomed O brother and a Prophet“. Then we ascended to the 6th heaven and again the same questions and answers were exchanged as in the previous heavens. There I met and greeted Moses who said, 'You are welcomed O brother and. a Prophet.' When I proceeded on, he started weeping and on being asked why he was weeping, he said, 'O Lord! Followers of this youth who was sent after me will enter Paradise in greater number than my followers.' Then we ascended to the seventh heaven and again the same questions and answers were exchanged as in the previous heavens. There I met and greeted Abraham who said, 'You are welcomed o son and a Prophet.' Then I was shown Al-Bait-al-Ma'mur (i.e. Allah's House). I asked Gabriel about it and he said, This is Al Bait-ul-Ma'mur where 70,000 angels perform prayers daily and when they leave they never return to it (but always a fresh batch comes into it daily).' Then I was shown Sidrat-ul-Muntaha (i.e. a tree in the seventh heaven) and I saw its Nabk fruits which resembled the clay jugs of Hajr (i.e. a town in Arabia), and its leaves were like the ears of elephants, and four rivers originated at its root, two of them were apparent and two were hidden. I asked Gabriel about those rivers and he said, 'The two hidden rivers are in Paradise, and the apparent ones are the Nile and the Euphrates.' Then fifty prayers were enjoined on me. I descended till I met Moses who asked me, 'What have you done?' I said, 'Fifty prayers have been enjoined on me.' He said, 'I know the people better than you, because I had the hardest experience to bring Bani Israel to obedience. Your followers cannot put up with such obligation. So, return to your Lord and request Him (to reduce the number of prayers.' I returned and requested Allah (for reduction) and He made it forty. I returned and (met Moses) and had a similar discussion, and then returned again to Allah for reduction and He made it thirty, then twenty, then ten, and then I came to Moses who repeated the same advice. Ultimately Allah reduced it to five. When I came to Moses again, he said, 'What have you done?' I said, 'Allah has made it five only.' He repeated the same advice but I said that I surrendered (to Allah's Final Order)'” Allah's Apostle was addressed by Allah, “I have decreed My Obligation and have reduced the burden on My slaves, and I shall reward a single good deed as if it were ten good deeds.”


## Hadith 4:430

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mus'ud:_

Allah's Apostle, the true and truly inspired said, “(The matter of the Creation of) a human being is put together in the womb of the mother in forty days, and then he becomes a clot of thick blood for a similar period, and then a piece of flesh for a similar period. Then Allah sends an angel who is ordered to write four things. He is ordered to write down his (i.e. the new creature's) deeds, his livelihood, his (date of) death, and whether he will be blessed or wretched (in religion). Then the soul is breathed into him. So, a man amongst you may do (good deeds till there is only a cubit between him and Paradise and then what has been written for him decides his behavior and he starts doing (evil) deeds characteristic of the people of the (Hell) Fire. And similarly a man amongst you may do (evil) deeds till there is only a cubit between him and the (Hell) Fire, and then what has been written for him decides his behavior, and he starts doing deeds characteristic of the people of Paradise.”


## Hadith 4:431

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “If Allah loves a person, He calls Gabriel saying, 'Allah loves so and-so; O Gabriel! Love him.' Gabriel would love him and make an announcement amongst the inhabitants of the Heaven. 'Allah loves so-and-so, therefore you should love him also,' and so all the inhabitants of the Heaven would love him, and then he is granted the pleasure of the people on the earth.”


## Hadith 4:432

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “The angels descend, the clouds and mention this or that matter decreed in the Heaven. The devils listen stealthily to such a matter, come down to inspire the soothsayers with it, and the latter would add to it one-hundred lies of their own.”


## Hadith 4:433

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “On every Friday the angels take heir stand at every gate of the mosques to write the names of the people chronologically (i.e. according to the time of their arrival for the Friday prayer and when the Imam sits (on the pulpit) they fold up their scrolls and get ready to listen to the sermon.”


## Hadith 4:434

_Narrated Sa'id bin Al-Musaiyab:_

'Umar came to the Mosque while Hassan was reciting a poem. ('Umar disapproved of that). On that Hassan said, “I used to recite poetry in this very Mosque in the presence of one (i.e. the Prophet ) who was better than you.” Then he turned towards Abu Huraira and said (to him), “I ask you by Allah, did you hear Allah's Apostle saying (to me), ”Retort on my behalf. O Allah! Support him (i.e. Hassan) with the Holy Spirit?“ Abu Huraira said, ”Yes."


## Hadith 4:435

_Narrated Al Bara:_

The Prophet said to Hassan, “Lampoon them (i.e. the pagans) and Gabriel is with you.”


## Hadith 4:436

_Narrated Jarir:_

as below (Hadith 437).


## Hadith 4:437

_Narrated Humaid bin Hilal:_

Anas bin Malik said, “As if I say a cloud of dust swirling up in the lane of Bani Ghanim.” Musa added, “That was caused by the procession of Gabriel.”


## Hadith 4:438

_Narrated Aisha:_

Al Harith bin Hisham asked the Prophet, “How does the divine inspiration come to you?” He replied, “In all these ways: The Angel sometimes comes to me with a voice which resembles the sound of a ringing bell, and when this state abandons me, I remember what the Angel has said, and this type of Divine Inspiration is the hardest on me; and sometimes the Angel comes to me in the shape of a man and talks to me, and I understand and remember what he says.”


## Hadith 4:439

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “Who ever spends a couple (of objects) in Allah's cause, will be called by the Gatekeepers of Paradise who will say, ”O so-and-so, come on!“ Abu Bakr said, ”Such a person will never perish or be miserable' The Prophet said, “I hope you will be among such person.”


## Hadith 4:440

_Narrated Abu Salama:_

'Aisha said that the Prophet said to her “O 'Aisha' This is Gabriel and he sends his (greetings) salutations to you.” 'Aisha said, “Salutations (Greetings) to him, and Allah's Mercy and Blessings be on him,” and addressing the Prophet she said, “You see what I don't see.”


## Hadith 4:441

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle asked Gabriel, “Why don't you visit us more often than you do?” Then the following Holy Verse was revealed (in this respect):— “And we (angels) descend not but by the order of your Lord. To Him belong what is before us and what is behind us, and what is between those two and your Lord was never forgetful.” (19.64)


## Hadith 4:442

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Gabriel read the Qur'an to me in one way (i.e. dialect) and I continued asking him to read it in different ways till he read it in seven different ways.”


## Hadith 4:443

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

Allah's Apostle was the most generous of all the people, and he used to be more generous in the month of Ramadan when Gabriel used to meet him. Gabriel used to meet him every night in Ramadan to study the Holy Quran carefully together. Allah's Apostle used to become more generous than the fast wind when he met Gabriel


## Hadith 4:444

_Narrated Ibn Shihab:_

Once Umar bin Abdul Aziz delayed the 'Asr prayer a little. 'Urwa said to him, “Gabriel descended and led the prayer in front of the Prophet ” On that 'Umar said, “O Urwa! Be sure of what you say.” “Urwa, ”I heard Bashir bin Abi Masud narrating from Ibn Masud who heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'Gabriel descended and led me in prayer; and then prayed with him again, and then prayed with him again, and then prayed with him again, and then prayed with him again, counting with his fingers five prayers."


## Hadith 4:445

_Narrated Abu Dhar:_

The Prophet said, “Gabriel said to me, 'Whoever amongst your followers die without having worshipped others besides Allah, will enter Paradise (or will not enter the (Hell) Fire).” The Prophet asked. “Even if he has committed illegal sexual intercourse or theft?” He replied, “Even then.”


## Hadith 4:446

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Angels keep on descending from and ascending to the Heaven in turn, some at night and some by daytime, and all of them assemble together at the time of the Fajr and 'Asr prayers. Then those who have stayed with you over-night, ascent unto Allah Who asks them, and He knows the answer better than they, ”How have you left My slaves?“ They reply, ”We have left them praying as we found them praying.“ If anyone of you says ”Amin“ (during the Prayer at the end of the recitation of Surat-al-Faitiha), and the angels in Heaven say the same, and the two sayings coincide, all his past sins will be forgiven.”


## Hadith 4:447

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I stuffed for the Prophet a pillow decorated with pictures (of animals) which looked like a Namruqa (i.e. a small cushion). He came and stood among the people with excitement apparent on his face. I said, “O Allah's Apostle! What is wrong?” He said, “What is this pillow?” I said, “I have prepared this pillow for you, so that you may recline on it.” He said, “Don't you know that angels do not enter a house wherein there are pictures; and whoever makes a picture will be punished on the Day of Resurrection and will be asked to give life to (what he has created)?”


## Hadith 4:448

_Narrated Abu Talha:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying; “Angels (of Mercy) do not enter a house wherein there is a dog or a picture of a living creature (a human being or an animal).”


## Hadith 4:449

_Narrated Busr bin Said:_

That Zaid bin Khalid Al-Juhani narrated to him something in the presence of Said bin 'Ubaidullah Al-Khaulani who was brought up in the house of Maimuna the wife of the Prophet. Zaid narrated to them that Abu Talha said that the Prophet said, “The Angels (of Mercy) do not enter a house wherein there is a picture.” Busr said, “Later on Zaid bin Khalid fell ill and we called on him. To our surprise we saw a curtain decorated with pictures in his house. I said to Ubaidullah Al-Khaulani, ”Didn't he (i.e. Zaid) tell us about the (prohibition of) pictures?“ He said, ”But he excepted the embroidery on garments. Didn't you hear him?“ I said, ”No.“ He said, ”Yes, he did."


## Hadith 4:450

_Narrated Salim's father:_

Once Gabriel promised the Prophet (that he would visit him, but Gabriel did not come) and later on he said, “We, angels, do not enter a house which contains a picture or a dog.”


## Hadith 4:451

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When the Imam, during the prayer, says, ”Allah hears him who praises Him', say: 'O Allah! Our Lord! All the praises are for You/, for if the saying of anyone of you coincides with the saying of the angels, his past sins will be forgiven."


## Hadith 4:452

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “As long as any-one of you is waiting for the prayer, he is considered to be praying actually, and the angels say, 'O Allah! Be merciful to him and forgive him', (and go on saying so) unless he leaves his place of praying or passes wind (i.e. breaks his ablution).”


## Hadith 4:453

_Narrated Yali:_

I heard the Prophet reciting the following Verse on the pulpit: "They will call: O Mali......' and Sufyan said that 'Abdullah recited it: 'They will call: O Mali..' (43.77)


## Hadith 4:454

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

That she asked the Prophet , 'Have you encountered a day harder than the day of the battle) of Uhud?“ The Prophet replied, ”Your tribes have troubled me a lot, and the worse trouble was the trouble on the day of 'Aqaba when I presented myself to Ibn 'Abd-Yalail bin 'Abd-Kulal and he did not respond to my demand. So I departed, overwhelmed with excessive sorrow, and proceeded on, and could not relax till I found myself at Qarnath-Tha-alib where I lifted my head towards the sky to see a cloud shading me unexpectedly. I looked up and saw Gabriel in it. He called me saying, 'Allah has heard your people's saying to you, and what they have replied back to you, Allah has sent the Angel of the Mountains to you so that you may order him to do whatever you wish to these people.' The Angel of the Mountains called and greeted me, and then said, “O Muhammad! Order what you wish. If you like, I will let Al-Akh-Shabain (i.e. two mountains) fall on them.” The Prophet said, “No but I hope that Allah will let them beget children who will worship Allah Alone, and will worship None besides Him.”


## Hadith 4:455

_Narrated Abu Ishaq-Ash-Shaibani:_

I asked Zir bin Hubaish regarding the Statement of Allah: “And was at a distance Of but two bow-lengths Or (even) nearer; So did (Allah) convey The Inspiration to His slave (Gabriel) and then he (Gabriel) Conveyed (that to Muhammad). (53.9-10) On that, Zir said, ”Ibn Mas'ud informed us that the Prophet had seen Gabriel having 600 wings."


## Hadith 4:456

_Narrated Abdullah:_

Regarding the Verse: “Indeed he (Muhammad) did see. Of the Signs of his Lord, The Greatest!” (53.18) That the Prophet had seen a green carpet spread all over the horizon of the sky.


## Hadith 4:457

_Narrated Aisha:_

Whoever claimed that (the Prophet) Muhammad saw his Lord, is committing a great fault, for he only saw Gabriel in his genuine shape in which he was created covering the whole horizon.


## Hadith 4:458

_Narrated Masruq:_

I asked Aisha “What about His Statement:— ”Then he (Gabriel) approached And came closer, And was at a distance Of but two bow-lengths Or (even) nearer?“ (53.8-9) She replied, ”It was Gabriel who used to come to the Prophet in the figure of a man, but on that occasion, he came in his actual and real figure and (he was so huge) that he covered the whole horizon."


## Hadith 4:459

_Narrated Samura:_

The Prophet said, “Last night I saw (in a dream) two men coming to me. One of them said, ”The person who kindles the fire is Malik, the gate-keeper of the (Hell) Fire, and I am Gabriel, and this is Michael."


## Hadith 4:460

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If a husband calls his wife to his bed (i.e. to have sexual relation) and she refuses and causes him to sleep in anger, the angels will curse her till morning.”


## Hadith 4:461

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

that he heard the Prophet saying, “The Divine Inspiration was delayed for a short period but suddenly, as I was walking. I heard a voice in the sky, and when I looked up towards the sky, to my surprise, I saw the angel who had come to me in the Hira Cave, and he was sitting on a chair in between the sky and the earth. I was so frightened by him that I fell on the ground and came to my family and said (to them), 'Cover me! (with a blanket), cover me!' Then Allah sent the Revelation: ”O, You wrapped up (In a blanket)! (Arise and warn! And your Lord magnify And keep pure your garments, And desert the idols." (74.1-5)


## Hadith 4:462

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “On the night of my Ascent to the Heaven, I saw Moses who was a tall brown curly-haired man as if he was one of the men of Shan'awa tribe, and I saw Jesus, a man of medium height and moderate complexion inclined to the red and white colors and of lank hair. I also saw Malik, the gate-keeper of the (Hell) Fire and Ad-Dajjal amongst the signs which Allah showed me.” (The Prophet then recited the Holy Verse): “So be not you in doubt of meeting him' when you met Moses during the night of Mi'raj over the heavens” (32.23)

Medina from Ad-Dajjal (who will not be able to enter the city of Medina)."


## Hadith 4:463

_Narrated Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When anyone of you dies, he will be shown his destination both in the morning and in the evening, and if he belongs to the people of Paradise, he will be shown his place in Paradise, and if he is from the people of Hell, he will be shown his place in Hell.”


## Hadith 4:464

_Narrated 'Imran bin Husain:_

The Prophet said, “I looked at Paradise and found poor people forming the majority of its inhabitants; and I looked at Hell and saw that the majority of its inhabitants were women.”


## Hadith 4:465

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

While we were in the company of the Prophet, he said, “While I was asleep, I saw myself in Paradise and there I beheld a woman making ablution beside a palace, I asked, To whom does this palace belong? 'They said, To 'Umar bin Al-Khattab.' Then I remembered 'Umar's Ghaira (concerning women), and so I quickly went away from that palace.” (When 'Umar heard this from the Prophet), he wept and said, “Do you think it is likely that I feel Ghaira because of you, O Allah's Apostle?”


## Hadith 4:466

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin Qais Al-Ashari:_

The Prophet said, “A tent (in Paradise) is like a hollow pearl which is thirty miles in height and on every corner of the tent the believer Imran in another narration, ”(The tent is) sixty miles (in height)")


## Hadith 4:467

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Allah said, ”I have prepared for My Pious slaves things which have never been seen by an eye, or heard by an ear, or imagined by a human being.“ If you wish, you can recite this Verse from the Holy Quran:—”No soul knows what is kept hidden for them, of joy as a reward for what they used to do." (32.17)


## Hadith 4:468

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The first group (of people) who will enter Paradise will be (glittering) like the moon when it is full. They will not spit or blow their noses or relieve nature. Their utensils will be of gold and their combs of gold and silver; in their centers the aloe wood will be used, and their sweat will smell like musk. Everyone of them will have two wives; the marrow of the bones of the wives' legs will be seen through the flesh out of excessive beauty. They ( i.e. the people of Paradise) will neither have differences nor hatred amongst themselves; their hearts will be as if one heart and they will be glorifying Allah in the morning and in the evening.”


## Hadith 4:469

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The first batch (of people) who will enter Paradise will be (glittering) like a full moon; and those who will enter next will be (glittering) like the brightest star. Their hearts will be as if the heart of a single man, for they will have no enmity amongst themselves, and everyone of them shall have two wives, each of whom will be so beautiful, pure and transparent that the marrow of the bones of their legs will be seen through the flesh. They will be glorifying Allah in the morning and evening, and will never fall ill, and they will neither blow their noses, nor spit. Their utensils will be of gold and silver, and their combs will be of gold, and the fuel used in their centers will be the aloes-wood, and their sweat will smell like musk.”


## Hadith 4:470

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

The Prophet said, “Verily! 70,000 or 700,000 of my followers will enter Paradise altogether; so that the first and the last amongst them will enter at the same time, and their faces will be glittering like the bright full moon.”


## Hadith 4:471

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

A silken cloak was presented to the Prophet and he used to forbid the usage of silk (by men). When the people were fascinated by the cloak. he said, “By Allah in Whose Hands the life of Muhammad is, the handkerchiefs of Sad bin Mu'adh in Paradise are better than this.”


## Hadith 4:472

_Narrated Al-Bara bin Azib:_

Allah's Apostle was given a silken garment, and its beauty and delicacy astonished the people. On that, Allah's Apostle said, “No doubt, the handkerchiefs of Sad bin Muadh in Paradise are better than this.”


## Hadith 4:473

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad Al-Saidi:_

Allah's Apostle said, “A place in Paradise equal to the size of a lash is better than the whole world and whatever is in it.”


## Hadith 4:474

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “There is a tree in Paradise (which is so big and huge that) if a rider travels in its shade for one hundred years, he would not be able to cross it.”


## Hadith 4:475

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said “There is a tree in Paradise (which is so big and huge that) a rider could travel in its shade for a hundred years. And if you wish, you can recite:—'In shade long extended..' (56. 30) and a place in Paradise equal to an arrow bow of one of you, is better than (the whole earth) on which the sun rises and sets.”


## Hadith 4:476

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The first batch (of people) who will enter Paradise will be (glittering) like the full moon, and the batch next to them will be (glittering) like the most brilliant star in the sky. Their hearts will be as if the heart of a single man, for they will have neither enmity nor jealousy amongst themselves; everyone will have two wives from the houris, (who will be so beautiful, pure and transparent that) the marrow of the bones of their legs will be seen through the bones and the flesh.”


## Hadith 4:477

_Narrated Al-Bara (bin Azib):_

The Prophet, after the death of his son Ibrahim, said, “There is a wet-nurse for him (i.e. Ibrahim) in Paradise.”


## Hadith 4:478

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

The Prophet said, “The people of Paradise will look at the dwellers of the lofty mansions (i.e. a superior place in Paradise) in the same way as one looks at a brilliant star far away in the East or in the West on the horizon; all that is because of their superiority over one another (in rewards).” On that the people said, “O Allah's Apostle! Are these lofty mansions for the prophets which nobody else can reach? The Prophet replied,” No! “By Allah in whose Hands my life is, these are for the men who believed in Allah and also believed in the Apostles.”


## Hadith 4:479

_Narrated Sahl bin Sad:_

The Prophet said, “Paradise has eight gates, and one of them is called Ar-Raiyan through which none will enter but those who observe fasting.” The Prophet also said, “If a person spends two different kinds of something (for Allah's Cause), he will be called from the gates of Paradise.”


## Hadith 4:480

_Narrated Abu Dhar:_

While the Prophet was on a journey, he said (regarding the performance of the Zuhr prayer), “Wait till it (i.e. the weather) gets cooler.” He said the same again till the shade of the hillocks extended. Then he said, “Delay the (Zuhr) Prayer till it gets cooler, for the severity of heat is from the increase in heat of Hell (fire).”


## Hadith 4:481

_Narrated Abu Sad:_

The Prophet said, "Delay the (Zuhr) Prayer till it gets cooler, for t


## Hadith 4:482

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The (Hell) Fire complained to its Lord saying, 'O my Lord! My different parts eat up each other.' So, He allowed it to take two breaths, one in the winter and the other in summer, and this is the reason for the severe heat and the bitter cold you find (in weather).”


## Hadith 4:483

_Narrated Abu Jamra Ad-Dabi:_

I used to sit with Ibn 'Abbas in Mecca. Once I had a fever and he said (to me), “Cool your fever with Zam-zam water, for Allah's Apostle said: 'It, (the Fever) is from the heat of the (Hell) Fire; so, cool it with water (or Zam-zam water).”


## Hadith 4:484

_Narrated Rafi bin Khadij:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “Fever is from the heat of the (Hell) Fire; so cool it with water.”


## Hadith 4:485

_Narrated Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “Fever is from the heat of the (Hell) Fire, so cool it with water.”


## Hadith 4:486

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, “Fever is from the heat of the (Hell) Fire; so abate fever with water.”


## Hadith 4:487

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Your (ordinary) fire is one of 70 parts of the (Hell) Fire.” Someone asked, “O Allah's Apostle This (ordinary) fire would have been sufficient (to torture the unbelievers),” Allah's Apostle said, “The (Hell) Fire has 69 parts more than the ordinary (worldly) fire, each part is as hot as this (worldly) fire.”


## Hadith 4:488

_Narrated Yali:_

That he heard the Prophet on the pulpit reciting:—

“They will cry: ”O Malik!' (43.77) (Malik is the gate-keeper (angel) of the (Hell) Fire.)


## Hadith 4:489

_Narrated Abu Wail:_

Somebody said to Usama, “Will you go to so-and-so (i.e. 'Uthman) and talk to him (i.e. advise him regarding ruling the country)?” He said, “You see that I don't talk to him. Really I talk to (advise) him secretly without opening a gate (of affliction), for neither do I want to be the first to open it (i.e. rebellion), nor will I say to a man who is my ruler that he is the best of all the people after I have heard something from Allah s Apostle .” They said, What have you heard him saying? He said, “I have heard him saying, ”A man will be brought on the Day of Resurrection and thrown in the (Hell) Fire, so that his intestines will come out, and he will go around like a donkey goes around a millstone. The people of (Hell) Fire will gather around him and say: O so-and-so! What is wrong with you? Didn't you use to order us to do good deeds and forbid us to do bad deeds? He will reply: Yes, I used to order you to do good deeds, but I did not do them myself, and I used to forbid you to do bad deeds, yet I used to do them myself."


## Hadith 4:490

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

Magic was worked on the Prophet so that he began to fancy that he was doing a thing which he was not actually doing. One day he invoked (Allah) for a long period and then said, “I feel that Allah has inspired me as how to cure myself. Two persons came to me (in my dream) and sat, one by my head and the other by my feet. One of them asked the other, ”What is the ailment of this man?“ The other replied, 'He has been bewitched” The first asked, 'Who has bewitched him?' The other replied, 'Lubaid bin Al-A'sam.' The first one asked, ‘What material has he used?’ The other replied, ‘A comb, the hair gathered on it, and the outer skin of the pollen of the male date-palm.’ The first asked, ‘Where is that?’ The other replied, ‘It is in the well of Dharwan.’ “ So, the Prophet went out towards the well and then returned and said to me on his return, ”Its date-palms (the date-palms near the well) are like the heads of the devils.“ I asked, ”Did you take out those things with which the magic was worked?“ He said, ”No, for I have been cured by Allah and I am afraid that this action may spread evil amongst the people." Later on the well was filled up with earth.


## Hadith 4:491

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “During your sleep, Satan knots three knots at the back of the head of each of you, and he breathes the following words at each knot, 'The night is, long, so keep on sleeping,' If that person wakes up and celebrates the praises of Allah, then one knot is undone, and when he performs ablution the second knot is undone, and when he prays, all the knots are undone, and he gets up in the morning lively and gay, otherwise he gets up dull and gloomy. ”


## Hadith 4:492

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

It was mentioned before the Prophet that there was a man who slept the night till morning (after sunrise). The Prophet said, “He is a man in whose ears (or ear) Satan had urinated.”


## Hadith 4:493

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “If anyone of you, when having sexual relation with his wife, say: 'In the name of Allah. O Allah! Protect us from Satan and prevent Satan from approaching our offspring you are going to give us,' and if he begets a child (as a result of that relation) Satan will not harm it.”


## Hadith 4:494

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When the (upper) edge of the sun appears (in the morning), don't perform a prayer till the sun appears in full, and when the lower edge of the sun sets, don't perform a prayer till it sets completely. And you should not seek to pray at sunrise or sunset for the sun rises between two sides of the head of the devil (or Satan).”


## Hadith 4:495

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

The Prophet said, “If while you are praying, somebody intends to pass in front of you, prevent him; and should he insist, prevent him again; and if he insists again, fight with him (i.e. prevent him violently e.g. pushing him violently), because such a person is (like) a devil.”

in charge of the Zakat of Ramadan (i.e. Zakat-ul-Fitr). Someone came to me and started scooping some of the foodstuff of (Zakat) with both hands. I caught him and told him that I would take him to Allah's Apostle.“ Then Abu Huraira told the whole narration and added ”He (i.e. the thief) said, 'Whenever you go to your bed, recite the Verse of “Al-Kursi” (2.255) for then a guardian from Allah will be guarding you, and Satan will not approach you till dawn.' “ On that the Prophet said, ”He told you the truth, though he is a liar, and he (the thief) himself was the Satan."


## Hadith 4:496

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Satan comes to one of you and says, 'Who created so-and-so? 'till he says, 'Who has created your Lord?' So, when he inspires such a question, one should seek refuge with Allah and give up such thoughts.”


## Hadith 4:497

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “When the month of Ramadan comes, the gates of Paradise are opened and the gates of the (Hell) Fire are closed, and the devils are chained.”


## Hadith 4:498

_Narrated Ubai bin Kab:_

That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, “(The prophet) Moses said to his attendant, ”Bring us our early meal' (18.62). The latter said, 'Did you remember when we betook ourselves to the rock? I indeed forgot the fish and none but Satan made me forget to remember it.“ (18.63) Moses did not feel tired till he had crossed the place which Allah ordered him to go to.”


## Hadith 4:499

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

I saw Allah's Apostle pointing towards the east saying, “Lo! Afflictions will verily emerge hence; afflictions will verily emerge hence where the (side of the head of) Satan appears.”


## Hadith 4:500

_Narrated Jabir:_

The Prophet said, “When nightfalls, then keep your children close to you, for the devil spread out then. An hour later you can let them free; and close the gates of your house (at night), and mention Allah's Name thereupon, and cover your utensils, and mention Allah's Name thereupon, (and if you don't have something to cover your utensil) you may put across it something (e.g. a piece of wood etc.).”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_400">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:301 to 4:400</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_600">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:501 to 4:600</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
