---
title: "Hadith 4:501 to 4:600"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_500">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:401 to 4:500</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_659">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:601 to 4:659</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 4:501

_Narrated Safiya bint Huyay:_

While Allah's Apostle was in Itikaf, I called on him at night and having had a talk with him, I got up to depart. He got up also to accompany me to my dwelling place, which was then in the house of Usama bin Zaid. Two Ansari men passed by, and when they saw the Prophet they hastened away. The Prophet said (to them). “Don't hurry! It is Safiya, the daughter of Huyay (i.e. my wife).” They said, “Glorified be Allah! O Allah's Apostle! (How dare we suspect you?)” He said, “Satan circulates in the human mind as blood circulates in it, and I was afraid that Satan might throw an evil thought (or something) into your hearts.”


## Hadith 4:502

_Narrated Sulaiman bin Surd:_

While I was sitting in the company of the Prophet, two men abused each other and the face of one of them became red with anger, and his jugular veins swelled (i.e. he became furious). On that the Prophet said, “I know a word, the saying of which will cause him to relax, if he does say it. If he says: 'I seek Refuge with Allah from Satan.' then all is anger will go away.” Some body said to him, “The Prophet has said, 'Seek refuge with Allah from Satan.”' The angry man said, “Am I mad?”


## Hadith 4:503

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “If anyone of you, on having sexual relation with his wife, says: ‘O Allah! Protect me from Satan, and prevent Satan from approaching the offspring you are going to give me,’ and if it happens that the lady conceives a child, Satan will neither harm it nor be given power over it.”


## Hadith 4:504

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet offered a prayer, and (after finishing) he said, “Satan came in front of me trying persistently to divert my attention from the prayer, but Allah gave me the strength to over-power him.”


## Hadith 4:505

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “When the call for the prayer is pronounced, Satan takes to his heels, passing wind with noise, When the call for the prayer is finished, he comes back. And when the Iqama is pronounced, he again takes to his heels, and after its completion, he returns again to interfere between the (praying) person and his heart, saying to him. ‘Remember this or that thing.’ till the person forgets whether he has offered three or four Rakat: so if one forgets whether he has prayed three or four Rak'a-t, he should perform two prostrations of Sahu (i.e. forgetfulness).”


## Hadith 4:506

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “When any human being is born. Satan touches him at both sides of the body with his two fingers, except Jesus, the son of Mary, whom Satan tried to touch but failed, for he touched the placenta-cover instead.”


## Hadith 4:507

_Narrated Alqama:_

I went to Sham (and asked. “Who is here?”), The people said, “Abu Ad-Darda.” Abu Darda said, “Is the person whom Allah has protected against Satan, (as Allah's Apostle said) amongst you”. The sub-narrator, Mughira said that the person who was given Allah's Refuge through the tongue of the Prophet was 'Ammar (bin Yasir).


## Hadith 4:508

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “While the angels talk amidst the clouds about things that are going to happen on earth, the devils hear a word of what they say and pour it in the ears of a soothsayer as one pours something in a bottle, and they add one hundred lies to that (one word).”


## Hadith 4:509

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Yawning is from Satan and if anyone of you yawns, he should check his yawning as much as possible, for if anyone of you (during the act of yawning) should say: ‘Ha’, Satan will laugh at him.”


## Hadith 4:510

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

On the day (of the battle) of Uhud when the pagans were defeated, Satan shouted, “O slaves of Allah! Beware of the forces at your back,” and on that the Muslims of the front files fought with the Muslims of the back files (thinking they were pagans). Hudhaifa looked back to see his father “Al-Yaman,” (being attacked by the Muslims). He shouted, “O Allah's Slaves! My father! My father!” By Allah, they did not stop till they killed him. Hudhaifa said, “May Allah forgive you.” 'Urwa said that Hudhaifa continued to do good (invoking Allah to forgive the killer of his father till he met Allah (i.e. died).


## Hadith 4:511

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

I asked the Prophet about one's looking here and there during the prayer. He replied, “It is what Satan steals from the prayer of any one of you.”


## Hadith 4:512

_Narrated Abu Qatada:_

as below i.e. Hadith No. 513)


## Hadith 4:513

_Narrated Abu Qatada:_

The Prophet said, “A good dream is from Allah, and a bad or evil dream is from Satan; so if anyone of you has a bad dream of which he gets afraid, he should spit on his left side and should seek Refuge with Allah from its evil, for then it will not harm him.”


## Hadith 4:514

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If one says one-hundred times in one day: ”None has the right to be worshipped but Allah, the Alone Who has no partners, to Him belongs Dominion and to Him belong all the Praises, and He has power over all things (i.e. Omnipotent)“, one will get the reward of manumitting ten slaves, and one-hundred good deeds will be written in his account, and one-hundred bad deeds will be wiped off or erased from his account, and on that day he will be protected from the morning till evening from Satan, and nobody will be superior to him except one who has done more than that which he has done.”


## Hadith 4:515

_Narrated Sad bin Abi Waqqas:_

Once Umar asked the leave to see Allah's Apostle in whose company there were some Quraishi women who were talking to him and asking him for more financial support raising their voices. When 'Umar asked permission to enter the women got up (quickly) hurrying to screen themselves. When Allah's Apostle admitted 'Umar, Allah's Apostle was smiling, 'Umar asked, “O Allah's Apostle! May Allah keep you gay always.” Allah's Apostle said, “I am astonished at these women who were with me. As soon as they heard your voice, they hastened to screen themselves.” 'Umar said, “O Allah's Apostle! You have more right to be feared by them.” Then he addressed (those women) saying, “O enemies of your own souls! Do you fear me and not Allah's Apostle ?” They replied. “Yes, for you are a fearful and fierce man as compared with Allah's Apostle.” On that Allah's Apostle said (to 'Umar), “By Him in Whose Hands my life is, whenever Satan sees you taking a path, he follows a path other than yours.”


## Hadith 4:516

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “If anyone of you rouses from sleep and performs the ablution, he should wash his nose by putting water in it and then blowing it out thrice, because Satan has stayed in the upper part of his nose all the night.”


## Hadith 4:517

_Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abdullah bin Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Sasaa_

Ansari:

That Abu Said Al-Khudri said to his father. “I see you are fond of sheep and the desert, so when you want to pronounce the Adhan, raise your voice with it for whoever will hear the Adhan whether a human being, or a Jinn, or anything else, will bear witness, in favor on the Day of Resurrection.” Abu Said added, “I have heard this from Allah's Apostle .”


## Hadith 4:518

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

That he heard the Prophet delivering a sermon on the pulpit saying, “Kill snakes and kill Dhu-at-Tufyatain (i.e. a snake with two white lines on its back) and ALBATROSS (i.e. a snake with short or mutilated tail) for they destroy the sight of one's eyes and bring about abortion.” ('Abdullah bin 'Umar further added): Once while I was chasing a snake in order, to kill it, Abu Lubaba called me saying: “Don't kill it,” I said. “Allah's Apostle ordered us to kill snakes.” He said, “But later on he prohibited the killing of snakes living in the houses.” (Az-Zubri said. “Such snakes are called Al-Awamir.”)


## Hadith 4:519

_Narrated Abu Said al-Khudri:_

Allah's Apostle said, “There will come a time when the best property of a man will be sheep which he will graze on the tops of mountains and the places where rain falls (i.e. pastures) escaping to protect his religion from afflictions.”


## Hadith 4:520

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The main source of disbelief is in the east. Pride and arrogance are characteristics of the owners of horses and camels, and those bedouins who are busy with their camels and pay no attention to Religion; while modesty and gentleness are the characteristics of the owners of sheep.”


## Hadith 4:521

_Narrated 'Uqba bin 'Umar and Abu Mas'ud:_

Allah's Apostle pointed with his hand towards Yemen and said, “True Belief is Yemenite yonder (i.e. the Yemenite, had True Belief and embraced Islam readily), but sternness and mercilessness are the qualities of those who are busy with their camels and pay no attention to the Religion where the two sides of the head of Satan will appear. Such qualities belong to the tribe of Rabi'a and Mudar.”


## Hadith 4:522

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “When you hear the crowing of cocks, ask for Allah's Blessings for (their crowing indicates that) they have seen an angel. And when you hear the braying of donkeys, seek Refuge with Allah from Satan for (their braying indicates) that they have seen a Satan.”


## Hadith 4:524

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “A group of Israelites were lost. Nobody knows what they did. But I do not see them except that they were cursed and changed into rats, for if you put the milk of a she-camel in front of a rat, it will not drink it, but if the milk of a sheep is put in front of it, it will drink it.” I told this to Ka'b who asked me, “Did you hear it from the Prophet ?” I said, “Yes.” Ka'b asked me the same question several times.; I said to Ka'b. “Do I read the Torah? (i.e. I tell you this from the Prophet.)”


## Hadith 4:525

_Narrated Aisha:_

The Prophet called the Salamander, a mischief-doer. I have not heard him ordering that it should be killed. Sad bin Waqqas claims that the Prophet ordered that it should be killed.


## Hadith 4:526

_Narrated Um Sharik:_

That the Prophet ordered her to kill Salamanders.


## Hadith 4:527

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “Kill the snake with two white lines on its back, for it blinds the on-looker and causes abortion.”


## Hadith 4:528

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet ordered that a short-tailed or mutilated-tailed snake (i.e. Abtar) should be killed, for it blinds the on-looker and causes abortion."


## Hadith 4:529

_Narrated Abu Mulaika:_

Ibn Umar used to kill snakes, but afterwards he forbade their killing and said, “Once the Prophet pulled down a wall and saw a cast-off skin of a snake in it. He said, 'Look for the snake. 'They found it and the Prophet said, ”Kill it.“ For this reason I used to kill snakes. Later on I met Abu Lubaba who told me the Prophet said, 'Do not kill snakes except the short-tailed or mutilated-tailed snake with two white lines on its back, for it causes abortion and makes one blind. So kill it.' ”


## Hadith 4:530

_Narrated Nafi:_

Ibn 'Umar used to kill snakes but when Abu Lubaba informed him that the Prophet had forbidden the killing of snakes living in houses, he gave up killing them.


## Hadith 4:531

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet said, “Five kinds of animals are mischief-doers and can be killed even in the Sanctuary: They are the rat the scorpion, the kite, the crow and the rabid dog.”


## Hadith 4:532

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “It is not sinful of a person in the state of Ihram to kill any of these five animals: The scorpion, the rat, the rabid dog, the crow and the kite.”


## Hadith 4:533

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “Cover your utensils and tie your water skins, and close your doors and keep your children close to you at night, as the Jinns spread out at such time and snatch things away. When you go to bed, put out your lights, for the mischief-doer (i.e. the rat) may drag away the wick of the candle and burn the dwellers of the house.” Ata said, “The devils.” (instead of the Jinns).


## Hadith 4:534

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

Once we were in the company of Allah's Apostle in a cave. Surat-al-Mursalat (77) was revealed there, and we were learning it from Allah's Apostle . Suddenly a snake came out of its hole and we rushed towards it to kill it, but it hastened and entered its hole before we were able to catch it. Allah's Apostle said,“ It has been saved from your evil and you have been saved from its evil.”


## Hadith 4:535

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

The Prophet said, "A woman entered the (Hell) Fire because of a cat w


## Hadith 4:536

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Once while a prophet amongst the prophets was taking a rest underneath a tree, an ant bit him. He, therefore, ordered that his luggage be taken away from underneath that tree and then ordered that the dwelling place of the ants should be set on fire. Allah sent him a revelation:— ”Wouldn't it have been sufficient to burn a single ant? (that bit you): (See Page 162, chapter No. 153).


## Hadith 4:537

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said “If a house fly falls in the drink of anyone of you, he should dip it (in the drink), for one of its wings has a disease and the other has the cure for the disease.”


## Hadith 4:538

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “A prostitute was forgiven by Allah, because, passing by a panting dog near a well and seeing that the dog was about to die of thirst, she took off her shoe, and tying it with her head-cover she drew out some water for it. So, Allah forgave her because of that.”


## Hadith 4:539

_Narrated Abu Talha:_

The Prophet said, “Angels do not enter a house witch has either a dog or a picture in it.”


## Hadith 4:540

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle ordered that the dogs should be killed.


## Hadith 4:541

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If somebody keeps a dog, he loses one Qirat (of the reward) of his good deeds everyday, except if he keeps it for the purpose of agriculture or for the protection of livestock. ”


## Hadith 4:542

_Narrated Sufyan bin Abi Zuhair Ash-Shani:_

That he heard Allah's Apostle saying, “If somebody keeps a dog that is neither used for farm work nor for guarding the livestock, he will lose one Qirat (of the reward) of his good deeds everyday.”


## Hadith 4:543

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Allah created Adam, making him 60 cubits tall. When He created him, He said to him, ”Go and greet that group of angels, and listen to their reply, for it will be your greeting (salutation) and the greeting (salutations of your offspring.“ So, Adam said (to the angels), As-Salamu Alaikum (i.e. Peace be upon you). The angels said, ”As-salamu Alaika wa Rahmatu-l-lahi" (i.e. Peace and Allah's Mercy be upon you). Thus the angels added to Adam's salutation the expression, 'Wa Rahmatu-l-lahi,' Any person who will enter Paradise will resemble Adam (in appearance and figure). People have been decreasing in stature since Adam's creation.


## Hadith 4:544

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “The first group of people who will enter Paradise, will be glittering like the full moon and those who will follow them, will glitter like the most brilliant star in the sky. They will not urinate, relieve nature, spit, or have any nasal secretions. Their combs will be of gold, and their sweat will smell like musk. The aloes-wood will be used in their centers. Their wives will be houris. All of them will look alike and will resemble their father Adam (in statute), sixty cubits tall.”


## Hadith 4:545

_Narrated Abu Salama:_

Um Salama said, “Um Salaim said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Allah does not refrain from saying the truth! Is it obligatory for a woman to take a bath after she gets nocturnal discharge?' He said, 'Yes, if she notices the water (i.e. discharge).' Um Salama smiled and said, 'Does a woman get discharge?' Allah's Apostle said. 'Then why does a child resemble (its mother)?”


## Hadith 4:546

_Narrated Anas:_

When 'Abdullah bin Salam heard the arrival of the Prophet at Medina, he came to him and said, “I am going to ask you about three things which nobody knows except a prophet: What is the first portent of the Hour? What will be the first meal taken by the people of Paradise? Why does a child resemble its father, and why does it resemble its maternal uncle” Allah's Apostle said, “Gabriel has just now told me of their answers.” 'Abdullah said, “He (i.e. Gabriel), from amongst all the angels, is the enemy of the Jews.” Allah's Apostle said, “The first portent of the Hour will be a fire that will bring together the people from the east to the west; the first meal of the people of Paradise will be Extra-lobe (caudate lobe) of fish-liver. As for the resemblance of the child to its parents: If a man has sexual intercourse with his wife and gets discharge first, the child will resemble the father, and if the woman gets discharge first, the child will resemble her.” On that 'Abdullah bin Salam said, “I testify that you are the Apostle of Allah.” 'Abdullah bin Salam further said, “O Allah's Apostle! The Jews are liars, and if they should come to know about my conversion to Islam before you ask them (about me), they would tell a lie about me.” The Jews came to Allah's Apostle and 'Abdullah went inside the house. Allah's Apostle asked (the Jews), “What kind of man is 'Abdullah bin Salam amongst you?” They replied, “He is the most learned person amongst us, and the best amongst us, and the son of the best amongst us.” Allah's Apostle said, “What do you think if he embraces Islam (will you do as he does)?” The Jews said, “May Allah save him from it.” Then 'Abdullah bin Salam came out in front of them saying, “I testify that None has the right to be worshipped but Allah and that Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah.” Thereupon they said, “He is the evilest among us, and the son of the evilest amongst us,” and continued talking badly of him.


## Hadith 4:547

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “But for the Israelis, meat would not decay and but for Eve, wives would never betray their husbands.”


## Hadith 4:548

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah 's Apostle said, “Treat women nicely, for a women is created from a rib, and the most curved portion of the rib is its upper portion, so, if you should try to straighten it, it will break, but if you leave it as it is, it will remain crooked. So treat women nicely.”


## Hadith 4:549

_Narrated Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle, the true and truly inspired said, “(as regards your creation), every one of you is collected in the womb of his mother for the first forty days, and then he becomes a clot for an other forty days, and then a piece of flesh for an other forty days. Then Allah sends an angel to write four words: He writes his deeds, time of his death, means of his livelihood, and whether he will be wretched or blessed (in religion). Then the soul is breathed into his body. So a man may do deeds characteristic of the people of the (Hell) Fire, so much so that there is only the distance of a cubit between him and it, and then what has been written (by the angel) surpasses, and so he starts doing deeds characteristic of the people of Paradise and enters Paradise. Similarly, a person may do deeds characteristic of the people of Paradise, so much so that there is only the distance of a cubit between him and it, and then what has been written (by the angel) surpasses, and he starts doing deeds of the people of the (Hell) Fire and enters the (Hell) Fire.”


## Hadith 4:550

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

The Prophet said, “Allah has appointed an angel in the womb, and the angel says, ‘O Lord! A drop of discharge (i.e. of semen), O Lord! a clot, O Lord! a piece of flesh.’ And then, if Allah wishes to complete the child's creation, the angel will say. 'O Lord! A male or a female? O Lord! wretched or blessed (in religion)? What will his livelihood be? What will his age be?' The angel writes all this while the child is in the womb of its mother.”


## Hadith 4:551

_Narrated Anas:_

The Prophet said, “Allah will say to that person of the (Hell) Fire who will receive the least punishment, 'If you had everything on the earth, would you give it as a ransom to free yourself (i.e. save yourself from this Fire)?' He will say, 'Yes.' Then Allah will say, 'While you were in the backbone of Adam, I asked you much less than this, i.e. not to worship others besides Me, but you insisted on worshipping others besides me.' ”


## Hadith 4:552

_Narrated Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Whenever a person is murdered unjustly, there is a share from the burden of the crime on the first son of Adam for he was the first to start the tradition of murdering.”


## Hadith 4:553

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

Once Allah's Apostle stood amongst the people, glorified and praised Allah as He deserved and then mentioned the Dajjal saying, “l warn you against him (i.e. the Dajjal) and there was no prophet but warned his nation against him. No doubt, Noah warned his nation against him but I tell you about him something of which no prophet told his nation before me. You should know that he is one-eyed, and Allah is not one-eyed.”


## Hadith 4:554

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Shall I not tell you about the Dajjal a story of which no prophet told his nation? The Dajjall is one-eyed and will bring with him what will resemble Hell and Paradise, and what he will call Paradise will be actually Hell; so I warn you (against him) as Noah warned his nation against him.”


## Hadith 4:555

_Narrated Abu Said:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Noah and his nation will come (on the Day of Resurrection and Allah will ask (Noah), ”Did you convey (the Message)?' He will reply, ‘Yes, O my Lord!’ Then Allah will ask Noah's nation, 'Did Noah convey My Message to you?' They will reply, 'No, no prophet came to us.' Then Allah will ask Noah, 'Who will stand a witness for you?' He will reply, 'Muhammad and his followers (will stand witness for me).' So, I and my followers will stand as witnesses for him (that he conveyed Allah's Message).“ That is, (the interpretation) of the Statement of Allah: ”Thus we have made you a just and the best nation that you might be witnesses Over mankind .." (2.143)


## Hadith 4:556

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

We were in the company of the Prophet at a banquet and a cooked (mutton) forearm was set before him, and he used to like it. He ate a morsel of it and said, “I will be the chief of all the people on the Day of Resurrection. Do you know how Allah will gather all the first and the last (people) in one level place where an observer will be able to see (all) of them and they will be able to hear the announcer, and the sun will come near to them. Some People will say: Don't you see, in what condition you are and the state to which you have reached? Why don't you look for a person who can intercede for you with your Lord? Some people will say: Appeal to your father, Adam.' They will go to him and say: 'O Adam! You are the father of all mankind, and Allah created you with His Own Hands, and ordered the angels to prostrate for you, and made you live in Paradise. Will you not intercede for us with your Lord? Don't you see in what (miserable) state we are, and to what condition we have reached?' On that Adam will reply, 'My Lord is so angry as He has never been before and will never be in the future; (besides), He forbade me (to eat from) the tree, but I disobeyed (Him), (I am worried about) myself! Myself! Go to somebody else; go to Noah.' They will go to Noah and say; 'O Noah! You are the first amongst the messengers of Allah to the people of the earth, and Allah named you a thankful slave. Don't you see in what a (miserable) state we are and to what condition we have reached? Will you not intercede for us with your Lord? Noah will reply: 'Today my Lord has become so angry as he had never been before and will never be in the future Myself! Myself! Go to the Prophet (Muhammad). The people will come to me, and I will prostrate myself underneath Allah's Throne. Then I will be addressed: 'O Muhammad! Raise your head; intercede, for your intercession will be accepted, and ask (for anything). for you will be given. ”


## Hadith 4:557

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

Allah's Apostle recited the following Verse) in the usual tone: 'Fahal-Min-Muddalkir.' (54.15)


## Hadith 4:558

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “I have been made victorious with As-Saba (i.e. an easterly wind) and the people of 'Ad were destroyed by Ad-Dabur (i.e. Prophet who distributed it among four persons: Al-Aqra' bin Habis Al-Hanzali from the tribe of Mujashi, 'Uyaina bin Badr Al-Fazari, Zaid At-Ta'i who belonged to (the tribe of) Bani Nahban, and 'Alqama bin Ulatha Al-'Amir who belonged to (the tribe of) Bani Kilab. So the Quraish and the Ansar became angry and said, ”He (i.e. the Prophet, ) gives the chief of Najd and does not give us.“ The Prophet said, ”I give them) so as to attract their hearts (to Islam).“ Then a man with sunken eyes, prominent checks, a raised forehead, a thick beard and a shaven head, came (in front of the Prophet ) and said, ”Be afraid of Allah, O Muhammad!“ The Prophet ' said ”Who would obey Allah if I disobeyed Him? (Is it fair that) Allah has trusted all the people of the earth to me while, you do not trust me?“ Somebody who, I think was Khalid bin Al-Walid, requested the Prophet to let him chop that man's head off, but he prevented him. When the man left, the Prophet said, ”Among the off-spring of this man will be some who will recite the Qur'an but the Qur'an will not reach beyond their throats (i.e. they will recite like parrots and will not understand it nor act on it), and they will renegade from the religion as an arrow goes through the game's body. They will kill the Muslims but will not disturb the idolaters. If I should live up to their time' I will kill them as the people of 'Ad were killed (i.e. I will kill all of them)."


## Hadith 4:559

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

I heard the Prophet reciting: “Fahal Min Muddakir.” (See Hadith No. 557)


## Hadith 4:560

_Narrated Abdullah bin Zam'a:_

I heard the Prophet while referring to the person who had cut the legs of the she-camel (of the Prophet Salih), saying, “The man who was appointed for doing this job, was a man of honor and power in his nation like Abu Zam'a,”


## Hadith 4:561

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

When Allah's Apostle landed at Al-Hijr during the Ghazwa of Tabuk, he ordered his companions not to drink water from its well or reserve water from it. They said, "We have already kneaded the dough with its water. and also filled our bags with its water.'' On that, the Prophet ordered them to throw away the dough and pour out the water.


## Hadith 4:562

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

The people landed at the land of Thamud called Al-Hijr along with Allah's Apostle and they took water from its well for drinking and kneading the dough with it as well. (When Allah's Apostle heard about it) he ordered them to pour out the water they had taken from its wells and feed the camels with the dough, and ordered them to take water from the well whence the she-camel (of Prophet Salih) used to drink.


## Hadith 4:563

_Narrated 'Abdullah bin 'Umar:_

When the Prophet passed by (a place called) Al Hijr, he said, “Do not enter the house of those who were unjust to themselves, unless (you enter) weeping, lest you should suffer the same punishment as was inflicted upon them.” After that he covered his face with his sheet cloth while he was on the camel-saddle.


## Hadith 4:564

_Narrated Ibn 'Umar:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Do not enter the ruined dwellings of those who were unjust to themselves unless (you enter) weeping, lest you should suffer the same punishment as was inflicted upon them.”


## Hadith 4:565

_Narrated Zainab bint Jahsh:_

That the Prophet once came to her in a state of fear and said, “None has the right to be worshipped but Allah. Woe unto the Arabs from a danger that has come near. An opening has been made in the wall of Gog and Magog like this,” making a circle with his thumb and index finger. Zainab bint Jahsh said, “O Allah's Apostle! Shall we be destroyed even though there are pious persons among us?” He said, “Yes, when the evil person will increase.”


## Hadith 4:566

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, "Allah has made an opening in the wall of the Gog and Magog (people) like this, and he made with his hand (with the help of his fingers).


## Hadith 4:567

_Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:_

The Prophet said, “Allah will say (on the Day of Resurrection), 'O Adam.' Adam will reply, 'Labbaik wa Sa'daik', and all the good is in Your Hand.' Allah will say: 'Bring out the people of the fire.' Adam will say: 'O Allah! How many are the people of the Fire?' Allah will reply: 'From every one thousand, take out nine-hundred-and ninety-nine.' At that time children will become hoary headed, every pregnant female will have a miscarriage, and one will see mankind as drunken, yet they will not be drunken, but dreadful will be the Wrath of Allah.” The companions of the Prophet asked, “O Allah's Apostle! Who is that (excepted) one?” He said, “Rejoice with glad tidings; one person will be from you and one-thousand will be from Gog and Magog.”

The Prophet further said, “By Him in Whose Hands my life is, hope that you will be one-fourth of the people of Paradise.” We shouted, “Allahu Akbar!” He added, “I hope that you will be one-third of the people of Paradise.” We shouted, “Allahu Akbar!” He said, “I hope that you will be half of the people of Paradise.” We shouted, “Allahu Akbar!” He further said, “You (Muslims) (compared with non Muslims) are like a black hair in the skin of a white ox or like a white hair in the skin of a black ox (i.e. your number is very small as compared with theirs).”


## Hadith 4:568

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “You will be gathered (on the Day of Judgment), bare-footed, naked and not circumcised.” He then recited:—'As We began the first creation, We, shall repeat it: A Promise We have undertaken: Truly we shall do it.' (21.104) He added, “The first to be dressed on the Day of Resurrection, will be Abraham, and some of my companions will be taken towards the left side (i.e. to the (Hell) Fire), and I will say: 'My companions! My companions!' It will be said: 'They renegade from Islam after you left them.' Then I will say as the Pious slave of Allah (i.e. Jesus) said. 'And I was a witness Over them while I dwelt amongst them. When You took me up You were the Watcher over them, And You are a witness to all things. If You punish them. They are Your slaves And if You forgive them, Verily you, only You are the All-Mighty, the All-Wise.” (5.120-121)


## Hadith 4:569

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “On the Day of Resurrection Abraham will meet his father Azar whose face will be dark and covered with dust.(The Prophet Abraham will say to him): 'Didn't I tell you not to disobey me?' His father will reply: 'Today I will not disobey you.' 'Abraham will say: 'O Lord! You promised me not to disgrace me on the Day of Resurrection; and what will be more disgraceful to me than cursing and dishonoring my father?' Then Allah will say (to him):' 'I have forbidden Paradise for the disbelievers.” Then he will be addressed, 'O Abraham! Look! What is underneath your feet?' He will look and there he will see a Dhabh (an animal,) blood-stained, which will be caught by the legs and thrown in the (Hell) Fire."


## Hadith 4:570

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet entered the Ka'ba and found in it the pictures of (Prophet) Abraham and Mary. On that he said' “What is the matter with them ( i.e. Quraish)? They have already heard that angels do not enter a house in which there are pictures; yet this is the picture of Abraham. And why is he depicted as practicing divination by arrows?”


## Hadith 4:571

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

When the Prophet saw pictures in the Ka'ba, he did not enter it till he ordered them to be erased. When he saw (the pictures of Abraham and Ishmael carrying the arrows of divination, he said, “May Allah curse them (i.e. the Quraish)! By Allah, neither Abraham nor Ishmael practiced divination by arrows.”


## Hadith 4:572

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The people said, “O Allah's Apostle! Who is the most honorable amongst the people (in Allah's Sight)?” He said, “The most righteous amongst them.” They said, “We do not ask you, about this. ” He said, “Then Joseph, Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, The son of Allah's Prophet the son of Allah's Khalil (i.e. Abraham).” They said, “We do not want to ask about this,” He said' “Then you want to ask about the descent of the Arabs. Those who were the best in the pre-lslamic period of ignorance will be the best in Islam provided they comprehend the religious knowledge.”


## Hadith 4:573

_Narrated Samura:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Two persons came to me at night (in dream) (and took me along with them). We passed by a tall man who was so tall that I was not able to see his head and that person was Abraham.”


## Hadith 4:574

_Narrated Mujahid:_

That when the people mentioned before Ibn 'Abbas that the Dajjal would have the word Kafir, (i.e. unbeliever) or the letters Kafir (the root of the Arabic verb 'disbelieve') written on his forehead, I heard Ibn 'Abbas saying, “I did not hear this, but the Prophet said, 'If you want to see Abraham, then look at your companion (i.e. the Prophet) but Moses was a curly-haired, brown man (who used to ride) a red camel, the reins of which was made of fires of date-palms. As if I were now looking down a valley.”


## Hadith 4:575

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Abraham did his circumcision with an adze at the age of eighty.”


## Hadith 4:576

_Narrated Abu Az-Zinad:_

(as above in Hadith No. 575) With an adze.


## Hadith 4:577

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Abraham did not tell a lie except on three occasions.”


## Hadith 4:578

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Abraham did not tell a lie except on three occasion. Twice for the Sake of Allah when he said, “I am sick,” and he said, “(I have not done this but) the big idol has done it.” The (third was) that while Abraham and Sarah (his wife) were going (on a journey) they passed by (the territory of) a tyrant. Someone said to the tyrant, “This man (i.e. Abraham) is accompanied by a very charming lady.” So, he sent for Abraham and asked him about Sarah saying, “Who is this lady?” Abraham said, “She is my sister.” Abraham went to Sarah and said, “O Sarah! There are no believers on the surface of the earth except you and I. This man asked me about you and I have told him that you are my sister, so don't contradict my statement.” The tyrant then called Sarah and when she went to him, he tried to take hold of her with his hand, but (his hand got stiff and) he was confounded. He asked Sarah. “Pray to Allah for me, and I shall not harm you.” So Sarah asked Allah to cure him and he got cured. He tried to take hold of her for the second time, but (his hand got as stiff as or stiffer than before and) was more confounded. He again requested Sarah, “Pray to Allah for me, and I will not harm you.” Sarah asked Allah again and he became alright. He then called one of his guards (who had brought her) and said, “You have not brought me a human being but have brought me a devil.” The tyrant then gave Hajar as a girl-servant to Sarah. Sarah came back (to Abraham) while he was praying. Abraham, gesturing with his hand, asked, “What has happened?” She replied, “Allah has spoiled the evil plot of the infidel (or immoral person) and gave me Hajar for service.” (Abu Huraira then addressed his listeners saying, “That (Hajar) was your mother, O Bani Ma-is-Sama (i.e. the Arabs, the descendants of Ishmael, Hajar's son).”


## Hadith 4:579

_Narrated Um Sharik:_

Allah's Apostle ordered that the salamander should be killed and said, “It (i.e. the salamander) blew (the fire) on Abraham.”


## Hadith 4:580

_Narrated Abdullah:_

When the Verse:—“It is those who believe and do not confuse their belief with wrong ( i.e. joining others in worship with Allah” (6.83) was revealed, we said, “O Allah's Apostle! Who is there amongst us who has not done wrong to himself?” He replied, “It is not as you say, for 'wrong' in the Verse and 'do not confuse their belief, with wrong means 'SHIRK' (i.e. joining others in worship with Allah). Haven't you heard Luqman's saying to his son, 'O my son! Join not others in worship with Allah, verily joining others in worship with Allah is a great wrong indeed.” (31.13)


## Hadith 4:581

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

One day some meat was given to the Prophet and he said, “On the Day of Resurrection Allah will gather all the first and the last (people) in one plain, and the voice of the announcer will reach all of them, and one will be able to see them all, and the sun will come closer to them.” (The narrator then mentioned the narration of intercession): “The people will go to Abraham and say: 'You are Allah's Prophet and His Khalil on the earth. Will you intercede for us with your Lord?' Abraham will then remember his lies and say: 'Myself! Myself! Go to Moses.”


## Hadith 4:582

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “May Allah bestow His Mercy on the mother of Ishmael! Had she not hastened (to fill her water-skin with water from the Zam-zam well). Zam-zam would have been a stream flowing on the surface of the earth.” Ibn 'Abbas further added, "(The Prophet) Abraham brought Ishmael and his mother (to Mecca) and she was suckling Ishmael and she had a water-skin with her.'


## Hadith 4:583

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The first lady to use a girdle was the mother of Ishmael. She used a girdle so that she might hide her tracks from Sarah. Abraham brought her and her son Ishmael while she was suckling him, to a place near the Ka'ba under a tree on the spot of Zam-zam, at the highest place in the mosque. During those days there was nobody in Mecca, nor was there any water So he made them sit over there and placed near them a leather bag containing some dates, and a small water-skin containing some water, and set out homeward. Ishmael's mother followed him saying, “O Abraham! Where are you going, leaving us in this valley where there is no person whose company we may enjoy, nor is there anything (to enjoy)?” She repeated that to him many times, but he did not look back at her Then she asked him, “Has Allah ordered you to do so?” He said, “Yes.” She said, “Then He will not neglect us,” and returned while Abraham proceeded onwards, and on reaching the Thaniya where they could not see him, he faced the Ka'ba, and raising both hands, invoked Allah saying the following prayers:

'O our Lord! I have made some of my offspring dwell in a valley without cultivation, by Your Sacred House (Kaba at Mecca) in order, O our Lord, that they may offer prayer perfectly. So fill some hearts among men with love towards them, and (O Allah) provide them with fruits, so that they may give thanks.' (14.37) Ishmael's mother went on suckling Ishmael and drinking from the water (she had).

When the water in the water-skin had all been used up, she became thirsty and her child also became thirsty. She started looking at him (i.e. Ishmael) tossing in agony; She left him, for she could not endure looking at him, and found that the mountain of Safa was the nearest mountain to her on that land. She stood on it and started looking at the valley keenly so that she might see somebody, but she could not see anybody. Then she descended from Safa and when she reached the valley, she tucked up her robe and ran in the valley like a person in distress and trouble, till she crossed the valley and reached the Marwa mountain where she stood and started looking, expecting to see somebody, but she could not see anybody. She repeated that (running between Safa and Marwa) seven times."

The Prophet said, “This is the source of the tradition of the walking of people between them (i.e. Safa and Marwa). When she reached the Marwa (for the last time) she heard a voice and she asked herself to be quiet and listened attentively. She heard the voice again and said, 'O, (whoever you may be)! You have made me hear your voice; have you got something to help me?” And behold! She saw an angel at the place of Zam-zam, digging the earth with his heel (or his wing), till water flowed from that place. She started to make something like a basin around it, using her hand in this way, and started filling her water-skin with water with her hands, and the water was flowing out after she had scooped some of it."

The Prophet added, “May Allah bestow Mercy on Ishmael's mother! Had she let the Zam-zam (flow without trying to control it) (or had she not scooped from that water) (to fill her water-skin), Zam-zam would have been a stream flowing on the surface of the earth.” The Prophet further added, “Then she drank (water) and suckled her child. The angel said to her, 'Don't be afraid of being neglected, for this is the House of Allah which will be built by this boy and his father, and Allah never neglects His people.' The House (i.e. Kaba) at that time was on a high place resembling a hillock, and when torrents came, they flowed to its right and left. She lived in that way till some people from the tribe of Jurhum or a family from Jurhum passed by her and her child, as they (i.e. the Jurhum people) were coming through the way of Kada'. They landed in the lower part of Mecca where they saw a bird that had the habit of flying around water and not leaving it. They said, 'This bird must be flying around water, though we know that there is no water in this valley.' They sent one or two messengers who discovered the source of water, and returned to inform them of the water. So, they all came (towards the water).” The Prophet added, “Ishmael's mother was sitting near the water. They asked her, 'Do you allow us to stay with you?” She replied, 'Yes, but you will have no right to possess the water.' They agreed to that.“ The Prophet further said, ”Ishmael's mother was pleased with the whole situation as she used to love to enjoy the company of the people. So, they settled there, and later on they sent for their families who came and settled with them so that some families became permanent residents there. The child (i.e. Ishmael) grew up and learnt Arabic from them and (his virtues) caused them to love and admire him as he grew up, and when he reached the age of puberty they made him marry a woman from amongst them.

After Ishmael's mother had died, Abraham came after Ishmael's marriage in order to see his family that he had left before, but he did not find Ishmael there. When he asked Ishmael's wife about him, she replied, 'He has gone in search of our livelihood.' Then he asked her about their way of living and their condition, and she replied, 'We are living in misery; we are living in hardship and destitution,' complaining to him. He said, 'When your husband returns, convey my salutation to him and tell him to change the threshold of the gate (of his house).' When Ishmael came, he seemed to have felt something unusual, so he asked his wife, 'Has anyone visited you?' She replied, 'Yes, an old man of so-and-so description came and asked me about you and I informed him, and he asked about our state of living, and I told him that we were living in a hardship and poverty.' On that Ishmael said, 'Did he advise you anything?' She replied, 'Yes, he told me to convey his salutation to you and to tell you to change the threshold of your gate.' Ishmael said, 'It was my father, and he has ordered me to divorce you. Go back to your family.' So, Ishmael divorced her and married another woman from amongst them (i.e. Jurhum).

Then Abraham stayed away from them for a period as long as Allah wished and called on them again but did not find Ishmael. So he came to Ishmael's wife and asked her about Ishmael. She said, 'He has gone in search of our livelihood.' Abraham asked her, 'How are you getting on?' asking her about their sustenance and living. She replied, 'We are prosperous and well-off (i.e. we have everything in abundance).' Then she thanked Allah' Abraham said, 'What kind of food do you eat?' She said. 'Meat.' He said, 'What do you drink?' She said, 'Water.“ He said, ”O Allah! Bless their meat and water.“ The Prophet added, ”At that time they did not have grain, and if they had grain, he would have also invoked Allah to bless it.“ The Prophet added, ”If somebody has only these two things as his sustenance, his health and disposition will be badly affected, unless he lives in Mecca.“ The Prophet added,” Then Abraham said Ishmael's wife, "When your husband comes, give my regards to him and tell him that he should keep firm the threshold of his gate.' When Ishmael came back, he asked his wife, 'Did anyone call on you?' She replied, 'Yes, a good-looking old man came to me,' so she praised him and added. 'He asked about you, and I informed him, and he asked about our livelihood and I told him that we were in a good condition.' Ishmael asked her, 'Did he give you any piece of advice?' She said, 'Yes, he told me to give his regards to you and ordered that you should keep firm the threshold of your gate.' On that Ishmael said, 'It was my father, and you are the threshold (of the gate). He has ordered me to keep you with me.'

Then Abraham stayed away from them for a period as long as Allah wished, and called on them afterwards. He saw Ishmael under a tree near Zamzam, sharpening his arrows. When he saw Abraham, he rose up to welcome him (and they greeted each other as a father does with his son or a son does with his father). Abraham said, 'O Ishmael! Allah has given me an order.' Ishmael said, 'Do what your Lord has ordered you to do.' Abraham asked, 'Will you help me?' Ishmael said, 'I will help you.' Abraham said, Allah has ordered me to build a house here,' pointing to a hillock higher than the land surrounding it.“ The Prophet added, ”Then they raised the foundations of the House (i.e. the Ka'ba). Ishmael brought the stones and Abraham was building, and when the walls became high, Ishmael brought this stone and put it for Abraham who stood over it and carried on building, while Ishmael was handing him the stones, and both of them were saying, 'O our Lord! Accept (this service) from us, Verily, You are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.' The Prophet added, “Then both of them went on building and going round the Ka'ba saying: O our Lord ! Accept (this service) from us, Verily, You are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.” (2.127)


## Hadith 4:584

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

When Abraham had differences with his wife), (because of her jealousy of Hajar, Ishmael's mother), he took Ishmael and his mother and went away. They had a water-skin with them containing some water, Ishmael's mother used to drink water from the water-skin so that her milk would increase for her child. When Abraham reached Mecca, he made her sit under a tree and afterwards returned home. Ishmael's mother followed him, and when they reached Kada', she called him from behind, 'O Abraham! To whom are you leaving us?' He replied, '(I am leaving you) to Allah's (Care).' She said, 'I am satisfied to be with Allah.' She returned to her place and started drinking water from the water-skin, and her milk increased for her child. When the water had all been used up, she said to herself, 'I'd better go and look so that I may see somebody.' She ascended the Safa mountain and looked, hoping to see somebody, but in vain. When she came down to the valley, she ran till she reached the Marwa mountain. She ran to and fro (between the two mountains) many times. They she said to herself, 'i'd better go and see the state of the child,' she went and found it in a state of one on the point of dying. She could not endure to watch it dying and said (to herself), 'If I go and look, I may find somebody.' She went and ascended the Safa mountain and looked for a long while but could not find anybody. Thus she completed seven rounds (of running) between Safa and Marwa. Again she said (to herself), 'I'd better go back and see the state of the child.' But suddenly she heard a voice, and she said to that strange voice, 'Help us if you can offer any help.' Lo! It was Gabriel (who had made the voice). Gabriel hit the earth with his heel like this (Ibn 'Abbas hit the earth with his heel to Illustrate it), and so the water gushed out. Ishmael's mother was astonished and started digging. (Abu Al-Qasim) (i.e. the Prophet) said, “If she had left the water, (flow naturally without her intervention), it would have been flowing on the surface of the earth.”) Ishmael's mother started drinking from the water and her milk increased for her child . Afterwards some people of the tribe of Jurhum, while passing through the bottom of the valley, saw some birds, and that astonished them, and they said, 'Birds can only be found at a place where there is water.' They sent a messenger who searched the place and found the water, and returned to inform them about it. Then they all went to her and said, 'O ishmael's mother! Will you allow us to be with you (or dwell with you)?' (And thus they stayed there.) Later on her boy reached the age of puberty and married a lady from them. Then an idea occurred to Abraham which he disclosed to his wife (Sarah), 'I want to call on my dependents I left (at Mecca).' When he went there, he greeted (Ishmael's wife) and said, 'Where is Ishmael?' She replied, 'He has gone out hunting.' Abraham said (to her), 'When he comes, tell him to change the threshold of his gate.' When he came, she told him the same whereupon Ishmael said to her, 'You are the threshold, so go to your family (i.e. you are divorced).' Again Abraham thought of visiting his dependents whom he had left (at Mecca), and he told his wife (Sarah) of his intentions. Abraham came to Ishmael's house and asked. “Where is Ishmael?” Ishmael's wife replied, “He has gone out hunting,” and added, “Will you stay (for some time) and have something to eat and drink?' Abraham asked, 'What is your food and what is your drink?' She replied, 'Our food is meat and our drink is water.' He said, 'O Allah! Bless their meals and their drink.” Abu Al-Qa-sim (i.e. Prophet) said, “Because of Abraham's invocation there are blessings (in Mecca).” Once more Abraham thought of visiting his family he had left (at Mecca), so he told his wife (Sarah) of his decision. He went and found Ishmael behind the Zam-zam well, mending his arrows. He said, “O Ishmael, Your Lord has ordered me to build a house for Him.” Ishmael said, “Obey (the order of) your Lord.” Abraham said, “Allah has also ordered me that you should help me therein.” Ishmael said, “Then I will do.” So, both of them rose and Abraham started building (the Ka'ba) while Ishmael went on handing him the stones, and both of them were saying, “O our Lord ! Accept (this service) from us, Verily, You are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.” (2.127). When the building became high and the old man (i.e. Abraham) could no longer lift the stones (to such a high position), he stood over the stone of Al-Maqam and Ishmael carried on handing him the stones, and both of them were saying, 'O our Lord! Accept (this service) from us, Verily You are All-Hearing, All-Knowing." (2.127)


## Hadith 4:585

_Narrated Abu Dhar:_

I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Which mosque was first built on the surface of the earth?” He said, “Al-Masjid-ul-,Haram (in Mecca).” I said, “Which was built next?” He replied “The mosque of Al-Aqsa ( in Jerusalem) .” I said, “What was the period of construction between the two?” He said, “Forty years.” He added, “Wherever (you may be, and) the prayer time becomes due, perform the prayer there, for the best thing is to do so (i.e. to offer the prayers in time).”


## Hadith 4:586

_Narrated Anas bin Malik:_

When the mountain of Uhud came in the sight of Allah's Apostle he said. “This is a mountain that loves us and is loved by us. O Allah! Abraham made Mecca a sanctuary, and I make (the area) in between these two mountains (of Medina) a sanctuary.”


## Hadith 4:587

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

(the wife of the Prophet) Allah's Apostle said (to her). “Don't you see that when your folk built the Ka'ba, they did not build it on all the foundations built by Abraham?” I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Why don't we rebuild it on the foundations of Abraham?” He said. “But for the fact that your folk have recently given up infidelity (I would have done so).”

I see that Allah's Apostle used not to touch the two corners facing Al-Hijr only because the House had not been built on the foundations of Abraham''


## Hadith 4:588

_Narrated Abu Humaid As-Sa'idi:_

The people asked, “O Allah's Apostle! How shall we (ask Allah to) send blessings on you?” Allah's Apostle replied, “Say: O Allah! Send Your Mercy on Muhammad and on his wives and on his off spring, as You sent Your Mercy on Abraham's family; and send Your Blessings on Muhammad and on his offspring, as You sent Your Blessings on Abraham's family, for You are the Most Praise-worthy, the Most Glorious.”


## Hadith 4:589

_Narrated Abdur-Rahman bin Abi Laila:_

Ka'b bin Ujrah met me and said, “Shall I not give you a present I got from the Prophet?” 'Abdur-Rahman said, “Yes, give it to me.” I said, “We asked Allah's Apostle saying, 'O Allah's Apostle! How should one (ask Allah to) send blessings on you, the members of the family, for Allah has taught us how to salute you (in the prayer)?' He said, 'Say: O Allah! Send Your Mercy on Muhammad and on the family of Muhammad, as You sent Your Mercy on Abraham and on the family of Abraham, for You are the Most Praise-worthy, the Most Glorious. O Allah! Send Your Blessings on Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, as You sent your Blessings on Abraham and on the family of Abraham, for You are the Most Praise-worthy, the Most Glorious.' ”


## Hadith 4:590

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet used to seek Refuge with Allah for Al-Hasan and Al-Husain and say: “Your forefather (i.e. Abraham) used to seek Refuge with Allah for Ishmael and Isaac by reciting the following: 'O Allah! I seek Refuge with Your Perfect Words from every devil and from poisonous pests and from every evil, harmful, envious eye.' ”


## Hadith 4:591

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “We are more liable to be in doubt than Abraham when he said, 'My Lord! Show me how You give life to the dead.” . He (i.e. Allah) slid: 'Don't you believe then?' He (i.e. Abraham) said: “Yes, but (I ask) in order to be stronger in Faith.” (2.260) And may Allah send His Mercy on Lot! He wished to have a powerful support. If I were to stay in prison for such a long time as Joseph did I would have accepted the offer (of freedom without insisting on having my guiltless less declared)."


## Hadith 4:592

_Narrated Salama bin Al-Akwa:_

The Prophet passed by some persons of the tribe of Aslam practicing archery (i.e. the throwing of arrows) Allah's Apostle said, “O offspring of Ishmael! Practice archery (i.e. arrow throwing) as your father was a great archer (i.e. arrow-thrower). I am with (on the side of) the son of so-and-so-.” Hearing that, one of the two teams stopped throwing. Allah's Apostle asked them, ' Why are you not throwing?“ They replied, ”O Allah's Apostle! How shall we throw when you are with the opposite team?“ He said, ”Throw, for I am with you all."


## Hadith 4:593

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Some people asked the Prophet: “Who is the most honorable amongst the people?” He replied, “The most honorable among them is the one who is the most Allah-fearing.” They said, “O Allah's Prophet! We do not ask about this.” He said, “Then the most honorable person is Joseph, Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Khalil.” They said, “We do not ask about this.” He said, “Then you want to ask me about the Arabs' descent?” They said, “Yes.” He said, “Those who were best in the pre-lslamic period, are the best in Islam, if they comprehend (the religious knowledge).”


## Hadith 4:594

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “May Allah forgive Lot: He wanted to have a powerful support.”


## Hadith 4:595

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet recited:— 'Hal-min-Muddakir' (54.15) (Is there any that will remember) (and avoid evil).


## Hadith 4:596

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

The Prophet said, "The honorable is the son of the honorable, the son the honorable, i.e. Joseph, the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham,


## Hadith 4:597

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle was asked, “Who is the most honorable amongst the people?” He replied, “The most Allah fearing.” The people said, “We do not want to ask you about this.” He said, “The most honorable person is Joseph, Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Prophet, the son of Allah's Khalil” The people said, 'We do not want to ask you about this.“ He said,” Then you want to ask me about the origins of the Arabs? People are of various origins. The best in the pre-lslamic period are the best in Islam, provided they comprehend (the religious knowledge)."


## Hadith 4:598

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

That the Prophet said (to her). “Order Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer.” She replied,“ Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted person and when he stands at your place, he will weep (so he will not be able to lead the prayer).” The Prophet repeated the same order and she gave the same reply. The narrator, Shuba said that the Prophet said on the third or fourth time. “You are (like) the female companions of Joseph. Order Abu Bakr to lead the prayer. ”


## Hadith 4:599

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

When the Prophet fell ill, he said, “Order Abu Bakr to lead the people in prayer.” 'Aisha said, “Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted person. The Prophet gave the same order again and she again gave the same reply. He again said, ”Order Abu Bakr (to lead the prayer)! You are (like) the female companions of Joseph." Consequently Abu Bakr led the people in prayer in the life-time of the Prophet


## Hadith 4:600

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “O Allah! Save Aiyyash bin Abi Rabia (from the unjust treatment of the infidels). O Allah! Save Salama bin Hisham. O Allah! Send your Punishment on (the tribe of) Mudar. O Allah! Let them suffer from years (of drought) similar to that inflicted during the life-time of Joseph.”

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_500">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:401 to 4:500</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_659">
          <span class="pr-2">Hadith 4:601 to 4:659</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
