---
title: "Hadith 4:601 to 4:659"
description: "Hadith of Bukhari"
published: true
date: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-9T15:38:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_600">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:501 to 4:600</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## Hadith 4:601

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “May Allah bestow His Mercy on Lot. He wanted to have a powerful support. If I were to stay in prison (for a period equal to) the stay of Joseph (prison) and then the offer of freedom came to me, then I would have accepted it.” (See Hadith No. 591)


## Hadith 4:602

_Narrated Masruq:_

I asked Um Ruman, 'Aisha's mother about the accusation forged against 'Aisha. She said, “While I was sitting with 'Aisha, an Ansari woman came to us and said, 'Let Allah condemn such-and-such person.' I asked her, 'Why do you say so?' She replied, 'For he has spread the (slanderous) story.' 'Aisha said, 'What story?' The woman then told her the story. 'Aisha asked, 'Have Abu Bakr and Allah's Apostle heard about it ?' She said, 'Yes.' 'Aisha fell down senseless (on hearing that), and when she came to her senses, she got fever and shaking of the body. The Prophet came and asked, 'What is wrong with her?' I said, 'She has got fever because of a story which has been rumored.' 'Aisha got up and said, 'By Allah! Even if I took an oath, you would not believe me, and if I put forward an excuse, You would not excuse me. My example and your example is just like that example of Jacob and his sons. Against that which you assert, it is Allah (Alone) Whose Help can be sought.' (12.18) The Prophet left and then Allah revealed the Verses (concerning the matter), and on that 'Aisha said, 'Thanks to Allah (only) and not to anybody else.”


## Hadith 4:603

_Narrated 'Urwa:_

I asked 'Aisha the wife of the Prophet about the meaning of the following Verse: — “(Respite will be granted) 'Until when the apostles give up hope (of their people) and thought that they were denied (by their people)...............”(12.110) 'Aisha replied, “Really, their nations did not believe them.” I said, “By Allah! They were definite that their nations treated them as liars and it was not a matter of suspecting.” 'Aisha said, “O 'Uraiya (i.e. 'Urwa)! No doubt, they were quite sure about it.”

I said, “May the Verse be read in such a way as to mean that the apostles thought that Allah did not help them?” Aisha said, “Allah forbid! (Impossible) The Apostles did not suspect their Lord of such a thing. But this Verse is concerned with the Apostles' followers who had faith in their Lord and believed in their apostles and their period of trials was long and Allah's Help was delayed till the apostles gave up hope for the conversion of the disbelievers amongst their nation and suspected that even their followers were shaken in Prophet said, ”The honorable, the son of the honorable, the son of the honorable, (was) Joseph, the son of Jacob! the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham."


## Hadith 4:604

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “While Job was naked, taking a bath, a swarm of gold locusts fell on him and he started collecting them in his garment. His Lord called him, 'O Job! Have I not made you rich enough to need what you see? He said, 'Yes, O Lord! But I cannot dispense with your Blessing.”'


## Hadith 4:605

_Narrated 'Aisha:_

The Prophet returned to Khadija while his heart was beating rapidly. She took him to Waraqa bin Naufal who was a Christian convert and used to read the Gospels in Arabic Waraqa asked (the Prophet), “What do you see?” When he told him, Waraqa said, “That is the same angel whom Allah sent to the Prophet) Moses. Should I live till you receive the Divine Message, I will support you strongly.”


## Hadith 4:606

_Narrated Malik bin Sasaa:_

Allah's Apostle talked to his companions about his Night Journey to the Heavens. When he reached the fifth Heaven, he met Aaron. (Gabriel said to the Prophet), “This is Aaron.” The Prophet said, “Gabriel greeted and so did I, and he returned the greeting saying, 'Welcome, O Pious Brother and Pious Prophet.”


## Hadith 4:607

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “On the night of my Ascension to Heaven, I saw (the prophet) Moses who was a thin person with lank hair, looking like one of the men of the tribe of Shanua; and I saw Jesus who was of average height with red face as if he had just come out of a bathroom. And I resemble prophet Abraham more than any of his offspring does. Then I was given two cups, one containing milk and the other wine. Gabriel said, 'Drink whichever you like.' I took the milk and drank it. Gabriel said, 'You have accepted what is natural, (True Religion i.e. Islam) and if you had taken the wine, your followers would have gone astray.' ”


## Hadith 4:608

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “One should not say that I am better than Jonah (i.e. Yunus) bin Matta.” So, he mentioned his father Matta. The Prophet mentioned the night of his Ascension and said, “The prophet Moses was brown, a tall person as if from the people of the tribe of Shanu'a. Jesus was a curly-haired man of moderate height.” He also mentioned Malik, the gate-keeper of the (Hell) Fire, and Ad-Dajjal.


## Hadith 4:609

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

When the Prophet came to Medina, he found (the Jews) fasting on the day of 'Ashura' (i.e. 10th of Muharram). They used to say: “This is a great day on which Allah saved Moses and drowned the folk of Pharaoh. Moses observed the fast on this day, as a sign of gratitude to Allah.” The Prophet said, “I am closer to Moses than they.” So, he observed the fast (on that day) and ordered the Muslims to fast on it.


## Hadith 4:610

_Narrated Abu Said:_

The Prophet said, 'People will be struck unconscious on the Day of Resurrection and I will be the first to regain consciousness, and behold! There I will see Moses holding one of the pillars of Allah's Throne. I will wonder whether he has become conscious before me of he has been exempted, because of his unconsciousness at the Tur (mountain) which he received (on the earth)."


## Hadith 4:611

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Were it not for Bani Israel, meat would not decay; and were it not for Eve, no woman would ever betray her husband.”


## Hadith 4:612

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

That he differed with Al-Hur bin Qais Al-Fazari regarding the companion of Moses. Ibn 'Abbas said that he was Al-Khadir. Meanwhile Ubai bin Ka'b passed by them and Ibn 'Abbas called him saying, “My friend and I have differed regarding Moses' companion whom Moses asked the way to meet. Have you heard Allah's Apostle mentioning something about him?” He said, “Yes, I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'While Moses was sitting in the company of some Israelites, a man came and asked (him), 'Do you know anyone who is more learned than you?' Moses replied, 'No.' So, Allah sent the Divine Inspiration to Moses: 'Yes, Our slave, Khadir (is more learned than you).' Moses asked how to meet him (i.e. Khadir). So, the fish, was made, as a sign for him, and he was told that when the fish was lost, he should return and there he would meet him. So, Moses went on looking for the sign of the fish in the sea. The servant boy of Moses said to him, 'Do you know that when we were sitting by the side of the rock, I forgot the fish, and t was only Satan who made me forget to tell (you) about it.' Moses said, That was what we were seeking after,' and both of them returned, following their footmarks and found Khadir; and what happened further to them, is mentioned in Allah's Book.”


## Hadith 4:613

_Narrated Said bin Jubair:_

I said to Ibn Abbas, “Nauf Al-Bukah claims that Moses, the companion of Al-Khadir was not Moses (the prophet) of the children of Israel, but some other Moses.” Ibn 'Abbas said, "Allah's enemy (i.e. Nauf) has told a lie. Ubai bin Ka'b told us that the Prophet said, 'Once Moses stood up and addressed Bani Israel. He was asked who was the most learned man amongst the people. He said, 'I.' Allah admonished him as he did not attribute absolute knowledge to Him (Allah). So, Allah said to him, 'Yes, at the junction of the two seas there is a Slave of Mine who is more learned than you.' Moses said, 'O my Lord! How can I meet him?' Allah said, 'Take a fish and put it in a large basket and you will find him at the place where you will lose the fish.' Moses took a fish and put it in a basket and proceeded along with his (servant) boy, Yusha 'bin Nun, till they reached the rock where they laid their heads (i.e. lay down). Moses slept, and the fish, moving out of the basket, fell into the sea. It took its way into the sea (straight) as in a tunnel. Allah stopped the flow of water over the fish and it became like an arch (the Prophet pointed out this arch with his hands). They travelled the rest of the night, and the next day Moses said to his boy (servant), 'Give us our food, for indeed, we have suffered much fatigue in this journey of ours.' Moses did not feel tired till he crossed that place which Allah had ordered him to seek after. His boy (servant) said to him, 'Do you know that when we were sitting near that rock, I forgot the fish, and none but Satan caused me to forget to tell (you) about it, and it took its course into the sea in an amazing way?.' So there was a path for the fish and that astonished them. Moses said, 'That was what we were seeking after.' So, both of them retraced their footsteps till they reached the rock. There they saw a man Lying covered with a garment. Moses greeted him and he replied saying, 'How do people greet each other in your land?' Moses said, 'I am Moses.' The man asked, 'Moses of Bani Israel?' Moses said, 'Yes, I have come to you so that you may teach me from those things which Allah has taught you.' He said, 'O Moses! I have some of the Knowledge of Allah which Allah has taught me, and which you do not know, while you have some of the Knowledge of Allah which Allah has taught you and which I do not know.' Moses asked, 'May I follow you?' He said, 'But you will not be able to remain patient with me for how can you be patient about things which you will not be able to understand?' (Moses said, 'You will find me, if Allah so will, truly patient, and I will not disobey you in aught.') So, both of them set out walking along the sea-shore, a boat passed by them and they asked the crew of the boat to take them on board. The crew recognized Al-Khadir and so they took them on board without fare. When they were on board the boat, a sparrow came and stood on the edge of the boat and dipped its beak once or twice into the sea. Al-Khadir said to Moses, 'O Moses! My knowledge and your knowledge have not decreased Allah's Knowledge except as much as this sparrow has decreased the water of the sea with its beak.' Then suddenly Al-Khadir took an adze and plucked a plank, and Moses did not notice it till he had plucked a plank with the adze. Moses said to him, 'What have you done? They took us on board charging us nothing; yet you I have intentionally made a hole in their boat so as to drown its passengers. Verily, you have done a dreadful thing.' Al-Khadir replied, 'Did I not tell you that you would not be able to remain patient with me?' Moses replied, 'Do not blame me for what I have forgotten, and do not be hard upon me for my fault.' So the first excuse of Moses was that he had forgotten. When they had left the sea, they passed by a boy playing with other boys.

Al-Khadir took hold of the boys head and plucked it with his hand like this. (Sufyan, the sub narrator pointed with his fingertips as if he was plucking some fruit.) Moses said to him, “Have you killed an innocent person who has not killed any person? You have really done a horrible thing.” Al-Khadir said, “Did I not tell you that you could not remain patient with me?' Moses said ”If I ask you about anything after this, don't accompany me. You have received an excuse from me.' Then both of them went on till they came to some people of a village, and they asked its inhabitant for wood but they refused to entertain them as guests. Then they saw therein a wall which was just going to collapse (and Al Khadir repaired it just by touching it with his hands). (Sufyan, the sub-narrator, pointed with his hands, illustrating how Al-Khadir passed his hands over the wall upwards.) Moses said, “These are the people whom we have called on, but they neither gave us food, nor entertained us as guests, yet you have repaired their wall. If you had wished, you could have taken wages for it.” Al-Khadir said, “This is the parting between you and me, and I shall tell you the explanation of those things on which you could not remain patient.” The Prophet added, “We wished that Moses could have remained patient by virtue of which Allah might have told us more about their story. (Sufyan the sub-narrator said that the Prophet said, ”May Allah bestow His Mercy on Moses! If he had remained patient, we would have been told further about their case.")


## Hadith 4:614

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Al-Khadir was named so because he sat over a barren white land, it turned green with plantation after (his sitting over it.”


## Hadith 4:615

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “It was said to Bani Israel, Enter the gate (of the town) with humility (prostrating yourselves) and saying: ”Repentance“, but they changed the word and entered the town crawling on their buttocks and saying: ”A wheat grain in the hair."


## Hadith 4:616

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “(The Prophet) Moses was a shy person and used to cover his body completely because of his extensive shyness. One of the children of Israel hurt him by saying, 'He covers his body in this way only because of some defect in his skin, either leprosy or scrotal hernia, or he has some other defect.' Allah wished to clear Moses of what they said about him, so one day while Moses was in seclusion, he took off his clothes and put them on a stone and started taking a bath. When he had finished the bath, he moved towards his clothes so as to take them, but the stone took his clothes and fled; Moses picked up his stick and ran after the stone saying, 'O stone! Give me my garment!' Till he reached a group of Bani Israel who saw him naked then, and found him the best of what Allah had created, and Allah cleared him of what they had accused him of. The stone stopped there and Moses took and put his garment on and started hitting the stone with his stick. By Allah, the stone still has some traces of the hitting, three, four or five marks. This was what Allah refers to in His Saying:— ”O you who believe! Be you not like those Who annoyed Moses, But Allah proved his innocence of that which they alleged, And he was honorable In Allah's Sight." (33.69)


## Hadith 4:617

_Narrated Abdullah:_

Once the Prophet distributed something (among his followers. A man said, “This distribution has not been done (with justice) seeking Allah's Countenance.” I went to the Prophet and told him (of that). He became so angry that I saw the signs of anger oh his face. Then he said, “May Allah bestow His Mercy on Moses, for he was harmed more (in a worse manner) than this; yet he endured patiently.”


## Hadith 4:618

_Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:_

We were with Allah's Apostle picking the fruits of the 'Arak trees, and Allah's Apostle said, “Pick the black fruit, for it is the best.” The companions asked, “Were you a shepherd?” He replied, “There was no prophet who was not a shepherd.”


## Hadith 4:619

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Angel of Death was sent to Moses when he came to Moses, Moses slapped him on the eye. The angel returned to his Lord and said, “You have sent me to a Slave who does not want to die.” Allah said, “Return to him and tell him to put his hand on the back of an ox and for every hair that will come under it, he will be granted one year of life.” Moses said, “O Lord! What will happen after that?” Allah replied, “Then death.” Moses said, “Let it come now.” Moses then requested Allah to let him die close to the Sacred Land so much so that he would be at a distance of a stone's throw from it.“ Abu Huraira added, ”Allah's Apostle said, 'If I were there, I would show you his grave below the red sand hill on the side of the road."


## Hadith 4:620

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

A Muslim and a Jew quarreled. The Muslim taking an oath, said, “By Him Who has preferred Muhammad over all people...!” The Jew said, “By Him Who has preferred Moses, over all people.” The Muslim raised his hand and slapped the Jew who came to the Prophet to tell him what had happened between him and the Muslim. The Prophet said, “Don't give me superiority over Moses, for the people will become unconscious (on the Day of Resurrection) and I will be the first to gain consciousness to see Moses standing and holding a side of Allah's Throne. I will not know if he has been among those people who have become unconscious; and that he has gained consciousness before me, or he has been amongst those whom Allah has exempted.”


## Hadith 4:621

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Adam and Moses argued with each other. Moses said to Adam. 'You are Adam whose mistake expelled you from Paradise.' Adam said to him, 'You are Moses whom Allah selected as His Messenger and as the one to whom He spoke directly; yet you blame me for a thing which had already been written in my fate before my creation?”' Allah's Apostle said twice, “So, Adam overpowered Moses.”


## Hadith 4:622

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The Prophet once came to us and said, “All the nations were displayed in front of me, and I saw a large multitude of people covering the horizon. Somebody said, 'This is Moses and his followers.' ”


## Hadith 4:623

_Narrated Abu Musa:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Many amongst men reached (the level of) perfection but none amongst the women reached this level except Asia, Pharaoh's wife, and Mary, the daughter of 'Imran. And no doubt, the superiority of 'Aisha to other women is like the superiority of Tharid (i.e. a meat and bread dish) to other meals.”


## Hadith 4:624

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

The Prophet said, “None of you should say that I am better than Yunus (i.e. Jonah).” Musadded added, “Jonah bin Matta.”


## Hadith 4:625

_Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:_

The Prophet said, “No slave (of Allah) should say that I am better than Yunus bin Matta.” So the Prophet mentioned his father's name with his name.


## Hadith 4:626

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Once while a Jew was selling something, he was offered a price that he was not pleased with. So, he said, “No, by Him Who gave Moses superiority over all human beings!” Hearing him, an Ansari man got up and slapped him on the face and said, “You say: By Him Who Gave Moses superiority over all human beings although the Prophet (Muhammad) is present amongst us!” The Jew went to the Prophet and said, “O Abu-l-Qasim! I am under the assurance and contract of security, so what right does so-and-so have to slap me?” The Prophet asked the other, “Why have you slapped”. He told him the whole story. The Prophet became angry, till anger appeared on his face, and said, “Don't give superiority to any prophet amongst Allah's Prophets, for when the trumpet will be blown, everyone on the earth and in the heavens will become unconscious except those whom Allah will exempt. The trumpet will be blown for the second time and I will be the first to be resurrected to see Moses holding Allah's Throne. I will not know whether the unconsciousness which Moses received on the Day of Tur has been sufficient for him, or has he got up before me. And I do not say that there is anybody who is better than Yunus bin Matta.”


## Hadith 4:627

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “None should say that I am better than Yunus bin Matta.”


## Hadith 4:628

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “The reciting of the Zabur (i.e. Psalms) was made easy for David. He used to order that his riding animals be saddled, and would finish reciting the Zabur before they were saddled. And he would never eat except from the earnings of his manual work.”


## Hadith 4:629

_Narrated Abdullah bin Amr:_

Allah's Apostle was informed that I have said: “By Allah, I will fast all the days and pray all the nights as long as I live.” On that, Allah's Apostle asked me. “Are you the one who says: 'I will fast all the days and pray all the nights as long as I live?' ” I said, “Yes, I have said it.” He said, “You cannot do that. So fast (sometimes) and do not fast (sometimes). Pray and sleep. Fast for three days a month, for the reward of a good deed is multiplied by ten time, and so the fasting of three days a month equals the fasting of a year.” I said, “O Allah's Apostle! I can do (fast) more than this.” He said, “Fast on every third day. I said: I can do (fast) more than that, He said: ”Fast on alternate days and this was the fasting of David which is the most moderate sort of fasting.“ I said, ”O Allah's Apostle! I can do (fast) more than that.“ He said, ”There is nothing better than that."


## Hadith 4:630

_Narrated Abdullah bin Amr bin Al-As:_

The Prophet said to me, “I have been informed that you pray all the nights and observe fast all the days; is this true?” I replied, “Yes.” He said, “If you do so, your eyes will become weak and you will get bored. So fast three days a month, for this will be the fasting of a whole year, or equal to the fasting of a whole year.” I said, “I find myself able to fast more.” He said, “Then fast like the fasting of (the Prophet) David who used to fast on alternate days and would not flee on facing the enemy.”


## Hadith 4:631

_Narrated Abdullah bin Amr:_

Allah's Apostle said to me, “The most beloved fasting to Allah was the fasting of (the Prophet) David who used to fast on alternate days. And the most beloved prayer to Allah was the prayer of David who used to sleep for (the first) half of the night and pray for 1/3 of it and (again) sleep for a sixth of it.”


## Hadith 4:632

_Narrated Mujahid:_

I asked Ibn 'Abbas, “Should we perform a prostration on reciting Surat-Sad?” He recited (the Sura) including: 'And among his progeny, David, Solomon..(up to)...so follow their guidance (6.84-91) And then he said, "Your Prophet is amongst those people who have been ordered to follow them (i.e. the preceding apostles).


## Hadith 4:633

_Narrated Ibn Abbas:_

The prostration in Sura-Sad is not amongst the compulsory prostrations, though I saw the Prophet prostrating on reciting The Statement of Allah:—and to David We gave Solomon (for a son). How excellent (a) slave he was ever oft-returning in repentance (to us) (38.30) And His Statement:— He said: My Lord Forgive me and grant me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after me.' (38.35) And His Statement:— 'And they followed what the Devils gave out (falsely), of magic in the life-time of Solomon.' (2.102)


## Hadith 4:634

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “A strong demon from the Jinns came to me yesterday suddenly, so as to spoil my prayer, but Allah enabled me to overpower him, and so I caught him and intended to tie him to one of the pillars of the Mosque so that all of you might see him, but I remembered the invocation of my brother Solomon: 'And grant me a kingdom such as shall not belong to any other after me.' (38.35) so I let him go cursed.”


## Hadith 4:635

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Solomon (the son of) David said, 'Tonight I will sleep with seventy ladies each of whom will conceive a child who will be a knight fighting for ”Allah's Cause.' His companion said, 'If Allah will.' But Solomon did not say so; therefore none of those women got pregnant except one who gave birth to a half child.“ The Prophet further said, ”If the Prophet Solomon had said it (i.e. 'If Allah will') he would have begotten children who would have fought in Allah's Cause.“ Shuaib and Ibn Abi Az-Zinad said, ”Ninety (women) is more correct (than seventy)."


## Hadith 4:636

_Narrated Abu Dhaar:_

I said, “O Allah's Apostle! Which mosque was built first?” He replied, “Al-Masjid-ul-Haram.” I asked, “Which (was built) next?” He replied, “Al-Masjid-ul-Aqs-a (i.e. Jerusalem).” I asked, “What was the period in between them?” He replied, “Forty (years).” He then added, “Wherever the time for the prayer comes upon you, perform the prayer, for all the earth is a place of worshipping for you.”


## Hadith 4:637

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “My example and the example o the people is like that of a person who lit a fire and let the moths, butterflies and these insects fall in it.” He also said, “There were two women, each of whom had a child with her. A wolf came and took away the child of one of them, whereupon the other said, 'It has taken your child.' The first said, 'But it has taken your child.' So they both carried the case before David who judged that the living child be given to the elder lady. So both of them went to Solomon bin David and informed him (of the case). He said, 'Bring me a knife so as to cut the child into two pieces and distribute it between them.' The younger lady said, 'May Allah be merciful to you! Don't do that, for it is her (i.e. the other lady's) child.' So he gave the child to the younger lady.”


## Hadith 4:638

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

When the Verse:— 'Those who believe and mix not their belief with wrong.“ was revealed, the companions of the Prophet said, ”Who amongst us has not mixed his belief with wrong?“ Then Allah revealed: ”Join none in worship with Allah, Verily joining others in worship with Allah is a great wrong indeed."


## Hadith 4:639

_Narrated 'Abdullah:_

When the Verse:— 'Those who believe and mix not their belief with wrong.' was revealed, the Muslims felt it very hard on them and said, “O Allah's Apostle! Who amongst us does not do wrong to himself?” He replied, “The Verse does not mean this. But that (wrong) means to associate others in worship to Allah: Don't you listen to what Luqman said to his son when he was advising him,” O my son! Join not others in worship with Allah. Verily joining others in worship with Allah is a great wrong indeed." (31.13)


## Hadith 4:640

_Narrated Malik bin Sasaa:_

That the Prophet talked to them about the night of his Ascension to the Heavens. He said, “(Then Gabriel took me) and ascended up till he reached the second heaven where he asked for the gate to be opened, but it was asked, 'Who is it?' Gabriel replied, 'I am Gabriel.' It was asked, 'Who is accompanying you?' He replied, 'Muhammad.' It was asked, 'Has he been called?' He said, 'Yes.' When we reached over the second heaven, I saw Yahya (i.e. John) and Jesus who were cousins. Gabriel said, 'These are John (Yahya) and Jesus, so greet them.' I greeted them and they returned the greeting saying, 'Welcome, O Pious Brother and Pious Prophet!;' ”


## Hadith 4:641

_Narrated Said bin Al-Musaiyab:_

Abu Huraira said, “I heard Allah's Apostle saying, 'There is none born among the off-spring of Adam, but Satan touches it. A child therefore, cries loudly at the time of birth because of the touch of Satan, except Mary and her child.” Then Abu Huraira recited: “And I seek refuge with You for her and for her offspring from the outcast Satan” (3.36)


## Hadith 4:642

_Narrated 'Ali:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “Mary, the daughter of 'Imran, was the best among the women (of the world of her time) and Khadija is the best amongst the women. (of this nation).”


## Hadith 4:643

_Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ashari:_

The Prophet said, “The superiority of 'Aisha to other ladies is like the superiority of Tharid (i.e. meat and bread dish) to other meals. Many men reached the level of perfection, but no woman reached such a level except Mary, the daughter of Imran and Asia, the wife of Pharaoh.”

those women who ride camels (i.e. Arabs), the ladies of Quraish are the best. They are merciful and kind to their off-spring and the best guardians of their husbands' properties.' Abu Huraira added, “Mary the daughter of Imran never rode a camel.”


## Hadith 4:644

_Narrated 'Ubada:_

The Prophet said, “If anyone testifies that None has the right to be worshipped but Allah Alone Who has no partners, and that Muhammad is His Slave and His Apostle, and that Jesus is Allah's Slave and His Apostle and His Word which He bestowed on Mary and a Spirit created by Him, and that Paradise is true, and Hell is true, Allah will admit him into Paradise with the deeds which he had done even if those deeds were few.” (Junada, the sub-narrator said, “ 'Ubada added, 'Such a person can enter Paradise through any of its eight gates he likes.”)


## Hadith 4:645

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “None spoke in cradle but three: (The first was) Jesus, (the second was), there a man from Bani Israel called Juraij. While he was offering his prayers, his mother came and called him. He said (to himself), 'Shall I answer her or keep on praying?” (He went on praying) and did not answer her, his mother said, “O Allah! Do not let him die till he sees the faces of prostitutes.” So while he was in his hermitage, a lady came and sought to seduce him, but he refused. So she went to a shepherd and presented herself to him to commit illegal sexual intercourse with her and then later she gave birth to a child and claimed that it belonged to Juraij. The people, therefore, came to him and dismantled his hermitage and expelled him out of it and abused him. Juraij performed the ablution and offered prayer, and then came to the child and said, 'O child! Who is your father?' The child replied, 'The shepherd.' (After hearing this) the people said, 'We shall rebuild your hermitage of gold,' but he said, 'No, of nothing but mud.'(The third was the hero of the following story) A lady from Bani Israel was nursing her child at her breast when a handsome rider passed by her. She said, 'O Allah ! Make my child like him.' On that the child left her breast, and facing the rider said, 'O Allah! Do not make me like him.' The child then started to suck her breast again. (Abu Huraira further said, “As if I were now looking at the Prophet sucking his finger (in way of demonstration.”) After a while the people passed by, with a lady slave and she (i.e. the child's mother) said, 'O Allah! Do not make my child like this (slave girl)!, On that the child left her breast and said, 'O Allah! Make me like her.' When she asked why, the child replied, 'The rider is one of the tyrants while this slave girl is falsely accused of theft and illegal sexual intercourse."


## Hadith 4:646

_Narrated Hisham:_

from Ma'mar as below.


## Hadith 4:647

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “I met Moses on the night of my Ascension to heaven.” The Prophet then described him saying, as I think, “He was a tall person with lank hair as if he belonged to the people of the tribe of Shanu's.' The Prophet further said, ”I met Jesus.“ The Prophet described him saying, ”He was one of moderate height and was red-faced as if he had just come out of a bathroom. I saw Abraham whom I resembled more than any of his children did.“ The Prophet further said, ”(That night) I was given two cups; one full of milk and the other full of wine. I was asked to take either of them which I liked, and I took the milk and drank it. On that it was said to me, 'You have taken the right path (religion). If you had taken the wine, your (Muslim) nation would have gone astray."


## Hadith 4:648

_Narrated Ibn Umar:_

The Prophet said, “I saw Moses, Jesus and Abraham (on the night of my Ascension to the heavens). Jesus was of red complexion, curly hair and a broad chest. Moses was of brown complexion, straight hair and tall stature as if he was from the people of Az-Zutt.”


## Hadith 4:649

_Narrated Abdullah:_

The Prophet mentioned the Massiah Ad-Dajjal in front of the people saying, Allah is not one eyed while Messsiah, Ad-Dajjal is blind in the right eye and his eye looks like a bulging out grape. While sleeping near the Ka'ba last night, I saw in my dream a man of brown color the best one can see amongst brown color and his hair was long that it fell between his shoulders. His hair was lank and water was dribbling from his head and he was placing his hands on the shoulders of two men while circumambulating the Kaba. I asked, 'Who is this?' They replied, 'This is Jesus, son of Mary.' Behind him I saw a man who had very curly hair and was blind in the right eye, resembling Ibn Qatan (i.e. an infidel) in appearance. He was placing his hands on the shoulders of a person while performing Tawaf around the Ka'ba. I asked, 'Who is this? 'They replied, 'The Masih, Ad-Dajjal.' "


## Hadith 4:650

_Narrated Salim from his father:_

No, By Allah, the Prophet did not tell that Jesus was of red complexion but said, “While I was asleep circumambulating the Ka'ba (in my dream), suddenly I saw a man of brown complexion and lank hair walking between two men, and water was dropping from his head. I asked, 'Who is this?' The people said, 'He is the son of Mary.' Then I looked behind and I saw a red-complexioned, fat, curly-haired man, blind in the right eye which looked like a bulging out grape. I asked, 'Who is this?' They replied, 'He is Ad-Dajjal.' The one who resembled to him among the people, was Ibn Qatar.” (Az-Zuhri said, “He (i.e. Ibn Qatan) was a man from the tribe Khuza'a who died in the pre-lslamic period.”)


## Hadith 4:651

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

I heard Allah's Apostle saying, “I am the nearest of all the people to the son of Mary, and all the prophets are paternal brothers, and there has been no prophet between me and him (i.e. Jesus).”


## Hadith 4:652

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “Both in this world and in the Hereafter, I am the nearest of all the people to Jesus, the son of Mary. The prophets are paternal brothers; their mothers are different, but their religion is one.”


## Hadith 4:653

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

The Prophet said, “Jesus, seeing a man stealing, asked him, 'Did you steal?, He said, 'No, by Allah, except Whom there is None who has the right to be worshipped' Jesus said, 'I believe in Allah and suspect my eyes.”


## Hadith 4:654

_Narrated 'Umar:_

I heard the Prophet saying, “Do not exaggerate in praising me as the Christians praised the son of Mary, for I am only a Slave. So, call me the Slave of Allah and His Apostle.”


## Hadith 4:655

_Narrated Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari:_

Allah's Apostle said, “If a person teaches his slave girl good manners properly, educates her properly, and then manumits and marries her, he will get a double reward. And if a man believes in Jesus and then believes in me, he will get a double reward. And if a slave fears his Lord (i.e. Allah) and obeys his masters, he too will get a double reward.”


## Hadith 4:656

_Narrated_

Narrted Ibn Abbas:

Allah's Apostle said, “You will be resurrected (and assembled) bare-footed, naked and uncircumcised.” The Prophet then recited the Divine Verse:— “As We began the first creation, We shall repeat it: A promise We have undertaken. Truly we shall do it.” (21.104)

He added, “The first to be dressed will be Abraham. Then some of my companions will take to the right and to the left. I will say: 'My companions! 'It will be said, 'They had been renegades since you left them.' I will then say what the Pious Slave Jesus, the son of Mary said: 'And I was a witness over them while I dwelt amongst them; when You did take me up, You were the Watcher over them, and You are a Witness to all things. If You punish them, they are Your slaves, and if you forgive them, You, only You are the All-Mighty the All-Wise.' ” from Islam during the Caliphate of Abu Bakr who fought them".


## Hadith 4:657

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said, “By Him in Whose Hands my soul is, surely (Jesus,) the son of Mary will soon descend amongst you and will judge mankind justly (as a Just Ruler); he will break the Cross and kill the pigs and there will be no Jizya (i.e. taxation taken from non Muslims). Money will be in abundance so that nobody will accept it, and a single prostration to Allah (in prayer) will be better than the whole world and whatever is in it.” Abu Huraira added “If you wish, you can recite (this verse of the Holy Book): — 'And there is none Of the people of the Scriptures (Jews and Christians) But must believe in him (i.e Jesus as an Apostle of Allah and a human being) Before his death. And on the Day of Judgment He will be a witness Against them.” (4.159) (See Fateh Al Bari, Page 302 Vol 7)


## Hadith 4:658

_Narrated Abu Huraira:_

Allah's Apostle said "How will you be when the son of Mary (i.e. Jesus) descends amongst you and he will judge people by the Law of the Quran and not by the law of Gospel (Fateh-ul Bari page 304 and 305 Vol 7)


## Hadith 4:659

_Narrated Rabi bin Hirash:_

'Uqba bin 'Amr said to Hudhaifa, “Won't you relate to us of what you have heard from Allah's Apostle ?” He said, “I heard him saying, ”When Al-Dajjal appears, he will have fire and water along with him. What the people will consider as cold water, will be fire that will burn (things). So, if anyone of you comes across this, he should fall in the thing which will appear to him as fire, for in reality, it will be fresh cold water.“ Hudhaifa added, ”I also heard him saying, 'From among the people preceding your generation, there was a man whom the angel of death visited to capture his soul. (So his soul was captured) and he was asked if he had done any good deed.' He replied, 'I don't remember any good deed.' He was asked to t

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari/4_600">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hadith 4:501 to 4:600</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Hadith_of_Bukhari">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
