---
title: "XLI - L"
description: "Songs of Kabîr"
published: true
date: 2024-11-21T21:56:54Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-21T21:56:54Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Songs_of_Kabir/31_40">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XXXI - XL</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Songs_of_Kabir">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Songs_of_Kabir/51_60">
          <span class="pr-2">LI - LX</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## XLI

I. 76. _santo, sahaj samâdh bhalî_

O SADHU! the simple union is the best. Since the day when I met with my <span id="p89">[<sup><small>p. 89</small></sup>]</span> Lord, there has been no end to the sport of our love.
I shut not my eyes, I close not my ears, I do not mortify my body;
I see with eyes open and smile, and behold His beauty everywhere:
I utter His Name, and whatever I see, it reminds me of Him; whatever I do., it becomes His worship.
The rising and the setting are one to me; all contradictions are solved.
Wherever I go, I move round Him,
All I achieve is His service:
When I lie down, I lie prostrate at His feet.

He is the only adorable one to me: I have none other.
My tongue has left off impure words, it sings His glory day and night:
Whether I rise or sit down, I can never forget Him; for the rhythm of His music beats in my ears. <span id="p90">[<sup><small>p. 90</small></sup>]</span>
Kabîr says: “My heart is frenzied, and I disclose in my soul what is hidden. I am immersed in that one great bliss which transcends all pleasure and pain.”

## XLII

I. 79. _tîrath men to sab pânî hai_

THERE is nothing but water at the holy bathing places; and I know that they are useless, for I have bathed in them.
The images are all lifeless, they cannot speak; I know, for I have cried aloud to them.
The Purana and the Koran are mere words; lifting up the curtain, I have seen.
Kabîr gives utterance to the words of experience; and he knows very well that all other things are untrue.

<span id="p91">[<sup><small>p. 91</small></sup>]</span>

## XLIII

I. 82. _pânî vic mîn piyâsî_

I LAUGH when I hear that the fish in the water is thirsty:
You do not see that the Real is in your home, and you wander from forest to forest listlessly!
Here is the truth! Go where you will, to Benares or to Mathura; if you do not find your soul, the world is unreal to you.

## XLIV

I. 93. _gagan ma**t**h gaib nisân ga_d_e_

THE Hidden Banner is planted in the temple of the sky; there the blue canopy decked with the moon and set with bright jewels is spread.
There the light of the sun and the moon is shining: still your mind to silence before that splendour. <span id="p92">[<sup><small>p. 92</small></sup>]</span>
Kabîr says: “He who has drunk of this nectar, wanders like one who is mad.”

## XLV

I. 97. _sâdho, ko hai kânh se âyo_

WHO are you, and whence do you come?
Where dwells that Supreme Spirit, and how does He have His sport with all created things?
The fire is in the wood; but who awakens it suddenly? Then it turns to ashes, and where goes the force of the fire?
The true guru teaches that He has neither limit nor infinitude.
Kabîr says: “Brahma suits His language to the understanding of His hearer.”

<span id="p93">[<sup><small>p. 93</small></sup>]</span>

## XLVI

I. 98. _sâdho, sahajai kâyâ s'odho_

O SADHU! purify your body in the simple way.
As the seed is within the banyan tree, and within the seed are the flowers, the fruits, and the shade:
So the germ is within the body, and within that germ is the body again.
The fire, the air, the water, the earth, and the aether; you cannot have these outside of Him.
O, Kazi, O Pundit, consider it well: what is there that is not in the soul?
The water-filled pitcher is placed upon water, it has water within and without.
It should not be given a name, lest it call forth the error of dualism.
Kabîr says: “Listen to the Word, the Truth, which is your essence. He <span id="p94">[<sup><small>p. 94</small></sup>]</span> speaks the Word to Himself; and He Himself is the Creator.”

## XLVII

I. 102. _tarvar ek mûl vin **t**hâ**d**â_

THERE is a strange tree, which stands without roots and bears fruits without blossoming;
It has no branches and no leaves, it is lotus all over.
Two birds sing there; one is the Guru, and the other the disciple:
The disciple chooses the manifold fruits of life and tastes them, and the Guru beholds him in joy.
What Kabîr says is hard to understand: “The bird is beyond seeking, yet it is most clearly visible. The Formless is in the midst of all forms. I sing the glory of forms.”

<span id="p95">[<sup><small>p. 95</small></sup>]</span>

## XLVIII

I. 107. _calat mansâ acal kînhî_

I HAVE stilled my restless mind, and my heart is radiant: for in Thatness I have seen beyond That-ness. In company I have seen the Comrade Himself.
Living in bondage, I have set myself free: I have broken away from the clutch of all narrowness.
Kabîr says: “I have attained the unattainable, and my heart is coloured with the colour of love.”

## XLIX

I. 105. _jo dîsai, so to hai nâhîn_

THAT which you see is not: and for that which is, you have no words.
Unless you see, you believe not: what is told you you cannot accept.
He who is discerning knows by the word; and the ignorant stands gaping. <span id="p96">[<sup><small>p. 96</small></sup>]</span>
Some contemplate the Formless, and others meditate on form: but the wise man knows that Brahma is beyond both.
That beauty of His is not seen of the eye: that metre of His is not heard of the ear.
Kabîr says: “He who has found both love and renunciation never descends to death.”

## L

I. 126. _muralî bajat akha**nd** sadâye_

THE flute of the Infinite is played without ceasing, and its sound is love:
When love renounces all limits, it reaches truth.
How widely the fragrance spreads! It has no end, nothing stands in its way.
The form of this melody is bright like <span id="p97">[<sup><small>p. 97</small></sup>]</span> a million suns: incomparably sounds the vina, the vina of the notes of truth.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Songs_of_Kabir/31_40">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XXXI- XL</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Songs_of_Kabir">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Songs_of_Kabir/51_60">
          <span class="pr-2">LI -XL</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
