# Our Challenge

The religious challenge of this age is to those farseeing and forward-looking men and women of spiritual insight who will dare to construct a new and appealing philosophy of living out of the enlarged and exquisitely integrated modern concepts of cosmic truth, universe beauty, and divine goodness. Such a new and righteous vision of morality will attract all that is good in the mind of man and challenge that which is best in the human soul. (43)

Where do we find these "enlarged and exquisitely integrated modern concepts of cosmic truth, universe beauty, and divine goodness?" Is there anything anywhere that is comparable to what we already have in the Urantia revelation? The answer to that question appears to be an emphatic, "No!" Which makes the statement self-referential.

And so our instructions are to search the Urantia Papers for material that fits the above categories and then present it in a form that will attract and challenge all that which is best in the human soul.

In the 1920 -1935 period when the Urantia Papers were received, anyone who wrote something of book length would have had some chance of at least getting their manuscript read and assessed for its suitability prior to a prospective publisher sending a courteous note of acceptance or rejection.

Today, with the advent of computers and word processors, all that has changed. Publishers have been inundated with vast numbers of manuscripts from hopeful authors such that most will not accept an unsolicited manuscript, a task that they pass on to professional agents. And the fierceness of competition generated by anxious would-be authors means that agents who have the ear of a major publisher can ask premium prices for his or her services.

An alternative pathway for budding authors is to pay to have their work printed--which shifts the problem to one of finding ways to get it distributed. But it is the publishers who control distribution and what gets distributed!!

Hence the reality is that the vast majority of such authors will find they must give their work away free to anyone friendly enough or forbearing enough to accept a free copy that, most likely, they will dispose of in the nearest garbage bin.

But is a full length book the way to spread the message of the Urantia revelation? In the previous issue of this newsletter, referring to the "religious challenge of this age" paragraph, it was concluded that:

"Currently there is an urgent need for not just one new philosophy but one for every race, nation, religion, faction, language--each and every barrier that divides us. And all such  philosophies have to be short, sharp, and simple, and based directly upon those revelatory concepts of 'cosmic truth, universe beauty, and divine goodness.'"

The need to be "short, sharp, and simple" appears to rule out book-length works. On pages 3 to 6 of this issue, some examples are presented of condensing sections of the Papers in the attempt to "construct new and appealing philosophies" that appear also to fit the description of "cosmic truth, universe beauty, and divine goodness"

The text of each has been adapted so as to make sense to people not acquainted with the Urantia revelation--and for whom terms such as "Thought Adjuster" would be more likely to generate association with "thought control" or "brain washing" than the gift of self from a God who loves us.

Whereas these condensations could readily become part of a larger work dedicated to philosophy or theology, or be stand alone articles in appropriate magazines, etc., they do not  appear to fill the requirement for short, sharp, and simple philosophies based on revelatory concepts of cosmic truth, universe beauty, and divine goodness.

Above and beyond all else, they simply are not simple enough to be enticingly readable for the vast majority of the world's population. And so we ask, what would be simple enough?

On pages 7 to 13 we have used a combined assault, first by invoking the Occam's razor principle of eliminating all unnecessary hypotheses. Is this the kind of thing the revelators are suggesting?

Almost all Urantia Book commentaries produced to date have been of a promotional nature. While meritorious, that is not what we are challenged to do in that page 43 reference.

Perhaps we should be promoting the required divine truth, beauty, and goodness in  pamphlets, booklets, articles, personal web sites, etc., and, to accord with the spirit of our p. 43 instructions, without mention of the Urantia Papers as our source.

Maybe only ten people would read our efforts. But if they pass it on, ten times ten is a hundred and ten times that is a  thousand, and so on and so on. And after all, Jesus only had eleven dedicated followers at the time of his crucifixion!

# The Indwelling Presence of God.

"Know you not that you are the temple of God, that the Spirit of God dwells in you." (1 Cor. 3-16)     

However this indwelling presence of God's spirit has no special mechanism through which to gain self-expression. The divine Spirit makes contact with mortal man, not by feelings or emotions, but in the realm of the highest and most spiritualized thinking. It is your thoughts, not your feelings, that lead you Godward.

The divine nature may be perceived only with the eyes of the mind. But the mind that really discerns God, hears the indwelling Spirit, is the pure mind. "Without holiness no man may see the Lord." All such inner and spiritual communion is  spiritual insight. Such religious experiences result from the impression made upon the mind of man by the operations of the divine Spirit--as it functions amid and upon the ideas, ideals, insights, and spirit strivings of these evolving sons and daughters of God.

Religion lives and prospers, then, not by sight and feeling, but rather by faith and insight. It consists not in the discovery of new facts nor in the finding of a unique experience, but rather in the discovery of new and spiritual meanings in facts already well known. The highest religious experience is not dependent on prior acts of belief, tradition, and authority; neither is religion the offspring of sublime feelings and purely mystical emotions. It is, rather, a profoundly deep and actual experience of spiritual communion with the spirit influences resident within the human mind, and as far as such an experience is definable in terms of psychology, it is simply the experience of experiencing the reality of believing in God as the reality of such a purely personal experience.
While religion is not the product of the rationalistic speculations of a material cosmology, it is, nonetheless, the creation of a wholly rational insight which originates in man's mind-experience. Religion is born neither of mystic meditations nor of isolated contemplations--albeit it is ever more or less mysterious and always indefinable and inexplicable in terms of purely intellectual reason and philosophic logic. The germs of true religion originate in the domain of man's moral consciousness, and they are revealed in the growth of man's spiritual insight, that faculty of human personality which accrues as a consequence of the presence of the God-revealing Spirit in the God-hungry mortal mind.

Faith unites moral insight with conscientious discriminations of values--and the pre-existent evolutionary sense of duty completes the ancestry of true consciousness of God and in the undoubted assurance of the survival of the believing personality.

Thus it may be seen that religious longings and spiritual urges are not of such a nature as would merely lead us to want to believe in God, but rather are they of such nature and power that we are profoundly impressed with the conviction that we ought to believe in God. The sense of evolutionary duty and the obligations consequent upon the illumination of revelation make such a profound impression upon our moral nature that we finally reach that position of mind and attitude of soul where we conclude that we have no right not to believe in God.

The higher and super-philosophic wisdom of such enlightened and disciplined individuals ultimately instructs them that to doubt God or distrust his goodness would be to prove untrue to the realest and deepest thing within the human mind and soul--the indwelling Presence of God.

# The Golden Rule.
"Do unto others as you would have them do unto you"
(Tobit 4:15; Matt 7:12; Luke 6:3; UB 1445, 1571 etc.)

Some persons discern and interpret the golden rule as a purely intellectual affirmation of human fraternity. Others experience this expression of human relationship as an emotional gratification of the tender feelings of the human personality. Another mortal recognizes this same golden rule as the yardstick for measuring all social relations, the standard of social conduct. Still others look upon it as being the positive injunction of a great moral teacher who embodied in this statement the highest concept of moral obligation as regards all fraternal relationships. In the lives of such moral beings the golden rule becomes the wise center and circumference of all their philosophy.

In the kingdom of the believing brotherhood of God-knowing truth lovers, this golden rule takes on such qualities of spiritual realization as to cause the mortal children of God so to relate themselves to their fellows that they will receive the highest possible eternal good as a result of the believer's contact with them. This is the essence of true religion: that you love your neighbor as God loves you.

But the highest realization and the truest interpretation of the golden rule consists in the consciousness of the truth of the living reality of such a divine declaration. The true meaning of this rule of universal relationship is revealed only in its spiritual realization--in its interpretation to the individual by the Spirit of God that indwells the souls of all mortal mankind.

For when such spirit-led mortals realize the true meaning of this golden rule, they are filled to overflowing with the assurance of citizenship in a friendly universe, and their ideals of spirit reality are satisfied only when they love their fellows as God loves us all--and that is the actuality of the realization of the love of God.

This same philosophy of the living flexibility and cosmic adaptability of divine truth to the individual requirements and capacity of every child of God must be perceived before you can hope adequately to understand its teaching and the practice of non-resistance to evil--for both teachings are basically spiritual pronouncements.

Even the material implications of this philosophy cannot be helpfully considered apart from their spiritual correlations. The spirit of the injunction not to resist evil consists in the abandonment of all selfish reaction to the world, coupled with the aggressive and progressive attainment of righteous levels of true spirit values: divine beauty, infinite goodness, and eternal truth--to know God and to become increasingly like him.

Love, unselfishness, must undergo a constant and living re-adaptive interpretation of relationships in accordance with the leading of the indwelling divine Spirit. Love must thereby grasp the ever-changing and enlarging concepts of the highest eternal good of the individual who is loved. And then love goes on to strike this same attitude concerning all other individuals who could possibly be influenced by the growing and living relationship of one spirit-led mortal's love for all other citizens of the world--and this entire living adaptation of love must be effected in the light of both the environment of present evil and the eternal goal of the perfection of divine destiny.

And so must we clearly recognize that neither the golden rule nor the teaching of non-resistance can ever be properly understood as dogmas or precepts. They can only be comprehended by living them, by realizing their meanings in the living interpretation of the indwelling divine Spirit that directs the loving contact of each human being with another--provided we will listen.

All this clearly indicates the difference between the old religions and the new. The old religions teach self-sacrifice; the new religion teaches only self-forgetfulness, enhanced self-realization in social service and universe comprehension. The old religions are much motivated by fear; the new gospel of the kingdom is dominated by truth-conviction, the spirit of eternal and universal truth. No amount of piety or creedal loyalty can compensate for the absence in the life experience of kingdom believers of that spontaneous, generous, and sincere friendliness which characterizes the spirit-born children of the living God. Neither tradition nor a ceremonial system of formal worship can atone for the lack of genuine compassion and genuine love for all one's fellows. (1950/51)

# On the Philosophy of Philosophy

When man approaches the study and examination of the universe from the outside, he brings into being the various physical sciences; when he approaches the research of himself and the universe from the inside, he gives origin to theology and metaphysics. The later art of philosophy was developed in an effort to harmonize the many discrepancies which inevitably appeared between the findings and teachings of these two diametrically opposite avenues of approach to the universe of things and beings.

Religion has to do with the spiritual viewpoint, the awareness of the inside-ness of human experience. Man's spiritual nature affords him the opportunity of turning the universe outside in. It is therefore true that, viewed exclusively from the inside-ness of personality experience, all creation appears to be spiritual in nature.

However, when man analytically inspects the universe through the material endowments of his physical senses and the associated mind perception, the cosmos appears to be mechanical. Such a technique of studying reality consists in turning the universe inside out.

A logical and consistent philosophic concept of the universe cannot be built up on the postulations of either materialism or spiritualism, for both of these systems of thinking, when universally applied, are compelled to view the cosmos in distortion. Never, then, can either science or religion, in and of themselves, standing alone, hope to gain an adequate understanding of universal truths and relationships without the guidance of human philosophy and the illumination of divine revelation.

Always must man's inner spirit depend for its expression and self-realization upon the mechanism and technique of the mind. Likewise must man's outer experience of material reality be predicated on the mind consciousness of the experiencing personality. Therefore are the spiritual and the material, the inner and the outer, human experiences always correlated with the mind function and conditioned, as to their conscious realization, by the mind activity. Man experiences matter in his mind; he experiences spiritual reality in the soul but becomes conscious of this experience in his mind. The intellect is the harmonizer and the ever-present conditioner and qualifier of the sum total of mortal experience. Both energy-things and spirit values are colored by their interpretation through the mind media of consciousness.

Science is man's attempted study of his physical environment, the world of energy-matter; religion is man's experience with the cosmos of spiritual values; philosophy has been developed by man's mind in an effort to organize and correlate the findings of these widely separated concepts into something like a reasonable and unified attitude toward the cosmos--and when clarified by revelation, philosophy does function acceptably in the presence of the breakdown and failure of man's reason substitute--metaphysics.

Science must always be grounded in reason, although imagination and conjecture are helpful in the extension of its borders. Religion is forever dependent on faith, albeit reason is a stabilizing influence and a helpful handmaiden. However, always there have been, and ever will be, misleading interpretations of the phenomena of both the natural and the spiritual worlds, sciences and religions.

Out of an incomplete grasp of science, his faint hold upon religion, and abortive attempts at metaphysics, man has attempted to construct his formulations of philosophy. And modern man would indeed build a worthy and engaging philosophy of himself, and his universe, were it not for the breakdown of an all-important and indispensable metaphysical connection between the world of matter and the domains of spirit, the failure of metaphysics to bridge the gulf between the physical and the spiritual.
Unaided, faith and reason cannot conceive nor construct a logical universe. And without insight into the spiritual domain mortal man cannot discern love, truth, beauty, and goodness in the phenomena of the material world. Revelation is evolutionary man's only realistic hope of bridging the gulf between the material and the spiritual domain. But revelation is always personal. Therefore must man always live, by faith, midst uncertainty. And this truth is the inevitable accompaniment of God's most precious gift of free will to all mankind. (1135-1137)

# Faith and Belief

Belief has attained the level of faith when it motivates life and shapes the mode of living. The acceptance of a teaching as true is not faith; that is mere belief. Neither is certainty nor conviction faith. A state of mind attains to faith levels only when it actually dominates the mode of living. Faith is a living attribute of genuine personal religious experience. One believes truth, admires beauty, and reverences goodness, but does not worship them; such an attitude of saving faith is centered on God alone, who is all of these personified and infinitely more.

Belief is always limiting and binding; faith is expanding and releasing. Belief fixates, faith liberates. But living religious faith is more than the association of noble beliefs; it is more than an exalted system of philosophy; it is a living experience concerned with spiritual meanings, divine ideals, and supreme values; it is God-knowing and man-serving. Beliefs may become group possessions, but faith must be personal. Theologic beliefs can be suggested to a group, but faith can rise up only in the heart of the individual religionist.
Faith has falsified its trust when it presumes to deny realities and to confer upon its devotees assumed knowledge. Faith is a traitor when it fosters betrayal of intellectual integrity and belittles loyalty to supreme values and divine ideals. Faith never shuns the problem-solving duty of mortal living. Living faith does not foster bigotry, persecution, or intolerance.

Faith does not shackle the creative imagination, neither does it maintain an unreasoning prejudice toward the discoveries of scientific investigation. Faith vitalizes religion and constrains the religionist heroically to live the golden rule. The zeal of faith is according to knowledge, and its strivings are the preludes to sublime peace.

Never can there be either scientific or logical proofs of divinity. Reason alone can never validate the values and the goodness of religious experience. But it will always remain true: Whosoever wills to do the will of God shall comprehend the validity of spiritual values. This is the nearest approach that can be made on the mortal level to offering proofs of the reality of religious experience. Such faith affords the only escape from the mechanical clutch of the material world and from the error distortion of the incompleteness of the intellectual world; it is the only discovered solution to the impasse in mortal thinking regarding the continuing survival of the individual personality. It is the only passport to completion of reality and to eternity of life in a universal creation of love, law, unity, and progressive Deity attainment.

When you experience such a transformation of faith, you are no longer a slavish part of the mathematical cosmos but rather a liberated volitional member of the family of God. No longer are you fighting alone against the inexorable doom of the termination of temporal existence; no longer do you combat all nature, with the odds hopelessly stacked against you; no longer are you  staggered by the paralyzing fear that, perchance, you have put you trust in a hopeless phantasm or pinned your faith to a fanciful error.

Now, rather, is God's earthly family enlisted together in fighting the battle of reality's triumph over the partial shadows of existence. At last all creatures can become conscious of the fact that God and all the divine hosts of a well-nigh limitless universe are on their side in the supernal struggle to attain eternity of life and divinity of status. Such faith-liberated individuals have certainly enlisted in the struggles of time on the side of the supreme forces and divine personalities of eternity; even the stars in their courses are now doing battle for them; at last they gaze upon the universe from within, from God's viewpoint--and all is transformed from the uncertainties of material isolation to the sureties of eternal spiritual progression. Even time itself becomes but the shadow of eternity cast upon the moving panoply of space. (1114-1117)


****************************
There follows a "combined assault." (see p. 2)

# Universal Spiritual Religion

Summary: Belief in God reduces to two basic axioms that naturally give rise to a universal spiritual religion.

Commencing around 600 years BCE and progressing to about 600 CE, a remarkable set of individuals appeared on Earth and proceeded to awaken mankind to the fact of God's existence--and that God's spirit dwells within the mind of every receptive individual human being to foster their spirituality. This indwelling God-Spirit is the real source of all true goodness, all morality, all spirituality. (see p.1134)

This is exactly the same indwelling Spirit of God that was friend, guide, and counselor to such remarkable sources of divine revelation as Moses, Lao Tzu, Siddartha Gautama, Jesus of Nazareth, Muhammad, and many others during their short interlude on Planet Earth.

This synopsis constitutes a framework for discovering the existence of God and the mind of God. It also generates a logical basis for religious belief more basic even than does Whitehead's "Process Theology."


Occam's Razor logic leads to belief in God and spiritual religion.

The Occam's razor principle is a universally recognized problem-solving procedure. It requires the elimination of all unnecessary hypotheses, leaving only the simplest for further exploration.  Our question: "what is the minimal set of axioms that will provide us with a valid system of religious belief."

Considering the beginning of all things we have only two options: thought was involved, or  all arose spontaneously from nothingness.

Choosing the latter hypothesis automatically generates difficult insoluble questions, such as: we are thinking, self-conscious beings, capable of creativity, abstract thought, etc. How could such properties arise from nothingness?

But if we allow thought to be involved, we have a built-in explanation for such phenomena. And so we choose the simpler of the two and express it as:

Axiom 1. God is the one self-caused fact existent in the whole of reality, hence must be the source and substance of all that is. (from "Origin of Origins of Tao Te Ching," about 500 BCE).

We give our "Original Creative Thought" the name "God," noting that since time and space came into being together as space-time, prior to that moment there was only the infinite eternal NOW. Hence questions such as what came before God are irrelevant.   

In order to keep our system simple we have need of one more primary axiom, and propose this:

Axiom 2. God is perfect goodness.

Dedicated belief in these two axioms is all that civilization requires to eventually evolve to a near perfect world of love and goodness.

Given God's perfect goodness, the next most important question every individual must ask is, "what does God require of me?" The simplest possible answer is that God would want us to be like him--good. Why? Well, if God did not want that, then we could make life miserable for others. Hence there would have to be a higher God whose goodness is superior to one who does not require that we should aspire to being good.


If we have the choice of wanting to be like God or not to be like him, then obviously we have free will. What would a world be like in which all us were created perfectly good--and could be nothing else but perfectly good? Unfortunately the answer to that question is that we would be automata, programmed to respond in fixed ways with no possibility of doing otherwise.

A God who loves us--as we would expect from one who is perfectly good--must grant us free will to choose, else there must be a more perfect God who would do so.

Our next question: Is there life after death? A God who is perfectly good must have had a purpose for creating earthly children capable of self-awareness, consciousness, abstract thought, spontaneous worship, etc. That purpose must provide for life beyond physical death. For if not, since our axiomatic God is perfect goodness, there would be a more perfect God who would so do.

What would qualify us for this reward? Well, certainly the desire, however feeble, to eventually attain God-like goodness. Possibly nothing else.

Finally--where do we find God? For that, our simplest answer must always be--within ourselves. For if God's spirit did not indwell each of us to encourage us towards our goal of eventual God-like perfection, the fact of our animal heritage would prevent all progression.

Our real life purpose? That we receive God's gift of eternal life wherein we seek to complete our task, finally to bask in God's presence.

And because we know that our God is perfectly good, we also know that the eternal life that is on offer is one we will eternally cherish.

In summary: God is; God is perfect goodness.

A Foundation for belief in God and Spiritual Uniformity.

Somewhere around 2,500 years ago, there was a remarkable event. A new concept, sometimes given the name of "Perennial Philosophy," entered the human psyche. Eventually it became the benchmark philosophy of all major religions. Its four main principles are:

1. Matter and self-consciousness are manifestations of the First Source and Center, known also as God, Tao, Brahman, Yahweh, Heavenly Father, Allah, etc.

2. God is knowable to all self-conscious, self-reflective minds.

3. The Spirit of God indwells all such minds.

4. The purpose of human life is union with this God-Spirit-Within as the initiating event leading to our ultimate attainment of God, the First Source and Center.

These primary principles persist in all major religions. The path to understanding appears to be improved through special individuals such as those believed by their followers to be incarnations of the Godhead, (Krishna, Jesus, Gautama for some Buddhists) or else God-inspired prophets (Muhammad and his Qur'an). Given these basics, mankind's religious philosophy, at its source, is uniform, and all human life has the same source, the same purpose, and the same end.

Conflict between such religions must be an anathema to the God who created us--perhaps to the point of wondering whether our creation was an error. But that is human-type thinking. So surely efforts to spiritualize our minds in the hope of reducing conflict must accord with God's desire for us.

The Spirit of God dwells within us--our guide to Spirituality

To understand the spiritual life, it is vital to understand the role that must be attributed to the indwelling Spirit of God.

Although few are aware of it, it is referred to in the Bible's New Testament in at least 25 of its verses, e.g. "Know you not that you are the temple of God, that the Spirit of God dwells in you" (1. Cor. 3:16), and, "If we love one another, God dwells in us." (1 John 4:12). It was also known among the ancient Egyptians, Persians, Hindus, Sufis, and other followers of Islam.

This indwelling Spirit is the source in our minds of all true meanings and values of a non-material nature. Thus it is the source of true morality, beauty and goodness, and all revealed and non-material truth.

So, one way or another, all true revelation is from God--regardless of the means of its apparent origin. But the recognition of this truth is an individual function, crucially dependent upon the personal relationship between the individual and the God-Spirit within. Empirical truths of science may appear to be different, but basically, they are not.

The great goal of our human existence is to attune to the divinity of this indwelling Spirit. The great achievement of our mortal life is the attainment of a true and understanding consecration of self to the eternal aims of the divine Spirit who waits and works within our mind. And our ideal life is one of loving service to our fellow travelers.

While it may be true that a God in heaven would not feel our pain, our joys, or our sins, nevertheless this cannot be true for the God-Within, who must know everything that we know and feel everything that we feel--including even our most secret thoughts, good or evil.

Jesus of Nazareth was approaching thirty years of age at the time of his baptism by John, the time when he began to be certain that he really was indwelt by the Spirit of God. As their relationship grew, Jesus also became aware that this same Spirit of God indwells all of his earthly children as their mentor and guide.

Jesus realized that he had been given the task of making known the fact that God desires to indwell and guide all of his earthly children; hence he lived his life in the flesh so as to inspire us ever to seek to know and do the will of this indwelling Spirit of the heavenly Father.

If the Spirit dwells within us, potentially we are free and liberated children of the Spirit. The secret of self-mastery is faith in our Indwelling Spirit which ever works by love. If then we are born of the Spirit and led by the Spirit, we are forever delivered from a life of self-denial and watch-care over the desires of the flesh and are translated into the kingdom of the Spirit--whence we spontaneously show forth the fruits of the spirit in our daily lives. These fruits include: love, joy, peace, gentleness, goodness, faith, righteousness, truth.

# Love--a Necessity for the Fulfilment of Mankind

Almost 500 years before the Christian era, Mo Tzu, in China, gained a large following for his concepts regarding mutual love and its potential to replace war among states and nations.

"Whence do these calamities arise?" he asked. And he answered as follows:

They arise from the absence of mutual love. At present feudal lords have learned only to love their own States, but not those of others. Therefore they have no scruples about attacking other states. And the heads of houses have learned only to love their own houses and never those of others. Therefore they have no scruples against usurping the houses of others. And individuals have learned only to love themselves and not others. Therefore they too have no scruples against injuring others. It follows that all the calamities, strifes, conflicts, complaints, and hatreds in the world have their origin out of the want of mutual love. How can this condition be altered?

It is to be altered by the way of universal love and mutual aid. This means to regard the State of others as one's own, the houses of others as one's own, the persons of others as one's self.

When all the people of the world love one another, then the strong will not overpower the weak, the many will not oppress the few, the wealthy will not mock the poor, the honored will not disdain the humble, and the cunning will not deceive the simple.
And it will be due to mutual universal love that calamities, strifes, complaints, and hatred will disappear from the face of the earth.

Mo Tzu's ideas were not well received by those in power. Jesus presented similar views 500 years later. Those in power crucified him.

Love is the Rule of Living

Perhaps these previous failures mean that the rule of love cannot be hastened. It must germinate, be nurtured, and grow in the hearts of individuals--voluntarily. When a large majority have it, universal love will simply take over.

Love is the rule of living in God's kingdom--supreme devotion to God while loving your neighbor as yourself.

The evidence to all the world that you have been born of the Spirit is that you sincerely love one another.

When the wise understand the impulses of others, they will love them. When you love your neighbors you have already forgiven them. This capacity to understand human nature and to forgive apparent wrong doing is God-like. And God-likeness is the measure of your spiritualization.

Love is the outworking of the divine and inner urge of life. It is founded on understanding, nurtured by unselfish service, and perfected in wisdom.

Love must grasp the ever changing concept of the highest cosmic good of the individual who is loved. And such love goes on to strike this same attitude to all individuals who could possibly be influenced by Spirit-led mortals' love for their fellows.

# Our Chores

Dedicate your life to demonstrating the combined human affection and divine dignity of the God-knowing mortal.

As far as is in your power live long on earth that your life of many years may be fruitful in souls won for God's kingdom.

To those who are God-knowing there is no such thing as common labor or secular toil. All honest earthly labor is sacred and is a service--even to God our Father.

But learn that even the expression of a good thought may need to be modulated in accordance with the understanding of the hearer. And neglect not to minister to the needy, the poor, the young. Bon voyage.

*****************

That concludes our examples of attempting to fulfil the edicts of that page 43 request to produce a new and righteous vision of morality. The foundation of such a vision would surely need to be that we love all men regardless of what they are like. The secret in being able to do so is in the words:

"If once you understand your neighbor, you will become tolerant, and this tolerance will grow into friendship and ripen into love." (1098)

An academic-style philosophical work of the intensity of even the Urantia revelation seems unlikely to achieve sufficient popularity to be effective. A novel with no religious connotations but a central character who does just that possibly could do so.

An alternative is thousands of minor, short works, articles, web sites, etc. all attempting the task and overcoming the handicaps through sheer quantity and persistence.

But primarily, we must live as Jesus lived. 


# Laugh Break

At a Catholic elementary school test, children were asked questions about the old and new testaments. The following statements were written by children and have not been retouched nor corrected:



1. In the first book of the bible, Guinessis. God got tired of creating the world so he took the Sabbath off.
2. Adam and Eve were created from an Apple tree. Noah's wife was called Joan of Ark. Noah built an ark and the animals came on in pears.
3. Lots wife was a pillar of salt during the day, but a ball of fire during the night.
4. The Jews were a proud people and throughout history they had trouble with unsympathetic Genitals.
5. Sampson was a strongman who let himself be led astray by a Jezebel like Delilah.
6. Samson slayed the Philistines with the axe of the Apostles.
7. Moses led the Jews to the Red sea where they made unleavened bread which is bread without any ingredients.
8. The Egyptians were all drowned in the dessert, Afterwards, Moses went up to Mount Cyanide to get the ten ammendments.
9. The first commandment was when Eve told Adam to eat the apple.
10. The seventh Commandment is thou shalt not admit adultery.
11. Moses died before he ever reached Canada. Then Joshua led the Hebrews in the battle of Geritol.
12. The greates miricle in the bible is when Joshua told his son to stand still and he obeyed him.
13. David was a Hebrew king who was skilled at playing the liar. He fought the Finkelsteins, a race of people who lived in bibical times.
14. Solomon, one of Davids sons, had 300 wives and 700 porcupines.
15. When Mary heard she was the mother of Jesus, she sang the Magna Carta.
16. When the three wise guys from the east side arrived, they found Jesus in the manager.
17. Jesus was born because Mary had an immaculate contraption.
18. St. John the blacksmith dumped water on his head.
19. Jesus enunciated the Golden Rule, which says to do unto others before they do one to you. He also explained. a man doth not live by sweat alone.
20. It was a miricle when Jesus rose from the dead and managed to get the tombstone off the entrance.
21. The people who followed the lord were called the 12 decibels.
22. The epistels were the wives of the apostals.
23. One of the oppossums was St. Matthew who was also a taximan.
24. St. Paul cavorted to Christianity. he preached holy acrimony. which is another name for marraige.
25. Christians have only one spouse. This is called monotony.

# More on 'Our Challenge.'

The religious challenge of this age is to those farseeing and forward-looking men and women of spiritual insight who will dare to construct a new and appealing philosophy of living out of the enlarged and exquisitely integrated modern concepts of cosmic truth, universe beauty, and divine goodness. Such a new and righteous vision of morality will attract all that is good in the mind of man and challenge that which is best in the human soul. (43)

In attempting to analyse what this means for us as individuals, several things are worthy of note. Keeping in mind that the source material for our philosophy is to be the cosmic truth, universe beauty, and divine goodness content of the Urantia revelation, note that:

We are not asked to promote the revelation itself, implying that giving away or selling a Urantia Book to all and sundry is not what is required of us.

We are not asked to promote any one religion--not even one based upon the life of Jesus as it is told in the Urantia Revelation.

And the source material, though contained within the Urantia revelation, need not necessarily be original to it.

Because of the way the Urantia revelation came to be, and its content, we must assume that something about its central figure, Jesus of Nazareth, is important for us. And surely this must include his faith and the central role that the "will of the Father" played in his life.

Jesus' faith was so real and all-encompassing that it absolutely swept away any spiritual doubts and effectively destroyed every conflicting desire. Nothing was able to tear him away from the spiritual anchorage of this fervent, sublime, and undaunted faith. Even in the face of apparent defeat or in the throes of disappointment and threatening despair, he calmly stood in the divine presence free from fear and fully conscious of spiritual invincibility. Jesus enjoyed the invigorating assurance of the possession of unflinching faith, and in each of life's trying situations he unfailingly exhibited an unquestioning loyalty to the Father's will. And this superb faith was undaunted even by the cruel and crushing threat of an ignominious death. (2087)

Jesus brought to God, as a man of the realm, the greatest of all offerings: the consecration and dedication of his own will to the majestic service of doing the divine will. Jesus always and consistently interpreted religion wholly in terms of the Father's will…. The secret of his unparalleled religious life was this consciousness of the presence of God; and he attained it by intelligent prayer and sincere worship--unbroken communion with God--and not by leadings, voices, visions, or extraordinary religious practices. (2088)

Is it possible for mere man to have such faith? Or such consciousness of the presence of God? And such dedication to the doing of God's will?

The answer is given in the revelation itself. In a discussion with Immanuel, Jesus' task is described as "to exhibit in his life in the flesh those transcendent possibilities attainable by a God-knowing human." (1328)

What is meant by "transcendent possibilities?"
We are told that all such possibilities are taught to us directly by our own personal indwelling Spirit of the Father.

All men recognize the morality of this universal human urge to be unselfish and altruistic. The humanist ascribes the origin of this urge to the natural working of the material mind; the religionist more correctly recognizes that the truly unselfish drive of mortal mind is in response to the inner spirit leadings of the indwelling God-Spirit. (1134)

What derives from a spirit source is "of the spirit." Spiritual and transcendent possibilities then are spiritual meanings and values that derive from spirit sources.

Hence the philosophy of living we are asked to construct surely must derive from the exquisitely integrated meanings and values presented in the Urantia revelation or given to us personally from our indwelling Spirit source.

By far the most effective way of presenting and distributing what we have learned is simply by living it.

Despite the many abuses injected into Christianity and Jesus' message by mankind over almost 2000 years, it has still been the world's major source of spiritual truth, beauty, and goodness absorbed into human societies during that time.

And all because one man lived the life he did, yet leaving no written record!!

His unwritten message : Follow me--live as I lived.


# The will of God   

The keys of the kingdom of heaven are: sincerity, more sincerity, and more sincerity. All men have these keys. Men use them--advance in spirit status--by decisions, by more decisions, and by more decisions. The highest moral choice is the choice of the highest possible value, and always--in any sphere, in all of them--this is to choose to do the will of God. If man thus chooses, he is great, though he be the humblest citizen of Jerusem or even the least of mortals on Urantia. (435)

This God-Spirit-Within did indeed triumph in Jesus' human mind--that mind which in each of life's recurring situations maintained a consecrated dedication to the Father's will, saying, "Not my will, but yours, be done." Such decisive consecration constitutes the true passport from the limitations of human nature to the finality of divine attainment. (1200)

The will of God is the way of God, partnership with the choice of God in the face of any potential alternative. To do the will of God, therefore, is the progressive experience of becoming more and more like God, and God is the source and destiny of all that is good and beautiful and true. (1431)


The Master thereby chose a program of living which was the equivalent of deciding  against miracles and wonders. Again he decided in favor of the Father's will; again he surrendered everything into the hands of his Paradise Father.
(1518)


Jesus agreed that it was proper to want to see social, economic, and political orders improved, but he would always add: "That is not our business. We must be dedicated to the doing of the Father's will. Our business is to be ambassadors of a spiritual government on high, and we must not immediately concern ourselves with aught but the representation of the will and character of the divine Father who stands at the head of the government whose credentials we bear." (1565)

The Master came to create in man a new spirit, a new will--to impart a new capacity for knowing the truth, experiencing compassion, and choosing goodness--the will to be in harmony with God's will, coupled with the eternal urge to become perfect, even as the Father in heaven is perfect. (1583)

When the Father's will is your law, you are hardly in the kingdom. But when the Father's will becomes truly your will, then are you in very truth in the kingdom because the kingdom has thereby become an established experience in you. When God's will is your law, you are noble slave subjects; but when you believe in this new gospel of divine sonship, my Father's will becomes your will, and you are elevated to the high position of the free children of God, liberated sons of the kingdom. (1588)

On this afternoon the Master distinctly taught a new concept of the double nature of the kingdom in that he portrayed the following two phases:

First. The kingdom of God in this world, the supreme desire to do the will of God, the unselfish love of man which yields the good fruits of improved ethical and moral conduct.

Second. The kingdom of God in heaven, the goal of mortal believers, the estate wherein the love for God is perfected, and wherein the will of God is done more divinely. (p. 1860)

Once more the Son of Man was prepared to face his enemies with equanimity and in the full assurance of his invincibility as a mortal man unreservedly dedicated to the doing of his Father's will. (1970)

These inhuman and shocking experiences which Jesus was called upon to endure in the final hours of his mortal life were not in any sense a part of the divine will of the Father, which his human nature had so triumphantly pledged to carry out at the time of the final surrender of man to God. (1971)

Jesus was convinced that it was the will of the Father that he submit himself to the natural and ordinary course of human events just as every other mortal creature must. (1999)

Jesus had purposed to live without resort to his supernatural power, and he likewise elected to die as an ordinary mortal upon the cross. He had lived as a man, and he would die as a man--doing the Father's will. (2008)

The Master desired that his followers should have nothing material to associate with his life on earth. He wanted to leave mankind only the memory of a human life dedicated to the high spiritual ideal of being consecrated to doing the Father's will. (2008)

The human Jesus saw God as being holy, just, and great, as well as being true, beautiful, and good. All these attributes of divinity he focused in his mind as the "will of the Father in heaven."  (2087)

The faith of Jesus visualized all spirit values as being found in the kingdom of God; therefore he said, "Seek first the kingdom of heaven." Jesus saw in the advanced and ideal fellowship of the kingdom the achievement and fulfillment of the will of God. The very heart of the prayer which he taught his disciples was, "Your kingdom come; your will be done." Having thus conceived of the kingdom as comprising the will of God, he devoted himself to the cause of its realization with amazing self-forgetfulness and unbounded enthusiasm. (2088)


Let not the discussions of the humanity or the divinity of the Christ obscure the saving truth that Jesus of Nazareth was a religious man who, by faith, achieved the knowing and the doing of the will of God; he was the most truly religious man who has ever  lived on Urantia. (2090)



Jesus was the world's most wholehearted and devoted religionist. He was a wholly consecrated mortal, unreservedly dedicated to doing his Father's will. (2093)

