---
title: "What Is Interfaith?"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-02-19T14:02:03.086Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-02-19T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2017 Michael Painter<br>© 2017 The Urantia Book Fellowship</p>

Have you ever observed two strangers who meet for the first time? There is a common process that they go through. Each asks questions of the other. The usual topics are whether they are married or single, do they have children, what kind of work they do, where they grew up, etc. The purpose of this mutual query is to try to find some common ground. Why? When we have something in common with another person, we feel a connection to them. We want to continue the conversation to get to know them better to see if there is a possibility for friendship at some level. Conversely, when we don’t find any areas of commonality, we feel alienated from that person. The affective symptoms of not connecting with someone are tension, uncomfortableness, wanting to distance ourselves from them, and even fear to varying degrees. As an example, consider how difficult it is to engage even in civil conversation, let alone develop a friendship, when you meet someone whose political views are opposed to yours. It takes a real effort for both people to remain civil and try to find some common ground. Why bother? Aren’t they just a misguided, immature, or uninformed person who refuses to see the truth when you present it to them? 

This scenario can become even more intolerant when we discover they have different religious beliefs. Why? I would suggest that the level of fear is greater in religious differences than political, cultural, sexual orientation, and gender differences. I remember reading a study from Princeton University that showed that people are more afraid of a “cult” member moving next to them than they are of different racial groups or other categories. As you know, any religion that people know nothing about is often labeled as a cult. 

So, what can we conclude from these observations? My point is that if you engage in any form of interfaith activity from the Parliament of the Worlds’ Religions to meeting your new neighbor with the attitude and intention of converting them, you will do damage to the purpose of interfaith. This is not to say there is not a time and place for proselytizing your beliefs. It is to say interfaith events are not the time and place for proselytizing. Why not? Because these fellow believers already have a religion, a set of beliefs, or a view of reality that they are comfortable with. They will resent your arrogance in assuming your religious views are superior to theirs and not be interested in engaging, sharing, or dialoguing with you. If, then, an interfaith event is not an appropriate venue for proselytizing, what is the point of attending such events? 

There is a great amount of good will that can be enhanced at interfaith gatherings. It is an opportunity to build positive perceptions, trust, and further the growth of a true brotherhood/sisterhood among all believers. At an intellectual/theological level, the focus is on what religions have in common rather than their differences. We humans are far more inclined to discuss differences than similarities. What are the affective results of focusing on our differences from others? It makes us feel different, alienated, separate, and fearful. If we could adjust our mode of thinking to more synthesis (what do apparently different things have in common) than analysis (what are the differences between things), we could better see what we have in common with other religionists. 

I’m often puzzled when I hear people say, “Well, you know we’re all different!”, as if that is a conversation ender. Of course we have uniqueness, and let’s thank our Creator for this gift. However, this is only half the story. It is equally true that we humans are all alike. We call this human nature. Thinking, feeling, seeking friends, seeking love, working jobs, etc. are all common to humans. So, why do we humans tend to focus so much on our differences rather than our similarities? You fall in love with someone and you love your children. Can you really say that your love for your partner or your children is qualitatively superior in your culture or belief system than someone’s of a different culture or belief system? Love is love no matter what the culture or belief system. Therefore, how would you know if your love for the Ultimate Divine Reality, whatever name a belief system gives to it, is any lesser or greater than some other religionist’s love for the UDR because their culture or beliefs are different? 

So, what are the attitudes and intentions we need to bring to interfaith events and encounters? First and foremost, we need to have a respectful attitude toward other religionists’ desires to seek the UDR in their own way. As _Urantia Book_ readers, we are well aware that the same spirit of God, the Thought Adjuster, indwells each human and is doing its best to lead them Godward. This most important fact means every spiritually seeking human is part of the spiritual brotherhood/sisterhood of our planet, Urantia. This is true no matter how misguided you think their doctrines may be. Imagine that you are speaking to their Thought Adjuster when you address them. Would you be disrespectful or disdainful toward their views? I would hope not! Jesus said we should love the sinner but hate the sin. By analogy, you can dislike a person’s beliefs or actions but not disrespect the person. Should a teacher disrespect his/her students because they don’t know as much as the teacher? Accept that they are pursuing the UDR in the best way that they know. All of our human understandings are partial, limited, and colored by our culture and education. Seek to understand, understanding leads to compassion, and compassion leads to loving all-even our enemies! 

Relish the fact that you are in the company of fellow spiritual seekers. Ask them to share the wisdom and insights they have gained from their spiritual path. Imagine your fellow seekers as different notes and different instruments. Enjoy the experience of this great symphony and chorus of fellow seekers. Realize what a blessing you have been given to share this experience with others. The right intention, then, is one of sharing religious/spiritual experience as opposed to converting or proselytizing. Seek first to understand and then to be understood as Stephen Covey suggests. 

There are two ways in which this more mature attitude toward interfaith experiences can be accomplished. One is by intellectually understanding it which results from the already mentioned recognition of the common elements of all religions. It produces a perception of the universal nature of all religions. This universalism allows us to see value in and have respect for all religions as we see them as different paths climbing to get to the same mountain top. The common elements of these different paths are a fuller understanding of the UDR as expressed in the different theologies, a way to help guide us on our climb as seen in the moral codes and rituals and ceremonies, a way to find greater happiness in this life expressed as the comfort of having faith and the surety of some ultimate justice for our struggles, and a way to feel connected to the spiritual brotherhood/sisterhood of all seekers as expressed in the universal teaching of the Golden Rule. This is not intended to be an exhaustive list, but hopefully it presents enough similarities to explain this intellectual realization of the universal quality of religions and religious belief. 

A second way to realize this more mature attitude toward interfaith is by “going within.” In making this inner journey, a person can “feelingly experience” the connectedness of all humanity. Whether you call it the “presence of God” or the “at-one-ment”, the feeling and experience is similar in its result. The result is the experiential feeling that all humans, as children of God or a part of the Universe, are equally loved or are an equal part of the whole. While this feeling of connectedness is subjective and each person must experience it on their own, it is undeniably real to those who experience it. _The Urantia Book_ explanation of this phenomenon would be feeling the presence of God resulting from communion with God and recognizing that each person is indwelt by a fragment of God. How could you not feel connected to others and treat them with respect if you truly realized you were standing in the presence of God each time you interact with another person? 

In summary, the purpose of interfaith encounters, whether on a large scale or one-on-one, is for sharing rather than converting. How do you know the difference? You discern whether the other person is satisfied with their belief system or whether they are still searching for a better way. How do you know if they are still searching? Sense the intent of their questions. If the questions are only to gain information or knowledge about your beliefs, then they are primarily interested in mutually sharing beliefs. If their questions are more about “why” than “what”, then they may be still searching for wisdom and deeper insights. If you are unsure, ask your inner spirit to give you guidance as to how to interpret their questions or comments. 

Interfaith experiences can occur any time. They are not all grand venues like the Parliament of the Worlds’ Religions. Any time you encounter someone with set beliefs and who seems content with those beliefs, you are engaging in an interfaith experience. When you interact with someone whether in relationships, political discussions, or religious dialogue with the attitude of you are right and they are wrong, you are likely to encounter a defensive reaction. No one likes to be told that what they believe is wrong. The more likely truth and reasonable approach is that there is some truth in both perspectives. Seek to build on what you have in common and can agree upon. This is the method Jesus used on his Mediterranean Tour. What makes it possible to endure the frustrations of having different views? In relationships, it’s the love that is the glue, and in politics it’s the sense of unity as Americans first and Democrats or Republicans second. In religion, it is the sense of the unity of our spiritual connection to other religionists and the intellectual understanding of the universalism of religious elements while the different doctrines/theologies become of secondary importance. 

The purpose of interfaith is a classic example of “unity, but not uniformity.” We are unified in spirit but do not all think alike, and that is perfectly fine. The greatest barrier to interfaith dialogue is the unfortunate belief that all religionists must think alike and this has turned much of religion into being about “right belief” instead of “right spirit.” _The Urantia Book_ is a revelation designed to expand and correct some of our conceptions of truth, but it is still partial and incomplete. Let’s not make our human “need to be right” get in the way of sharing our fruits of the spirit with our fellow religionists in interfaith experiences!   

> Michael Painter lives in Plainfield, IN and is teaching Philosophy part-time at a Junior College. He has two sons and three grandchildren. A reader since 1972, he has attended, presented, and helped plan conferences over the years. As a member of the Orvonton UB society, he currently serves as President. Also, he is a member of the General Council and was recently elected to the Executive Committee as Chair of the Interfaith Committee. He welcomes your comments and feedback on this article. You can contact him at: mpainter913@gmail.com.  
{.is-info}

## References

- Article obtained from: https://urantia-book.org/archive/newsletters/herald/