---
title: "Apocalypse of Zephaniah"
description:
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---


## Clement, _Stromata_ 5.11.77

### A

**The scene in the fifth heaven**

A Anda spirit took me and brought me up into the fifth heaven. And I saw angels who are called “lords,” and the diadem was set upon them in the Holy Spirit, and the throne of each of them was sevenfold more (brilliant) than the light of the rising sun. (And they were) dwelling in the temples of salvation and singing hymns to the ineffable most high God.


## Sahidic fragment

### B

**The seer’s vision of a soul in torment**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  I saw a s[ou]l which five thousand angels punished [?] [an]d gua[rded].

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  They took [it] to the East and they brought it to the West. They beat its . . . they gave it a hundred . . . lashes for each one daily. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  I was afraid and I cast myself up[o]n my face so that my joints dissolved. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  The angel helped me. He said to me, “Be strong, O one who will triumph, and prevail so that you will triumph over the accuser and you will come up from Hades.” And after I arose I said, “Who is this whom they are punishing?” 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  He said to me, “This is [a] soul which was found in its lawlessness.” And before it attained to repenting it was [vi]sited, and taken out of its body. Truly, I, Zephaniah, saw these things in my vision.

**The scene in a broad place**

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And the angel of the Lord went with me. I saw a great broad place, thousandsof thousands surrounded [it] on its left side and myriads of myriads on its right [side]. The form of [each] one was different. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  Their hair was loosee like that belonging to women. [Their] teeth were like the teeth of . . .

## The Akhmimic Text

### 1

**Fragment dealing with burial**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  ... dead. We will bury him like any man. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Whenever he dies, we will carry him out playing the cithara before [him] and chanting psalms and odes? over his body.

### 2

**Scenes from above the seer’s city**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Now I went with the angel of the Lord, and he took me up (Over) all my city. There was nothing? before my eyes. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Then I saw two men walking togeth[er] on one road. I watched [them] as they ta[lk]ed. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And, moreover, I also saw two women grinding together at a mill. And I watched them as they talked. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And I [also] saw two upon a bed, [each] one of them acting for their (mutual) . . . upon a bed. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And [I saw] the whole inhabited world ha[nging] like a drop of wa[ter], which is suspended from a buc[ket] when it comes up frome a well. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  I said to the angel of the Lord, “Then does darkness or night not exist in this place?”" 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  He said to me, “No, because darkness does not exist in that place where the righteous and the saints are, but rather they always exist in the light.”

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And I saw all the souls of men as they existed in punishment. And I cried out to the Lord Almighty, [“O Go]d, if you remain with the [sa]ints, you (certainly) have compassion on behalf of the world [and] the souls which are in [this] punishment.”

### 3

**Vision of recording angels from Mount Seir**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  The angel of the Lord said to me, “Come, let me show you the [place (?)] of
righteousness.” 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And he took me [up] upon Mount Seire and he [showed me] three men, as two angels walked with them rejoicing and exulting over them. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  I said to the angel, “Of what sort are these?” 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  He said to me, “These are the three sons of Joatham, the priest, who neither kept the commandment of their father nor observed the ordinances of the Lord.”

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Then I saw two other angels weeping over the three sons of Joatham, the priest.

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  I said, “O angel, who are these?” He said, “These are the angels of the Lord Almighty. They write down all the good deeds of the righteous upon their manuscript as they watch at the gate of heaven. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And I take them from their hands and bring them up before the Lord Almighty; he writes their name in the Book of the Living. 

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  Also the angels of the accuser who is upon the earth, they also write down all of the sins of men upon their manuscript. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  They also sit at the gate of heaven. They tell the accuser and he writes them upon his manuscript so that he might accuse them when they come out of the world (and) down there.”

### 4

**Vision of ugly angels who carry off the souls of ungodly men**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Then I walked with the angel of the Lord. I looked before me and I saw a place there. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  [Thousands] of thousands and myriads of myriads of an[gels] entered through [it]. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Their faces were like a leopar[d], their tusks being outside their mouth [like] the wild boars. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Their eyes were mixed with blood. Their hair was loose like the hair of women, and fiery scourges were in their hands. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  When I saw them, I was afraid. I said to that angel who walked with me, “Of what sort are these?” 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  He said to me, “These are the servants of all creation who come to the souls of ungodly men and bring them and leave them in this place. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  They spend three days going around with them in the air before they bring them and cast them into their eternal punishment.”

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  I said, “I beseech you, O Lord, don’t give them authority to come to me.”

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  The angel said, “Don’t fea[r]. I will not permit them to come to [you] because you are pure? before the Lord. I will not permit them to come to you because the Lord Almighty sent me to you because (you) are pure before him.”  

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  Then he beckoned to them, and they withdrew themselves and they ran from me.


### 5

**Vision of the heavenly city**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  But I went with the angel of the Lord, and I looked in front of me and I saw gates. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Then when I approached them I discovered that they were bronze gates.

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  The angel touched them and they opened before him. I entered with him and found its whole square like a beautiful city, and I walked in its midst. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Then the angel of the Lord transformed himself beside me in that place.

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Now I looked at them, and I discovered that they were bronze gates and bronze bolts and iron bars. Now my mouth was shut? therein. I beheld the bronze gates in front of met as fire was being cast forth for about fifty stadia.

### 6

**Vision of the accuser and the angel Eremiel in Hades**


<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Again I turned back and walked, and I saw a great sea. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  But I thought that it was a sea of water. I discovered that it was entirely a sea of flame like a slime which casts forth much flame and whose waves burn sulfur and bitumen. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  They began to approach me.

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Then I thought that the Lord Almighty had come to visit me. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Then when I saw, I fell upon my face before him in order that I might worship him. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  I was very much afraid, and I entreated him that he might save me from this distress. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  I cried out, saying, “Eloe, Lord, Adonai, Sabaoth, I beseech you to save me from this distress because it has befallen me.”’

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  That same instant I stood up, and I saw a great angel before me. His hair was spread out like the lionesses. His teeth were outside his mouth like a bear. His hair was spread out like women’s. His body was like the serpent’s when he wished to swallow me. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And when I saw him, I was afraid of him so that all of my parts of my body were loosened and I fell upon my face. 

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  I was unable to stand, and I prayed before the Lord Almighty, “You will save me from this distress. You are the one who saved Israel from the hand of Pharaoh, the king of Egypt. You saved Susanna from the hand of the elders of injustice. You saved the three holy men, Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego, from the furnace of burning fire. I beg you to save me from this distress.”

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  Then I arose and stood, and I saw a great angel standing before me with his face shining like the rays of the sun in its glory since his face is like that which is perfected in its glory. 

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  And he was girded as if a golden girdle were upon his breast. His feet were like bronze which is melted in a fire. 

<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  And when I saw him, I rejoiced, for I thought that the Lord Almighty had come to visit me. 

<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  I fell upon my face, and I worshiped him. 

<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  He said to me, “Take heed. Don’t worship me. I am not the Lord Almighty, but I am the great angel, Eremiel, who is over the abyss and Hades, the one in which all of the souls are imprisoned from the end of the Flood, which came upon the earth, until this day.”

<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  Then I inquired of the angel, “What is the place to which I have come?! He said to me, “It is Hades.” 

<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  Then I asked him, “‘Who is the great angel who stands thus, whom I saw?” He said, “This is the one who accuses men in the presence of the Lord.”

### 7

**Vision of the two manuscripts**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Then I looked, and I saw him with a manuscript in his hand. He began to unroll it. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Now after he spread it out, I read it in my (own) language. I found that all my sins which I had done were written in it, those which I had done from my youth until this day. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  They were all written upon that manuscript of mine without there being a false word in them. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  If I did not go to visit a sick man or a widow, I found it written down as a shortcoming upon my manuscript. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  If I did not visit an orphan, it was found written down as a shortcoming on my manuscript. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  A day on which I did not fast (or) pray in the time of prayer I found written down as a failing upon my manuscript. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And a day when I did not turn to the sons of Israel—since it is a shortcoming—I found written down upon my manuscript

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  so that I threw myself upon my face and prayed before the Lord Almighty, “May your mercy reach me and may you wipe out my manuscript because your mercy has [co]me to be in every place and has filled every [p]lace.”

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  Then I arose and stood, and I saw a great angel before me saying to me, “Triumph, prevail because you have prevailed and have triumphed? over the accuser, and you have come up from Hades and the abyss. You will now cross over the crossing place.”

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  Again he brought another manuscript which was written by hand. Ħ He began to unroll it, and I read it, and found it written in my (own) language... 

TWO PAGES MISSING

(In the missing pages the author probably discussed the content of the second manuscript, which should have recorded the good deeds of the seer. If the missing material is parallel to the preceding section, the reading of the manuscript would be followed by a prayer—possibly a prayer of thanksgiving—and a pronouncement of triumph by a great angel. That would be followed by preparations for crossing over the river in a journey out of Hades. The section that follows begins after the arrival of a boat.)

### 8

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  ... They helped me and set me on that boat. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Thousands of thousands and myriads of myriads of angels gave praise before me. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  I, myself, put on an angelic garment. I saw all of those angels praying. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  I, myself, prayed together with them, I knew their language, which they spoke with me. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Now, moreover, my sons, this is the trial because it is necessary that the good and the evil be weighed in a balance.

### 9

**The first trumpet, a proclamation of triumph and visitation of the righteous**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Then a great angel came forth having a golden trumpet in his hand, and he blew it three times over my head, saying, “Be courageous! O one who has triumphed. Prevail! O one who has prevailed. For you have triumphed over the accuser, and you have escaped from the abyss and Hades. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  You will now cross over the crossing place. For your name is written in the Book of the Living.” 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  I wanted to embrace him, (but) I was unable to embrace the great angel because his glory is great. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Then he ran to all the righteous ones, namely, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and Enoch and Elijah and David. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  He spoke with them as friend to friend speaking with one another.

### 10

**A second trumpet, the openimg of heaven, a vision of souls in torment**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Then the great angel came to me with the golden trumpet in his hand, and he blew it up to heaven. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Heaven opened from the place where the sun rises to where it sets, from the north to the south. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  I saw the sea which I had seen at the bottom of Hades. Its waves came up to the clouds. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  I saw all the souls sinking in it. I saw some whose hands were bound to their neck, with their hands and feet being fettered. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  I said, “Who are these?” He said to me, “These are the ones who were bribed? and they were given gold and silver until the souls of men were led astray.” 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And I saw others covered with mats of fire. 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  I said, “Who are these?” He said to me, “These are the ones who give money at interest, and they receive interest ” 

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And I also saw some blind ones crying out. And I was amazed when I saw all these works of God. 

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  I said, “Who are these?” He said to me, “These are catechumens who heard the word of God, but they were not perfected in the work which they heard.” 

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And I said to him, “Then do they not have repentance here?” He said, ‘“Yes.” 

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  I said, “How long?” He said to me, “Until the day when the Lord will judge.” 

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  And I saw others with their hair on them. I said, “Then there is hair and body in this place?” He said, “Yes, the Lord gives body and hair to them as he desires.”

### 11

**The intercession of the saints for those in torment**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And I also saw multitudes. He brought them forth. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  As they looked at all of the torments they called out, praying before the Lord Almighty, saying, “We pray to you on account of those who are in all these torments so that you might have mercy on all of them.” 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And when I saw them, I said to the angel who spoke with me, “(Who are these?)” 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  He said, “These who beseech the Lord are Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Then at a certain hour daily they come forth with the great angel. He sounds a trumpet up to heaven and another sound upon the earth. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  All the righteous hear the sound. They come running, praying to the Lord Almighty daily on behalf of these who are in all these torments.”

### 12

**Another trumpet blast heralding the coming wrath of God**

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And again the great angel comes forth with the golden trumpet in his hand blowing over the earth. 

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  They hear (it) from the place of the sunrise to the place of the sunset and from the southern regions to the northern region. 

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And again he blows up to heaven and his sound is heard. 

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  I said, “O Lord, why did you not leave me until I saw all of them?” 

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  He said to me, “I do not have authority to show them to you until the Lord Almighty rises up in his wrath to destroy the earth and the heavens. 

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  They will see and be disturbed, and they will all cry out, saying, ‘All flesh which is ascribed to you we will give to you on the day of the Lord.’ 

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  Who will stand in his presence when he rises in his wrath (to destroy) the earth (and the heaven?) 

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  Every tree which grows upon the earth will be plucked up with their roots and fall down. And every high tower and the birds which fly will fall...”


FOUR PAGES MISSING


