---
title: "Book of John, Archbishop of Thessalonica"
description:
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Book_of_John_Archbishop_of_Thessalonica#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## SLEEP OF OUR LADY, MOTHER OF GOD AND ALWAYS VIRGIN MARY, WRITTEN BY JOHN, ARCHBISHOP OF THESSALONIKI

## I

To the admirable, most glorious and truly great lady of the world; to the ever virgin mother of Jesus Christ, God and our savior; To her who is truly the mother of God, just tributes of praise, honor and glory are perpetually due from every creature that lives under heaven, for the benefit that the entire creation received through her in the economy of the carnal advent of the only begotten Son. and Word of God the Father.

This, after the divine Word, who truly took flesh from her and became human for us, voluntarily consummated his bodily passion, rose from the dead and ascended to heaven, remained in the company of the holy apostles, spending a period of no small time in the surroundings of Judea and Jerusalem and dwelling, according to the Holy Scripture [Io. 19,27], almost always in the house of the virgin and beloved apostle of the Lord.

This same most glorious virgin and mother of God, after some time since the apostles launched themselves into preaching the gospel throughout the world under the impulse of the Holy Spirit, she left the earth with a natural death.

Now there have been those who have recorded in writing the wonders that took place at that time in connection with it, and almost the entire earth celebrates with all solemnity the annual memory of its repose, excepting a few places, among which is the that surrounds this metropolis of the Thessalonians, protected by God. What (shall we do) then? Will we condemn the apathy or indolence of those who preceded us? Far be it from us to say this, or even think about it, since they were the only ones to bequeath to their country, sanctioned by laws, this exceptional (privilege); I am referring to the custom of celebrating the memory, not only of local saints, but also of those for the most part who fought for Christ on earth, thus making us spiritually familiar to God through sacred meetings and prayers.

They were not, therefore, lazy or indolent. It happened rather that, although it is true that the witnesses of her (Mary's) death faithfully described everything about her, nevertheless, some harmful heretics came after her who spread her weeds and depraved her. her writings. This is the reason why our fathers stayed away from them, considering them at odds with the Catholic Church. Hence the party was forgotten among them.

And do not be surprised to hear that the heretics corrupted such writings, since they have been surprised doing similar things on different occasions with the letters of the divine Apostle and even with the holy gospels. But let us not despise the true writings because of their cunning, which is abominable to God; but, after removing the harmful mixture of the seed, we will collect and commemorate for the benefit of souls and the pleasure of God what actually took place for the glory of God in relation to his saints.

For this is what they did, as we have learned, both those who have recently preceded us and the holy fathers who lived before them: these, regarding the so-called journeys of the holy apostles Peter, Paul, Andrew and John; those, regarding the majority of the writings about the martyrs, bearers of Christ. For something like _cleaning_ is necessary, according to what is written [Jer. 50, 26], _the stones of the path_, so that the flock that God has gathered does not stumble.

## II

We, then, since, for the benefit of this beloved metropolis of Christ and so that it is not deprived of any good, it is absolutely necessary to sincerely honor Mary, ever virgin and mother of God, (particularly) with the rejoicing celebration of his venerated rest; We, I say, have made a contribution of no small diligence, in order to the excitement and edification of souls, to expose to your ears, friends of God, not everything that we have indiscriminately found written in various books about it, but only those things that really took place, that are remembered as such and that have been confirmed until now by the testimony of the places. We have, therefore, collected all this with fear of God and love of the truth, ignoring personal appreciations, the insertion of which is due to the perfidy of those who have falsified these things.

Hearing, then, with a compunction profitable for the soul, the tremendous, magnificent and truly worthy wonders of the mother of God, which actually took place on the occasion of her admirable dormancy, we will offer, after God, Mary, the immaculate lady and mother of God, the gratitude and honor that is due to him, showing ourselves worthy of his gifts for our good works. And you, after receiving this small (testimony) of our love and giving your approval to the diligence with which we hereby exhort you to better things, reciprocate with your love, as brothers and beloved children in the Lord, requesting us the help from God through continuous prayer; for his is the glory, the honor and the power forever and ever. Amen.

## III

When Mary, the holy mother of God, was about to detach herself from the body, the great angel came to her and said: OMaria, get up and take this palm that the one who planted paradise has given me; Give her to the apostles so that they may carry her among hymns before you, because within three days you are going to leave her body. Know that I am going to send all the apostles to your side; They will take care of your funeral and contemplate your glory until (finally) they take you to the place that is reserved for you. And Mary answered the angel, saying: “Why have you brought only this palm and not one for each, lest, when you give it to one, the others will murmur?” “And what do you want me to do or what is your name so I can tell them, if they ask me?” The angel answered him: Why do you inquire about my name? ; because it causes admiration (just) to hear it. Do not hesitate about the palm, because many will be healed through it and it will serve as a test for all the inhabitants of Jerusalem. To him who therefore gives credit, it is revealed; and from him who does not believe, it is hidden. “So set out on the mountain road.”

Then Mary began to walk and climbed the Mount of Olives, while the light of the angel was shining before her and she had the palm in her hands. And, when she arrived at the mountain, it rejoiced along with all the plants that were there, to the point that they bowed their heads and worshiped her. Mary was troubled when she saw this, thinking that Jesus was there, and said: Are you, by chance, the Lord, since such a wonder has been worked for you, since these plants have worshiped you? For I say that no one can do such a wonder except the Lord of glory, who gave himself to me.

Then the angel said to him: «No one can do wonders except by his hand, because he communicates virtue to each of the beings. I am the one who takes the souls of those who humble themselves before God and who transfers them to the place of the righteous on the same day they leave the body. And as for you, if you ever leave the body, I myself will come for you."

Then Mary said to him: «My Lord, in what form do you come to the elect? So tell me what it is; Tell me so that I can act (as appropriate) when you come to take me over. He answers her: What do you have, Lady? You must know that when the Lord sends for you, I will not come alone, but all the angelic armies will also come and sing before you. And the angel, saying this, became like a light and ascended into heaven.

## IV

María, for her part, returned to her house. And immediately she was moved by the glory of the palm that was in her hand. And, after her shock had ceased, she entered her secret chamber and left her palm on a very fine cloth. She then began to pray to the Lord, saying: «Listen, Lord, to the prayer of your mother, Mary, who cries out to you, and send your benevolence upon me; and that no evil genius come to my presence at the moment in which I am going to leave the body, but rather fulfill what you said when I cried in your presence saying: What will I do to escape the powers that come upon my soul? And you made me the following promise: Don't cry; They are not angels, nor archangels, nor cherubs, nor seraphim, nor any other power, who are to come for you; but I myself will come to collect your soul. Now, then, the pain has come closer to the woman in labor. And he began to pray saying: «I bless the eternal light in which you dwell; I bless every plantation of your hands, which remains forever. Holy One, who dwells among the saints, hear the voice of my prayer.

## V

And, saying this, he went out and said to the maid of his house: “Listen, go and call my relatives and those who know me, saying (to them): Mary is calling you.” The maid went and informed everyone in accordance with what she had been commanded. And, after they had entered, Mary said to them: «My fathers and brothers, come to my help, for I am going to leave the body for my eternal rest. Get up, then, and do me a great favor. I do not ask you for gold or silver, since all these things are vain and corruptible; I only ask for the charity that you stay with me these two nights and that each of you takes a lamp, without letting it go out for three consecutive days. “I, for my part, will bless you before I die.”

And they did just as she had instructed them. And the news was transmitted to all of Mary's acquaintances and her relatives, so they all gathered at her side. Mary turned and, seeing everyone present, raised her voice saying: «My fathers and brothers, let us help each other and watch after lighting the lamps, for we do not know at what time the thief will come [Mt. 24:43], it has been made known, my brothers, the time when I am going to depart; I have known it and I have been informed without fear overwhelming me, since it is (a phenomenon) universal. The only one I fear is the insidator, the one who makes war on everyone; only it cannot prevail against the just and the faithful; but he takes possession of the unbelievers, the sinners and those who do his will, working on them whatever he pleases. But he does not take possession of the righteous, because (this) evil angel has nothing in them, but, ashamed, he flees from his side. It is important to know that there are two angels that come for man: one of justice and the other of evil. Both enter the company of death. This (at first) bothers the soul, (later) these two angels come and feel his body. And, if he has done works of righteousness, the good angel rejoices at this, for the evil angel has nothing in him. Then more angels come upon the soul, singing hymns before it until the Play where all the righteous are. Meanwhile, the evil angel grieves, for he has no part in it. But, if there is a case of one who has committed iniquity, that one (bad angel) also rejoices and takes other evil spirits with him and they take over (all of them) the soul, tearing it out. Meanwhile, the good angel is extremely afflicted. Now, then, my fathers and brothers, let us help each other so that nothing evil is found within us.

After Mary had spoken thus, the women said to her: “O our sister, who has become the mother of God and mistress of the whole world! As much as we are all afraid, what do you have to fear, being the mother of the Lord? Because, woe to us! Where should we flee if you say these things? You are our hope. What, then, are we, the most insignificant, going to do or where are we going to flee? If the shepherd is afraid of the wolf, where will the sheep flee? All the bystanders were crying, and Mary said to them: “Be still, my brothers, and do not cry; rather praise her who is presently among you. I beg you not to weep in this place for the virgin of the Lord, but instead of lamenting, sing psalms so that praise may spread to all generations of the earth and to every man of God. Sing psalms instead of lamentations, so that instead of weeping it may become a blessing to you."

## VI

Saying this, Mary called all those who were near her and said to them: “Get up and pray.” And, after praying, they sat talking among themselves about the wonders of God and the wonders that she had worked. And, while they were thus chatting, behold, John, the apostle, appears, knocking on Mary's door. Then he opened it and went inside. But Mary, upon seeing him, felt troubled in her spirit and sobbed and cried, until then she began to shout, saying in a loud voice: “John, my son, do not forget the recommendation that your Master gave you regarding me when I was crying to him.” next to the cross and I said to him: You are leaving, my Son, and to whom are you leaving me entrusted? Who will I dwell with? And he said to me while you were present and heard it: John is the one who will keep you. Now, then, son, do not forget the recommendations that were made to you for my sake and remember that He made you the object of a special love among all the apostles. Remember that you were the only one who could lean on his chest. Remember that he only entrusted his secret to you when you were reclining on his chest, a secret that no one has known except you and me, since you are the virgin and (the) chosen one. As for me, he did not want to grieve me, because I came to be his habitation. And so I said to him: Let me know what you said to Juan. And He gave you orders and you shared it with me. Now, then, Juan, my son, do not abandon me.

Maria, as she said this, cried softly. But John could not resist without his spirit being disturbed. And he did not understand what she was telling him, because he did not realize that she was going to leave her body. He then says to her: «Mary, mother of the Lord, what do you want me to do to you? I have already left my deacon at your service to present the food to you. Do not want me to break the command that the Lord gave me when he told me: Go around the whole world until sin is destroyed. So now reveal to me the pain of your soul. Are you missing something P.” And Mary tells him: «John, my son, I do not need anything in this world; But, since the day after tomorrow I leave this body, I beg you to show me charity and keep my body safe, depositing it alone in a tomb. And stand guard in the company of your brothers the apostles, because of the high priests. Well, I have heard them say with my own ears: If we find her body, we will burn it to the flames, since that seducer was born from her.

When she heard John say that she was going to leave the body, she fell to her knees and said between sobs: Oh Lord, who are we that you have made us see these tribulations? In fact, we had not yet forgotten the first ones, and here we have to suffer another one. Why don't I also leave the body, so that you can protect me, oh Mary?

When Mary heard John crying and saying these things, she begged those present to be silent (since they were also crying), and she grabbed John saying: “My son, be magnanimous with me, and stop crying.” Then Juan got up and wiped away his tears. Then Mary said to him: “Come with me and ask the people to sing hymns while I am speaking to you.” And, while they chanted, he brought John into his own chamber and showed him his shroud and all the equipment of his (future) corpse, saying: “John, my son, you see that I possess nothing on earth except my shroud and of two tunics. Know that there are two widows here; When I die, then give one of these to each one. She then took him to the place where the palm that had been given to him by the angel was, and said to him: «John, my son, take this palm so that you can carry it in front of my coffin; for this has been ordered to me. He replied: ”I cannot take it without (the consent of) my brothers in the apostolate, while they are absent, lest, when they come, there will be murmurings and complaints among us, since there is one who is appointed greatest over all. But, if we meet, there will be harmony.

## VII

And at the very moment in which they left the chamber, a great clap of thunder occurred, so that all those present were seized with confusion. And, when the noise of thunder ceased, the apostles landed at Mary's door on the wings of the clouds. They came eleven in number, each one flying on a cloud: Peter the first and Paul the second; He also traveled on a cloud and had been added to the number of the apostles, since he owed the beginning of faith to Christ. After these the other apostles also gathered at the gates of Mary riding on clouds. They greeted each other and looked at each other, amazed to see how they had come to meet in the same place. And Peter said: “Brothers, let us pray to God, who has brought us together, especially because Brother Paul is among us.” When Peter had spoken these words, they (all) stood up in an attitude of prayer and raised their voices saying: “Let us pray that it may be made known to us why God has gathered us together.” Then each one bowed to the other to pray.

So Peter says to Paul: “Paul, my brother, get up and pray before me, for I am filled with unspeakable joy that you have come to the faith of Christ.” Paul said to him: “Forgive me, Peter, my father, for I am but a neophyte and am not worthy to follow in the footsteps of your feet; How then am I going to start praying before you? You are, in fact, the luminous column, and all the brothers present are better than me. You, then, O father, pray for me and for everyone so that the grace of the Lord may remain in us.

Then the apostles rejoiced at Paul's humility and said: “Father Peter, you have been made our leader; you pray first. Peter therefore began to pray, saying: “God our father and the Lord Jesus Christ will glorify you in the same way that my ministry is glorified, because I am a servant and the least among the brothers. In the same way that I was chosen, so were you, and the call that was made to all of us is identical. Therefore, everyone who glorifies his neighbor, it is Jesus whom he glorifies, not a man. For this is the command of the Master: that we love one another.

Then Peter extended his hands and gave thanks in this way: «Lord Almighty, _who sits on the cherubim_ [4 Reg. 19,15] on high _and looks at lowly things_ (Ps. 112,6) _who inhabits an inaccessible light_ [2 Tim. 6,16]; _you solve the difficult things_ [Dan. 5,12], _you discover hidden treasures_ [Ism 45, 3], you have sown your goodness in us. For who is merciful among the gods like you? And _you have not withdrawn your mercy from us_ [2 Mach. 6,16], for you deliver from evil all those who hope in you; you who live and who have conquered death, from now on and forever and ever. Amen". And he greeted everyone again.

## VIII

And immediately John appeared in their midst, saying: “Bless me also, all of you.” And each one greeted him according to his order. And, after the greeting, Peter said to him: «John, beloved of the Lord, how have you come here and how many days do you have? John answered: «It happened, when I was in the city of Sardis explaining the doctrine until the ninth hour, when it descended a cloud came over the place where we were gathered and caught me up in the presence of all those who were with me, bringing me here. I knocked on the door and, when they opened it, I found a whole crowd surrounding our mother Mary, who told me: I am going to leave the body. I couldn't stand it in the midst of those around him, and crying overcame me. Now, brothers, if you enter into it early in the morning, do not cry or be troubled, lest those around you, seeing you crying, may doubt the resurrection and say, “They too were afraid of death.” Let us rather encourage ourselves with the words of the good Master.

So the morning apostles entered Mary's house and said with one voice: “Blessed Mary, mother of all those who are saved, grace is with you.” Mary, on her part, tells them: «How did you get here or who is it that announced to you that I am about to leave the body? And how did you come to meet in this place? Well, I see you together and I'm glad.“ And each one told him the country from which he had been transferred and how, carried away by the clouds, they had come to gather there. Then they all glorified her, saying: ”Bless the Lord, who saves all." Mary rejoiced in spirit and said: “I bless you, from whom all have received blessings; I bless the habitation of your glory; I bless you, giver of light, who wanted to be a guest in my womb; I bless all the works of your hands, which obey you with all performance; I bless you, who has blessed us; I bless the words of life that come out of your mouth, and that have been given to us in truth. I believe that everything you have said is realized in me; for you said: I will send you all the apostles when you are going to leave the body, and here they are gathered together, I being among them like a fruitful vine, as when I was in your company. I bless you with every blessing; May the rest of the things you said be fulfilled in me, for you made this promise to me: You will see me when you leave the body.

Saying this, she called Peter and all the apostles and brought them into her chamber, where she showed them her shroud. Then she went out and sat among them, while the lamps were burning. Well, they had not let them turn off, as María had ordered them.

## IX

When the sun had set (it was then the second day), as she was about to leave the body, Peter 8 said to all the apostles: “Brothers, whoever has a word of edification, let him say it and indoctrinate the people.” All night long". The apostles said to him: And who (of us) is before you? We will be extremely happy if we are able to hear your instructions.

Then Peter began to say: «My brothers and all those who have come to this place at this hour when our mother Mary is going to depart: those of you who have lit these visible lamps with the earthly fire, have done well; But I would also like each one to have his immaterial lamp in the century that has no end. I am referring to the lamp of the inner man, which consists of three wicks, that is: our body, our soul and our spirit. For if these three things shine with the true fire for which you fight, you will not be ashamed when you enter the wedding to rest with the Bridegroom. This is what happens (now) with our mother Mary; for the light of her lamp has filled the earth and will not go out until the end of the ages, so that all who want to be saved may take courage through her. Because you must not think that Mary's death is (authentic) death. It is not death, but eternal life, because the death of the righteous is praised by God [Ps. 115,151]. For this is the (true) glory, and the second death will not be able to cause you any discomfort.

And while Peter was still speaking, a great light shone within the house among them all, so that his lamps became pale. And a voice was heard saying: “Peter, speak to them wisely about the things they can endure. Well, the most competent doctor applies the remedy according to the patients' ailments and the wet nurse provides shelter proportionate to the child's age. Peter then raised his voice and said: “We bless you, O Christ! who are the rudder of our souls.”

## X

And then, addressing the virgins who were there, he said: “Hear (what is) your privilege, your glory and your honor. Because blessed are all those who keep the habit of their purity. Listen and learn what our Master said (in this regard): The kingdom of heaven, says he, is like unto virgins [Mt. 25.1]. He did not say: it is like a long time, for time passes, but the name of virginity will not pass away. He did not liken him to a rich man, because riches diminish, while virginity remains (unalterable). So, I think you will be glorious. Because you have no worries, that is why he made the kingdom of heaven like to you. Well, when your time comes to die, you will not say: ”Woe to us! Where do we go, leaving our poor children, or our great wealth, or our planted fields, or our great estates? Because none of this concerns you. You have no concern except that of your virginity. And, when death is sent to you, you will be prepared, lacking nothing. And so that you may realize that there is nothing better than virtue and that nothing is more burdensome than worldly things, listen to this also:

There was in a city a man rich in all kinds of goods. He also had some servants. And it came to pass that two of these transgressed against him, not obeying his words. The master then became angry and confined them for some time in a distant place with the intention of calling them back. One of these exiled servants built a house, planted a vineyard, made a furnace, and acquired many other possessions. But the other, everything he got from his work, was deposited in gold. Then he called the goldsmith and gave him the design of a crown, saying: I am a servant belonging to a lord and his son; He chisels (then) their image into the golden crown. The goldsmith executed his work of art and said to the servant: Get up and put the crown on your head. But the servant replied: Take your salary, for I (already) have a special occasion to wear the crown. The goldsmith understood the meaning of these words of the servant and went to his house.

And with this the predetermined limit of exile was imposed. Then the lord sent a certain rough (emissary), saying to him: If you do not present them to me within seven days, your life will be in danger. The emissary left with great diligence. And when he came to that country, he found the servants (who were) both night and day. And stopping him who had acquired the house, the vineyard and other property, he said to him: Let us go, because • your lord has sent me for you. This one apparently responded: (Yes), let's go; but then he added: Be patient with me until I sell all the goods I have acquired here. The emissary replied: I cannot be patient, since I have seven days at my disposal and for fear of your threat I cannot delay. Then the servant began to cry, saying, “Woe is me! , which have caught me off guard. And the emissary said to him: Oh lousy servant! Were you unaware of your condition as a slave and exile and (did you not realize) that the lord could claim you whenever he pleased? Why have you bothered to plant vineyards from which you can take nothing and have you allowed yourself to be caught off guard? You should have prepared yourself before my arrival. Then the servant said through tears: “Woe is me!” because I thought I would be confined forever, believing that the master was not going to claim me, and that is why I have acquired all this property in this country. The employee forced him to leave without him being able to take anything with him.

But when the other servant heard that they had been sent for them, he got up, took the crown from him, and going to the road where the emissary was to pass, he began to wait for him. And, as soon as he arrived, he addressed him these words: My lord has sent you, without a doubt, for me; Let's go, then, happy together, both of us, since I have no obstacle to stop me, since my baggage is light. I really have nothing more than this golden crown. I have built it, waiting daily and wishing that the Lord would favor me and send for me to lift my exile, lest some would envy me and take away my crown. Therefore, now I have had my wish fulfilled; Let's go, then, and get on our way.

Then the servants set out with the employee. And, as soon as they were seen by the lord, he said to him who had nothing: Where is the fruit of your work for as long as your confinement has lasted? And the servant answered: Lord, you have sent for me a cruel soldier, whom I begged to allow me to sell my goods and take into my hands (their produce), but he answered me that it was not lawful for him. Then his master said to him: Oh wicked servant, did you remember to make the sale precisely at the moment I called you? Why didn't you stop lying in your confinement or realize that that farm meant nothing to you? And, flying into anger, he orders that his hands and feet be tied and he be sent to other, more inhospitable places. Then he calls the one who had brought the crown and says to him: Well done, good and faithful servant; The crown you made was a testimony of the desire for your freedom, since the crown is typical of free men. On the other hand, you have not dared to take her without your lord's permission. So, as you have desired freedom, (so) receive it from my hands. With this the servant is freed and he is put in charge of many things.

## XI

For in truth we are the virgins of the true Husband, of the Son of God and Father of all creation; (that is,) we are the humanity against whom God was angry from the beginning, throwing Adam into this world. Therefore, we live here as exiles, subjected to his indignation; but it is not lawful for us to remain (forever), because each one's day will come and he will be transferred to the place where our fathers and progenitors are, where Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are. For when each person's end comes, the strong emissary is sent to him, that is, death. And when it comes for the soul of the sick sinner, who has accumulated upon himself many sins and iniquities, and causes him much discomfort, then he begs her saying: Be patient with me just this once until I finish redeeming the sins that I have sown. in my body. But death does not pay attention; Because, how are you going to give truces, having already met your deadline? Therefore, not having anything good to her credit, she is deported to the place of torment. But he who does good works, he rejoices, saying:

Nothing stops me, for at this moment I have nothing to carry, except the name of virginity. So, he makes this plea to her: Do not leave me on earth, lest some become envious of me and take away the name of my virginity. Then the soul leaves the body and is carried between hymns to the presence of the immortal Bridegroom, who deposits it in a place of rest. So fight now, brothers, knowing that we will not remain here forever.

## XII

While Peter was busy saying these things to comfort the crowds, dawn broke and the sun rose. Mary then got up, went outside, raised her hands and prayed to the Lord. When this was finished, she entered again and lay down on her bed. Peter sat at her head and John at her feet, while the other apostles surrounded the bed. And about the third hour a great thunder sounded from heaven and a fragrant perfume was exhaled (so soft), that all the bystanders were overcome by sleep, except only the apostles and three virgins, whom the Lord kept awake for that they would bear witness to Mary's funeral and her glory. And behold (suddenly) the Lord appears on the clouds with an innumerable multitude of angels. And Jesus in person, accompanied by Michael, entered the chamber where Mary was, while the angels and those who surrounded the room outside sang hymns. And, upon entering, he found the Savior the apostles around Mary and greeted everyone. Then he greeted her mother. Mary then opened her mouth and gave thanks with these words: O I bless you that you have not snubbed me in regard to your promise. Well, you repeatedly gave me your word not to commission the angels to come for my soul, but to come (in person) for it. And everything has been fulfilled in me, Lord, according to your offer. Who am I, poor me, to have made myself worthy of such great glory? And as she said these words, she fulfilled her task, while her body smiled at the Lord. But He took her soul and put it in the hands of Michael, but not before having wrapped it in something like veils, the radiance of which is impossible to describe.

But we the apostles saw that the soul of Mary, when delivered into the hands of Michael, was made up of all the members of man, apart from sexual difference, having in her nothing but the likeness of every (human) body and a whiteness which exceeded that of the sun seven times. Peter, for his part, overjoyed, asked the Lord, saying: Who among us has a soul as white as Mary's. The Lord answered: "O Peter! The souls of all those who are born into this world are similar; But when they leave the body they are not so radiant, because in some conditions he sent them to them and in others (very different) they were found, because they had loved the darkness of many sins. But if anyone protects himself from the dark iniquities of this world, his soul will enjoy a similar whiteness when it leaves the body. Then the Savior said again to Peter: «Secure with great diligence the body of Mary, my habitation. Go out on the right side of the city and you will find a new tomb; Place her body in it and wait there, as you have been commanded.

When the Savior said this, the body of the holy mother of God began to cry out, saying in the presence of everyone: “Remember me, King of glory; remember me, for I am the work of your hands; Remember me, for I have kept the treasure that was given to me as a deposit. Jesus then responded to the body: «I will not leave you, treasure of my daisy; I will not leave you, who were found faithful (guardian) of the deposit that had been entrusted to you; Far be it from me to abandon you, who were the ark that governed your governor; Far be it from me to abandon you, sealed treasure, until you are sought. And as he said this, the Savior disappeared.

## XIII

Peter, in the company of the other apostles and the three virgins, shrouded Mary's body and placed it on the coffin. After this those who had been overcome by sleep rose up. Peter then spoke and said to John: «You are the virgin; You are, therefore, the one who must go singing hymns in front of the coffin with the palm in your hands. But John replied: «You are our father and bishop; Therefore, you must preside over the procession until we take the coffin to the (set) place. Then Peter said, “So that none of us may grieve, let us crown the coffin with the palm.” So the apostles got up and carried Xfaría's coffin. Peter, meanwhile, intoned: “Israel came out of Egypt [Ps. 113.1]. Hallelujah“. The Lord and the angels, for their part, walked on the clouds and sang hymns and praises without being seen. Only the voice of the angels was heard. The rumor of (that) large crowd spread throughout Jerusalem. So when the priests heard the tumult and the voices of those who were singing, they trembled and exclaimed: ”Why is this tumult coming? One told them that Mary had just left the body and that the apostles were around her singing hymns. Immediately Satan penetrated inside them, and, flying into anger, they said: “Come, let us go outside, let us kill the apostles and make the body that carried that deceiver (in its womb) fuel for the flames.” They got up, therefore, and came out armed with swords and (other) means of defense with the purpose of killing them. But immediately the angels who were on the clouds struck them with blindness. These, not knowing where they were going, banged their heads against the walls, except for only one pontiff among them, who had come out to see what was happening. When he approached the procession and saw the crowned coffin and the apostles singing hymns, he said full of anger: "Behold the habitation of him who spoiled our nation. See what terrible glory he enjoys. And, saying this, he rushed furiously upon the coffin. He grabbed it where the palm was with the intention of destroying it; Then he dragged him and tried to throw him to the ground. But suddenly his hands remained glued to the coffin and hanging on it, as they were violently detached from the trunk by the elbows.

Then the man began to cry in front of all the apostles, addressing them with this plea: “Do not leave me abandoned, immersed as I am in such great need.” Peter then said to him: «The virtue that is needed to help you is not mine nor any of these. But, if you believe that Jesus, against whom you convened and whom you arrested and killed, is the Son of God, you will be effectively freed from this exemplary punishment. To which the man replied: Did we not know that he was the Son of God? But what were we to do, having our eyes darkened by greed? Because our fathers, who were about to die, called us to tell us: Children, behold, God has chosen you from among all the tribes so that you may be energetically in charge of this people and not work with materials from this land. Here is your task: to build up the people and to receive tithes and first fruits from all (in reward) together with every firstborn who breaks the womb. But be careful, children, lest the people swim in abundance because of you and then, rebelling, you trade for your benefit and provoke the wrath of God. Give rather what is superfluous to the poor, orphans, and widows of your people, and do not despise a troubled soul. But we did not listen to the traditions of our fathers, but seeing that the land was exceedingly abundant, we made the firstborn of sheep, oxen and all animals a business for sellers and buyers. Then the Son of God came and expelled everyone outside, as well as the money changers, saying: _Take these things away from here and do not make my Father's house a house of commerce_ [Io. 2,16]. But we, setting our eyes on the (depraved) customs suppressed by Him, plotted evil within ourselves, rallied against Him and put Him to death, (even) really recognizing that He was the Son of God. But do not now take into account our evil, but rather forgive me. Well, this has happened to me because I am loved by God and so that I may live.

Then Peter had the coffin laid down and said to the pontiff: “If you believe now with all your heart, go and place a kiss on the body of Mary, saying: I believe in you and in the God you gave birth to.” Then the pontiff began to bless Mary in Hebrew for three hours and did not allow anyone to touch her, bringing testimonies from the holy books of Moses and the other prophets, since it is written of her: She will become the temple of the Glorious God, to the point that the listeners were amazed to hear such traditions, which they had never heard before.

Peter then said to him, “Go and join your hands one with another.” He made to join them together, saying: “In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, the son of Mary, mother of God, join my hands together.” And immediately they were as they were at the beginning, without any defect. And Peter insisted: “Get up (now) and take a branch of the palm and enter the city. There you will find a crowd that lacks sight and cannot find a way out; Tell them what has happened to you, and to whoever believes, impose the twig on his eyes, and he will instantly regain his sight.

The high priest went, according to Peter's command, and found many blind men—those whom the angel had struck with blindness—who were crying out, “Woe to us! for the same thing has happened to us that happened in Sodom.”— because first God had struck them with blindness and then brought fire from heaven and burned them—; or Woe to us! “Well, on top of being mutilated, fire also comes.” Then the man who had taken the twig spoke to them about faith. And he who believed saw again; But he who did not listen did not recover his sight, but he remained blind.

## XIV

And they remained unanimously with him three days to keep him. But, when we went to open the tomb with the intention of venerating the precious tabernacle of the one that is worthy of all praise, we found only the linen cloths, (because) it had been transferred to the eternal inheritance by Christ God, who took flesh from it. This same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who glorified Mary, his immaculate mother and mother of God, will give glory to those who glorify her, will free from all danger those who annually celebrate her memory with supplications and will fill their homes with goods, as he he did with that of Onesiphorus. These will also receive the remission of their sins here and in the future century. For He chose her to be her cherubic throne on earth and her earthly heaven and, at the same time, to be hope, refuge and support for our race; so that, mystically celebrating the feast of his glorious dormancy, we may find mercy and favor in the present age and in the future, through the grace and kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be given glory and praise together with his Father, which has no beginning, and the most holy and life-giving Spirit, now and ever and forever and ever. Amen.


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Book_of_John_Archbishop_of_Thessalonica#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>