## title: The I Ching
## folder_name: The_I_Ching
## shelf_name: Confucianism
## tag: Confucianism
## cover:
<div class="urantiapedia-book-front urantiapedia-book-bahai">
<svg xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" width="102.6mm" height="136.8mm" viewBox="0 0 102.6 136.8" version="1.1">
	<g transform="translate(-7,-5)">
		<rect width="9.6" height="136.8" x="7" y="5" />
		<rect width="96.9" height="136.8" x="17" y="5" />
		<text style="font-size:5px" x="61" y="22">James Legge, (tr.)</text>
		<text style="font-size:4px" x="61" y="125">1899</text>
		<text style="font-size:9px" x="61" y="60">The I Ching</text>
		<text style="font-size:9px" x="61" y="70">(SBE 16)</text>
	</g>
</svg>
</div>

<p style="text-align:center;">
<span class="text-h3">The Yî King</span><br>
Sacred Books of the East Vol. 16<br>
The Sacred Books of China, vol. 2 of 6<br>
Part II of The Texts of Confucianism.<br>
<span class="text-h5">James Legge, Translator.</span><br>
Oxford, the Clarendon Press<br>
[1899]<br>
Scanned at sacred-texts.com, March, 2003. J. B. Hare, redactor. This text is in the public domain. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is left intact.<br>
</p>

<br>

The I Ching, or Book of Changes, is the most widely read of the five [Chinese Classics](https://archive.sacred-texts.com/cfu/index.htm#fivecla). The book was traditionally written by the legendary Chinese Emperor Fu Hsi (2953-2838 B.C.). It is possible that the the I Ching originated from a prehistoric divination technique which dates back as far as 5000 B.C. Thus it may be the oldest text at this site. Futher commentaries were added by King Wen and the Duke of Chou in the eleventh century B.C.

An I Ching interpretation is performed by making six binary decisions (a hexagram). This is called 'casting the I Ching'. These are written down as a stack of six solid or broken lines. This was traditionally done either by tossing yarrow stalks or coins, although there is no reason why the hexagrams can't be generated by some other means (such as a computer program).

There are actually _four_ possible values for each of the lines; the two on/off values, and a line which changes from on to off or vice versa. Thus one cast of the I Ching can generate two different hexagrams, which adds depth to the interpretation. The sophistication of this method has not escaped modern interpretation, and the four-valued logic has been compared to the biochemistry of [DNA amino acids](https://archive.sacred-texts.com/dna/index.htm). How a Neolithic shamans' divination technique presaged the basic logic of the human genome is one of the ageless mysteries.

_Production Notes_: This is a complete overhaul of the Legge I Ching etext, with all of the original illustrations. This utilizes [Unicode characters](https://archive.sacred-texts.com/unicode.htm) throughout to represent the 'short A' and the 'Yodh' found in the original book. Because not all browsers support the official Unicode 'Yodh' (Ȝ and ȝ), we have used Ž and ž to represent it. In addition, we have used images to present the dozen or so Chinese characters in this text.

## index:
Contents | Contents
Preface | Preface
Introduction | #
	Chapter I: The Yî King from The Twelfth Century B.C. to the Commencement of the Christian Era | Introduction_1
	Chapter II: The Subject-Matter of the Text. The Lineal Figures and the Explanation of Them | Introduction_2
	Chapter III: The Appendixes | Introduction_3
Plates | Plates
	Plate I | Plates#p1
	Plate II, Figure 1 | Plates#p21
	Plate II, Figure 2 | Plates#p22
	Plate III, Figure 1 | Plates#p31
	Plate III, Figure 2 | Plates#p32
The Yî King Text: Section I | Section_1
	I. The Khien Hexagram | Section_1#p1
	II. The Khwăn Hexagram | Section_1#p2
	III. The Kun Hexagram | Section_1#p3
	IV. The Măng Hexagram | Section_1#p4
	V. The Hsü Hexagram | Section_1#p5
	VI. The Sung Hexagram | Section_1#p6
	VII. The Sze Hexagram | Section_1#p7
	VIII. The Pî Hexagram | Section_1#p8
	IX. The Hsiâo Khû Hexagram | Section_1#p9
	X. The Lî Hexagram | Section_1#p10
	XI. The Thâi Hexagram | Section_1#p11
	XII. The Phî Hexagram | Section_1#p12
	XIII. The Thung Zăn | Section_1#p13
	XIV. The Tâ Yû Hexagram | Section_1#p14
	XV. The Khien Hexagram | Section_1#p15
	XVI. The Yü Hexagram | Section_1#p16
	XVII. The Sui Hexagram | Section_1#p17
	XVIII. The Kû Hexagram | Section_1#p18
	XIX. The Lin Hexagram | Section_1#p19
	XX. The Kwân Hexagram | Section_1#p20
	XXI. The Shih Ho Hexagram | Section_1#p21
	XXII. The Pî Hexagram | Section_1#p22
	XXIII. The Po Hexagram | Section_1#p23
	XXIV. The Fû Hexagram | Section_1#p24
	XXV: The Wû Wang Hexagram | Section_1#p25
	XXVI. The Tâ Khû Hexagram | Section_1#p26
	XXVII. The Î Hexagram | Section_1#p27
	XXVIII. The Tâ Kwo Hexagram | Section_1#p28
	XXIX. The Khan Hexagram | Section_1#p29
	XXX. The Lî Hexagram | Section_1#p30
Text Section II | Section_2
	XXXI. The Hsien Hexagram | Section_2#p31
	XXXII. The Hăng Hexagram | Section_2#p32
	XXXIII. The Thun Hexagram | Section_2#p33
	XXXIV. The Tâ Kwang Hexagram | Section_2#p34
	XXXV. The Žin Hexagram | Section_2#p35
	XXXVI. The Ming Î Hexagram | Section_2#p36
	XXXVII. The Kiâ Zăn Hexagram | Section_2#p37
	XXXVIII. The Khwei Hexagram | Section_2#p38
	XXXIX. The Kien Hexagram | Section_2#p39
	XL. The Kieh Hexagram | Section_2#p40
	XLI. The Sun Hexagram | Section_2#p41
	XLII. The Yî Hexagram | Section_2#p42
	XLIII. The Kwâi Hexagram | Section_2#p43
	XLIV. The Kâu Hexagram | Section_2#p44
	XLV. The Žhui Hexagram | Section_2#p45
	XLVI. The Shăng Hexagram | Section_2#p46
	XLVII. The Khwăn Hexagram | Section_2#p47
	XLVIII. The Žing Hexagram | Section_2#p48
	XLIX. The Ko Hexagram | Section_2#p49
	L. The Ting Hexagram | Section_2#p50
	LI. The Kăn Hexagram | Section_2#p51
	LII. The Kăn Hexagram | Section_2#p52
	LIII. The Kien Hexagram | Section_2#p53
	LIV. The Kwei Mei Hexagram | Section_2#p54
	LV. The Făng Hexagram | Section_2#p55
	LVI. The Lü Hexagram | Section_2#p56
	LVII. The Sun Hexagram | Section_2#p57
	LVIII. The Tui Hexagram | Section_2#p58
	LIX. The Hwân Hexagram | Section_2#p59
	LX. The Kieh Hexagram | Section_2#p60
	LXI. The Kung Fû Hexagram | Section_2#p61
	LXII. The Hsiâo Kwo Hexagram | Section_2#p62
	LXIII. The Kî Žî Hexagram | Section_2#p63
	LXIV. The Wei Žî Hexagram | Section_2#p64
The Appendixes | #
	Appendix I | #
		Section I | Appendix_1
		Section II | Appendix_1#s2
	Appendix II | #
		Section I | Appendix_2
		Section II | Appendix_2#s2
	Appendix III: The Great Appendix | #
		Section I | Appendix_3
		Section II | Appendix_3#s2
	Appendix IV | #
		Section I: Khien | Appendix_4
		Section II: Khwăn | Appendix_4#s2
	Appendix V | #
		Appendix V: Treatise of Remarks on the Trigrams | Appendix_5
	Appendix VI | #
		Appendix VI: The Orderly Sequence of the Hexagrams | Appendix_6
	Appendix VII | #
		Appendix VII | Appendix_7

## links:
[Sacred texts website](https://sacred-texts.com/ich/index.htm)