---
title: "Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 12"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers/11">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 11</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers/13">
          <span class="pr-2">Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 13</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## 12. A Prayer of Praise to God, Rehearsing the Grounds in Redemption and in Creation Which Make Praise So Fitting for God's Redeemed Creature, Man (_AposCon_ 8.12.6—27)

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1 (6)</small></sup></span> It is truly worthy and right before all things to sing a hymn to you,
the one who is truly God;
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> the one who is before things that have been made;
from whom every family in heaven and upon earth is named;
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span> the only one without origin, and without a beginning;
and not ruled by a king, and without a master;
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span> the one not in want;
the supplier of every good (thing);
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> the one far exceeding every cause and origin;
the one always the same, and holding just so;
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> from whom are all things,
just as from some starting-point, it came in order to be.
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7 (7)</small></sup></span> For you are the knowledge without beginning;
the eternal vision;
the hearing without origin;
the wisdom without teaching;
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span> the first by nature,
and only one in being,
and far exceeding every number;
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span> the one who brought everything into being out of non-being, through your only Son,
and gave him birth before all the ages,
by purpose, and power, and unmediated goodness—
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span> an only Son, a divine Word, a living Wisdom,
a firstborn of all creation,
a messengerb of your great purpose,
your high priest;
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span> both king and lord of all intelligible and perceptible nature,
the one before all things, through whom are all things!
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12 (8)</small></sup></span> For you, O eternal God, have made all things through him,
and through him by suitable foreknowledge you design everything.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span> For through him you freely gave being,
(and) through him also you gave well-being.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span> (You are) the God and Father of your only Son,
who through him before all things made the cherubim and the seraphim,
both ages and (heavenly) hosts,
both powers and authorities,
both rulers and thrones,
both archangels and angels;
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span> and after all these, having made through him this world that is seen, and everything in it.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16 (9)</small></sup></span> For you are the one who placed the heaven like a vaulted arch,
and like a screen stretched it out;
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span> and founded the earth upon nothing, by judgment alone;
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span> the one who fixed a firmament, and prepared night and day;
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span> the one who brought light out of the treasuries, and at the contraction of this (light),
the one who brought the darkness for rest for the living creatures moving about in the world;
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span> the one who appointed the sun for rule (over) the day in heaven,
and the moon for rule (over) the night,
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21 (10)</small></sup></span> and engraved the choir of the stars in heaven, for praise of your great splendor;
the one who made water for drinking and cleansing,
lively air for breathing in and breathing out,
and for utterance of a voice,
the air having been struck by a tongue,
and (the sense of) hearing, working together under it, so as to hear.
taking in the speech falling upon it;
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22 (11)</small></sup></span> the one who made fire for encouragement (in) darkness,
for fulfillment of want,
and for us to be warmed and enlightened by it;
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23 (12)</small></sup></span> the one who separated the great sea from the land,
who indeed declared the one for navigation,
and made the Other passable for feet;
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span> who filled the one with living creatures, small and great,
and filled up the Other with tame animals and untamed;
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span> having encircled (it) with manifold plants,
and having crowned (it) with herbs,
and having beautified (it) with flowers,
and having enriched (it) with seeds;
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26 (13)</small></sup></span> the one who framed an abyss,
and surrounded it with a great hollow,
seas of salt waters having been heaped up;
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span> the one who by winds sometimes raises it to a crest, to become the height of mountains,
and sometimes spreads it out into a plain,
and sometimes indeed driving it mad with storm,
and sometimes soothing it with a calm,
so as to be easy for crossing by seafaring sailors;
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28 (14)</small></sup></span> the one who encircled with rivers the world
which came into being by you through Christ.
and flooded it with mountain torrents,
and drenched it with never-failing springs,
and bound it tightly all around with mountains,
for an unshakable foundation of a most steadfast earth
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29 (15)</small></sup></span> For you filled your world, and divided and arranged it,
with sweet-smelling and healing herbs;
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span> with many and varied living creatures,
with strong ones and with weak ones,
with edible ones and with productive ones,
with tame ones and with untamed ones;
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span> with hissings of serpents,
with scrams of many-colored birds;
<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span> with cycles of years,
with numbers of months and days;
with arrangements of customs;
<span id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span> with courses of rain-producing clouds, for the generation of fruits, and the care of living creatures;
<span id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span> (and with) a balance of winds,
blowing when they are ordered by you;
(and) the multitude of plants and herbs.
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35 (16)</small></sup></span> And you not only made the world,
but you also made the world citizen in it,
declaring him (to be) a (micro-)cosm of the cosmos.
<span id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span> For you said by your Wisdom,
Let us make man according to our image,
and according to (our) likeness;
and let them rule thefish of the sea,
and the winged birds of the heaven.
<span id="v37"><sup><small>37 (17)</small></sup></span> Therefore also you have made him out of immortal soul,
and out of a body that may be scattered;
<span id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup></span> the one indeed out of that which is not,
but the Other out of the four elements.
<span id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span> And you have indeed given to him, with reference to the soul.
rational discrimination,
distinguishing of piety and impiety,
observation of right and wrong.
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span> While with reference to the body,
you have given (him) five senses,
and the movement involving Change of place.
<span id="v41"><sup><small>41 (18)</small></sup></span> For you, O God Almighty, throuph Christ,
planted a paradise in Eden, eastward,
with all manner of edible foods, in (proper) order;
<span id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup></span> and into it, as if into a very expensive home, you brought him.
<span id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup></span> And indeed, you have given to him an implanted law to do,
so that from himself, and by himself,
he might have the seeds of divine knowledge._
<span id="v44"><sup><small>44 (19)</small></sup></span> So, having brought (him) into the paradise of luxury,
you allowed him the right to partake of all things.
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span> But of only one thing did you refuse him the taste;
in hope of greater things,
in order that, if he should keep the commandment,
he might receive immortality as a reward for this.
<span id="v46"><sup><small>46 (20)</small></sup></span> But, having cared nothing for the commandment,
and having tasted of the forbidden fruit,
by the trickery of a serpent,
and by the counsel of a woman,
you indeed rightly thrust him out from paradise.
<span id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup></span> Yet in goodness, you did not overlook him who was perishing forever,
for he was your work of art.
<span id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup></span> But, having subjected to him the creation,
You have given to him, through sweat and hard labors, to provide by himself
the nourishment for his own family,
while you are causing all things to grow, and to ripen.
<span id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup></span> And in time, having caused him to fall asleep for a while,
you called (him) by an oath to new birth;
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span> having dissolved the boundaries of death,
you promised life by resurrection!
<span id="v51"><sup><small>51 (21)</small></sup></span> And not only this; but also those who poured forth from him,
to become an innumerable multitude—
<span id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup></span> those who continued with you, you glorified,
while those who separated from you, you punished.
<span id="v53"><sup><small>53</small></sup></span> And while indeed from Abel, as from a devout man,
you favorably received a sacrifice;
<span id="v54"><sup><small>54</small></sup></span> from the brother-murderer Cain,
you turned aside the offering as from an accursed person.
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span> And in addition to these, you took hold of Seth and Enos, and you translated Enoch.
<span id="v56"><sup><small>56 (22)</small></sup></span> For you are the maker of man,
and the supplier of life,
and the fulfiller of need,
<span id="v57"><sup><small>57</small></sup></span> and the dispenser of laws,
and the rewarder of those keeping them,
and the avenger of those transgressing them;
<span id="v58"><sup><small>58</small></sup></span> the one who brought the great flood on the world,
because of the multitude of those who lived godlessly;
<span id="v59"><sup><small>59</small></sup></span> and who delivered the righteous Noah from the flood in an ark,
together with eight souls;
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span> an end indeed of those who have passed on,
but a beginning of those about to be born
<span id="v61"><sup><small>61</small></sup></span> (You are) the one who kindled the fearful fire against the five cities of Sodom,
and turned a fruitful land into salt because of those living in it,
and snatched away pious Lot from the burning.
You are the one who delivered Abraham from ancestral godlessness,
<span id="v62"><sup><small>62 (23)</small></sup></span> and appointed him heir of the world,
and showed to him your Christ;
<span id="v63"><sup><small>63</small></sup></span> the one who appointed Melchizedek a high priest in your service;
who declared your much-enduring servant Job conqueror of the archevil serpent;
who made Isaac a son of promise;
(and) Jacob, father of twelve sons; and you fonned his descendants into a multitude;
and who led (them) into Egypt, with seventy-five souls,
<span id="v63"><sup><small>63 (24)</small></sup></span> You, O Lord, did not neglect Joseph,
but gave to him to rule over Egypt—
a reward of the self-control that you enable.
<span id="v66"><sup><small>66</small></sup></span> You, O Lord, did not disregard the Hebrews,
being worn out by hard labor under the Egyptians.
<span id="v67"><sup><small>67</small></sup></span> But, on account of the promises (made) to the fathers,
you delivered (them), having punished the Egyptians.
<span id="v68"><sup><small>68 (25)</small></sup></span> And when men had corrupted the natural law,
and at one time, indeed, having esteemed the creation as happening without cause,
and at another time, having honored it more than is right,
comparing it to you, to the God of the universe;
<span id="v69"><sup><small>69</small></sup></span> you did not permit them to go astray,
but showed forth your holy servant Moses,
having given through him the written Law, as an aid to the natural (law).
<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span> And you showed the creation to be your work,
and you banished the polytheistic error.
<span id="v71"><sup><small>71</small></sup></span> You glorified Aaron, and those who came after him, with priestly honor;
<span id="v72"><sup><small>72</small></sup></span> you punished the Hebrews when they sinned;
you received those who returned (to you).
<span id="v73"><sup><small>73 (26)</small></sup></span> You exacted vengeance on the Egyptians with ten plagues;
you carried the Israelites across a sea, dividing it;
you destroyed the pursuing Egyptians under water;
<span id="v74"><sup><small>74</small></sup></span> you sweetened bitter water with wood;
you poured forth water out of jagged rock;
<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span> you rained the manna out of heaven,
a mother-of-quail nourishment out of the air;
<span id="v76"><sup><small>76</small></sup></span> you comforted them with a pillar of fire by night, for light,
and a pillar of Cloud by day, for shade;
<span id="v77"><sup><small>77</small></sup></span> you showed forth Joshua, the soldier;
you destroyed seven Canaanite nations through him;
<span id="v78"><sup><small>78</small></sup></span> you tore in two the Jordan;
you dried up the rivers of Etham;
<span id="v79"><sup><small>79</small></sup></span> you broke down walls without machines (of war),
and without human hand.
<span id="v80"><sup><small>80 (27)</small></sup></span> Glory is yours, because of all these things,
O Master Almighty!
<span id="v81"><sup><small>81</small></sup></span> Innumerable armies of angels worship you—archangels, thrones, dominions,
rulers, authorities, powers, eternal armies;
<span id="v82"><sup><small>82</small></sup></span> the cherubim and the six-winged seraphim, with two covering up their feet,
and with two their heads, and with two flying;
<span id="v83"><sup><small>83</small></sup></span> and saying together with thousands on thousands of archangels,
and ten thousand times ten thousand angels,
incessantly and loudly crying out
<span id="v84"><sup><small>84</small></sup></span> —and all the people together, let them say—
“Holy, holy, holy is Lord Sabaoth, the heaven and the earth are full of his glory!
<span id="v85"><sup><small>85</small></sup></span> (He is) blessed forever!” Amen.