---
title: "Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 3"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers/2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 2</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers/4">
          <span class="pr-2">Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 4</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## 3. A Prayer That Meditates upon God's Manifold Creative Power, Which Comes to Sinful Man in Redemption (_AposCon_ 7.34.1—8)

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1 (l)</small></sup></span> Blessed are you, O Lord, King of the ages,
who through Christ made everything,
and through him in the beginning ordered that which was unprepared;
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> who separated waters from waters with a firmament,
and put a lively spirit in these;
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span> who settled the earth (firmly),
and stretched out heaven,
and ordered the exact arrangement of each one of the creatures.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4 (2)</small></sup></span> For by your conception, O Master, order has beamed with joy;
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> while heaven, having been pitched like a vault, is adorned with stars,
for the sake of encouragement (in the midst of) the darkness;
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> while light and sun, for days and (for) fruits, came to birth;
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span> while moon, for changing of seasons, increased and decreased,
and night was named, and day was kindly addressed;
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span> while a firmament was shown forth in the midst of the abysses,
and you said for the waters to be gathered together,
and for the dry land to appear;
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9 (3)</small></sup></span> while the sea itself—how shall we describe it in full?—
which comes raging from (the) oceans,
yet runs back again from (the) sand, being hindered by your command.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span> For you said,
_By it shall her waves be shattered._
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span> While for living creatures, for small and for great,
and for (the) voyaging of ships, you made it.
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12 (4)</small></sup></span> Then earth grew green, engraved with all sorts of flowers,
and with an embroidery of different trees.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span> And (the) all-blazing luminaries are nourishers of these,
keepipg without trespass the long course,
not deviating in any way from your ordinance;
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span> but wherever you may command,
in this (place) they rise and set,
for signs of seasons and years,
alternating for the assistance of mankind.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15 (5)</small></sup></span> Thereafter were prepared races of differing living creatures:
those found on dry land,
those living in water,
those traversing the air,
(and) amphibians.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span> And by the skilled Wisdom of your forethought
is given to each one the appropriate providence.
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span> For just as she was not exhausted in bringing forth differing races,
neither has she neglected to make for each one a different providence.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18 (6)</small></sup></span> And the goal of the creative work—
the rational living creature, the world citizen—
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span> having given order by your Wisdom, you created, saying,
_Let us make man according to our image and likeness;_
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span> having declarzd him a (micro-)cosm of the cosmos,
having formed for him the body out of the four elements;
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span> and having prepared for him the soul out of non-being,
and having given to him fivefold perception,
and having placed over the perceptions a mind, the holder of the reins of the Soul.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22 (7)</small></sup></span> And in addition to all these things, O Master, Lord,
who can worthily describe the movement of rain-producing clouds,
the flashing forth of lightning, the clashing of thunders;
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span> for the supplying of appropriate nourishment,
and the blending of complex atmospheres?
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24 (8)</small></sup></span> But when man was disobedient,
You took away his deserved life.
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span> You did not make it disappear absolutely, but for a time,
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span> having put (him) to sleep for a little (while),
by an oath you have called (him forth) to new birth.
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span> You have loosed the boundary of death,
You who are the Maker of life for the dead, through Jesus Christ, our hope!