---
title: "Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 4"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers/3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 3</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers/5">
          <span class="pr-2">Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 5</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## 4. A Prayer That Joins with All Nature in Praising the One and Only Great and Merciful God (_AposCon_ 7.35.1—10)

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1 (1)</small></sup></span> Great are you, O Lord, Almighty One, and great is your strength,
and of your understanding there is no numbering!
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> O Creator, Savior, Rich One in favors,
Long-sufferer, and Supplier of mercy,
_Who do_ not withdraw from the salvation of your creatures!
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span> For by nature you are good;
yet you spare those who are sinning, summoning them to repentance,
for your waming is merciful!
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span> For how should we have withstood,
having swift judgment demanded of us?
We who, when being treated patiently, with difficulty refuse our weakness?
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5 (2)</small></sup></span> The heavens proclaimed your might;
and earth, (though) being shaken, (proclaimed) your firmness,
being hung upon nothing!
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> (The) sea, surging with waves,
and shepherding a herd of countless living creatures,
has been shackled with sand,
has shuddered at your Will,
and compels all to cry out:
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span> _How magnified are your works, O Lord!_
_You made everything with Wisdom;_
_the earth wasfilled with your creating!_
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8 (3)</small></sup></span> And an army of angels breaking forth,
and intellectual spirits say to Phelmuni,
_There is one Holy One!_
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span> And holy seraphim, together with the six-winged cherubim, singing to you the triumphal song, with never-silent voices cry out,
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span> _Holy, holy, holy, Lord Sabaoth,_
_the heaven and the earth are full of your glory!_
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span> And the Other throngs of the hosts, archangels, thrones, dominions, sovereignties,
authorities, powers, crying out, say,
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span> Blessed be the glory of the Lord from its place!
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13 (4)</small></sup></span> But Israel, your earthly assembly out of (the) gentiles,
competing with the heavenly powers by night and by day,
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span> with heart filled to the brim and with a Willing spirit sings,
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span> _The chariot of God is ten thousands multiplied by thousands of thriving ones;_
_the Lord is among them in Sinai, in the holy place!_
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16 (5)</small></sup></span> Heaven knows the one who raised it as a vault upon nothing,
like a stone cube,
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span> and united earth and water with each Other,
and poured out air for keeping animals,
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span> and plaited together with this fired for warmth and encouragement in darkness.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span> The chorus of stars amazes,
pointing out the one who numbered (them),
and showing the one who named (them).
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span> Living creatures (point to) the one who gave (them) life;
trees (point to) the one who produced (them);
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span> as all things, having been made by your word, suggest the might of your power.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22 (6)</small></sup></span> Wherefore also all men ought, from their very breasts,
to send up to you through Christ the hymn on behalf of all,
by reason of you who hold power over all things.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23 (7)</small></sup></span> For you are the Kind One in good deeds,
and One fond of giving with compassions,
the only All-Mighty one!
For when you desire, to be able is present with you
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span> For your eternal power even cools flames,
and muzzles lions, and tames sea monsters,
and raises those who are sick, and overtums powers,
and overthrows an army of enemies and a people numbered for its arrogance.
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25 (8)</small></sup></span> You are the one in heaven, the one upon earth,
the one in the sea,
the one in the farthest boundaries, bounded by nothing.
For of your greatness there is no boundary.
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span> For this oracle is not ours, Master, but your servant•s, saying,
_And you Shall know in your heart that your God is (the) Lord,_
_God in heaven above, and upon earth beneath,_
_and there is no other beside him!_
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27 (9)</small></sup></span> For there is no god beside you alone, there is no Holy one beside you;
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span> Lord God of knowledge,
God of holy ones,
Holy one above all holy ones.
For those who have been made holy are under your hands.
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span> (You are) honored and exalted exceedingly:
invisible by nature,
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span> unsearchable in judgments,
whose life is in want of nothing.
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span> Unchangeable and unceasing is (your) continuance.
Untiring is (your) activity.
<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span> Unlimited is (your) greatness.
Unfailing is (your) beauty.
<span id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span> Unapproachable is (your) dwelling-place.
Unremovable is (your) resting-place.
<span id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span> Without beginning is (your) knowledge.
Unchangeable is (your) truth.
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span> Unmediated is (your) work.
Unplotted against is (your) strength.
<span id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span> Without successor is (your) monarchy.
Unending is (your) kingdom.
<span id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup></span> Without adversary is (your) might.
Great in number is (your) army.
<span id="v38"><sup><small>38 (10)</small></sup></span> For you are the Father of Wisdom,
the Creator, as cause, of the creative workmanship through a Mediator;
<span id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span> the Supplier of foresight;
the Giver of laws;
the Fulfiller of needs;
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span> the Punisher of the ungodly,
and the Rewarder of the righteous;
<span id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup></span> the God and Father of the Christ
and the Lord of those who are pious toward him;
<span id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup></span> whose promise is not deceptive,
(whose) judgment is without bribery,
<span id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup></span> (whose) knowledge is never faithless,
(whose) religion is never-ending,
<span id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup></span> (whose) thanksgiving is everlasting;
through whom also the worship wofihy of you is owed by every reasonable and holy nature!