---
title: "Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 5"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers/4">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 4</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers/6">
          <span class="pr-2">Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 6</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## 5. A Prayer Praising God for His Redemptive Deeds for Israel, Old and New, and for the Institution of Days Set Apart for Worship (_AposCon_ 7.36.1—7)

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1 (1)</small></sup></span> O Lord, Almighty One,
you created (the) cosmos through Christ,a
and marked out a sabbath day for a remembrance of this;
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> because on it you rested from the works (of creation),
in order to give attention to your own laws.
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span> And you appointed festivals for (the) gladdening of our souls,
so that we may come into remembrance of the Wisdom created by you:
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> how for us he submitted to birth2 that (birth) through a woman;
(how) he appeared in (this) life, having demonstrated himself in (his) baptism;
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> how he who appeared is God and man;
(how) he suffered for us with your consent,
and (how) he died and arose by your strength.
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span> Therefore, celebrating the resurrection festival on the Lord's day,
we rejoice over the one who indeed conquered death.
having brought to light life and immortality.
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span> For by him you brought the gentiles to yourself, for a treasured people, the true Israel the friend of God who sees God.
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9 (3)</small></sup></span> For you, O Lord, have led out from (the) land of Egypt even our fathers;
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span> and you have rescued (them) out of an iron furnace,
and out of Clay and making of bricks.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span> You redeemed (them) out of Pharaoh's hand, and (the hand) of those under him.
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span> And you led them through (the) sea as through dry land,
and you bore with their manners in the wildemess with manifold goodnesses.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13 (4)</small></sup></span> You gave to them a Law, ten oracles uttered by your voice,
and engraved by your hand.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span> You commanded (them) to keep sabbath, not giving an excuse for laziness,
but rather an opportunity for reverence (toward God),
for knowledge of your power,
for hindrance of evil;
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span> as if having confined (them) in a holy circumference,
for the sake of teaching,
for the exultant joy of the number seven.f
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span> Because of this (you appointed) one seven, and seven sevens, and a seventh month, and a seventh year;
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span> and with this a year for forgiveness, each fifty-year cycle,
<span id="v17b"><sup><small>(5)</small></sup></span> So that men might have no excuse to pretend ignorance.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span> For this reason every sabbath you permitted (them) not to work,
so that no one would desire to let drop from his mouth a word (spoken) in anger on the day of the sabbath.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span> For (the) sabbath is a rest from creation,
a completion of (the) cosmos,
a seeking out of laws,
thankful praise to God on behalf of those things which he has freely given to men.
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20 (6)</small></sup></span> All of which the Lord's day surpasses, showing forth:
the Mediator himself, the Supervisor,
the Lawgiver, the cause of resurrection,
the firstbom of all creation the divine Word;
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span> and Man, the one born of Mary alone, without a husband:
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span> who lived holily as a citizen,
who was crucified under Pontius Pilate
and having died, is also (the one) having arisen from (the) dead.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span> As the Lord's day, it advises (us) to Offer to you, O Master,
thanksgiving on behalf of everything.
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span> For this is the grace which has been fumished by you.
which by (its) magnitude covered over every (other) good deed!