---
title: "Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 7"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers/6">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 6</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Hellenistic_Synagogal_Prayers/8">
          <span class="pr-2">Hellenistic Synagogal Prayers — Prayer 8</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## 7. A Prayer of Thanksgiving to God for His Continuing Acts of Redemption in the Past, and Now in Christ; and for His Manifold Gifts to Man, the Rational Animal (_AposCon_ 7.38.1—8)

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1 (1)</small></sup></span> We give thanks to you for all things, O Master Almighty,
because you have not forsaken us with your mercies and your compassions;
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> but generation after generation you save, rescue, lay hold of, (and) shelter.
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3 (2)</small></sup></span> For you laid hold of (people) in the days of Enos and Enoch,
in the days of Moses and Joshua,
in the days of the Judges,
in the days of Samuel and Elijah and of the Prophets.
in the days of David and of the Kings,
in the days of Esther and Mordecai,
in the days of Judith,
in the days of Judah Maccabeus, and of his brothers.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4 (3)</small></sup></span> And in our days you laid hold of us through your great High Priest, Jesus Christ your Child.
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> For even from the sword he rescued,
and from famine he delivered, having maintained (us);
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> from disease he healed,
(and) from an evil tongue he sheltered (us).
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span> For all things we give thanks to you through Christ,
(to you) who even have given (us) an articulate voice for confession (of gratitude),
and have undergirded (it with) a harmonious tongue,
in the manner of a plectrum,
like a musical instrument;
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span> and a useful (sense of) taste,
and a corresponding sense of touch,
and vision for sight,
and hearing for sound,
and a sense of smelling for vapors,
and hands for work,
and feet for travel.
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9 (5)</small></sup></span> And all these things you have formed out of a little drop in a womb,
and after the shaping, you freely give immortal life
and you bring forward into light the rational animal, the man
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span> With laws, you have taught (him);
with just ordinances, you have cleansed (him);
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span> bringing on dissolution for a little while,
You have promised the resurrection!
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12 (6)</small></sup></span> Therefore indeed, what manner of life is fully able,
and how great length of ages Will be sufficient for men for thanksgiving?
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span> To do so worthily would be impossible,
but (to do so) according to (our) ability is holy.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span> For you have rescued (us) from the ungodliness of many gods,
(7) and you have delivered (us) from the heresy of the Christ-murderers;
You have set (us) free from the ignorance that has gone astray.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span> You have sent forth the Christ to men as a man, being uniquely born God;
you have caused the Paraclete to live in us;
you have set up angels (over us);
you have dishonored the devil.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span> Not being, you have made (us); having become, you watch over (us).
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span> You measure out life;
you supply nourishment;
you have promised repentance.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18 (8)</small></sup></span> On behalf of all things, to you (be) the glory and the reverential awe,
through Jesus Christ, now and always, and into the ages. Amen.