---
title: "Book on the Savior's Childhood (Arundel Code"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

## THE BIRTH 

<span id="v62"><sup><small>62</small></sup></span>  And Joseph went forward towards the city, leaving María in the company of her son Simón, since she walked slowly due to her pregnancy. She entered Bethlehem, her homeland; and, already in the middle of the city, he said: «There is nothing (as) just as that one loves his (native) city, since it constitutes the rest of every man, and that each one rests in his own tribe. I see you again after a long time, oh Bethlehem, good house of David, king and prophet of God. 

<span id="v63"><sup><small>63</small></sup></span>  And as he walked around, he saw a solitary stable and said, “This is the place where I will stay, for “It seems to be a shelter for walkers and I don't have an inn or inn here where we can rest.” And, taking a look at it, he said: “Certainly the place is small, but on purpose for poor people (like us), since it is far from the shouting of the crowd, so that it cannot harm a woman in the process of giving birth.” . So, this is the place where I must rest with all my people. 

<span id="v64"><sup><small>64</small></sup></span>  And as he said this, he went outside, looked at the road, and behold, Mary was already approaching in company. of Simon. After they had arrived, Joseph said, “Simeon, my son, how is it that you have taken so long?” He responded: «If it were not for me, my lord and father, Mary would have taken (even longer), because, pregnant as she is, she made many stops along the way to rest. During her trip I have always been worried about her not being surprised by the moment of her birth (in full swing). And I thank the Almighty because he has given him strength to endure. Well, from what I can suspect and judging from what she says, she is already very close to leaving her. And as he said this, he ordered the donkey to stop and Mary got off the horse. 

<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span>  Then Joseph said to Mary, “My daughter, you have suffered greatly for my sake. So come in now and take care of yourself. You, Simeon, bring water and wash her feet; Also give her food or whatever she needs and please her in everything. Simeon did as her father told him and led her to the cave. When Maria entered, she saw herself flooded by sunlight and lit up as if it were noon.

<span id="v66"><sup><small>66</small></sup></span>  She, for her part, did not stop for a moment, but was continually giving thanks to each other. Simeon said to her father: “Father, what do we think this maiden suffers from, since she is continually talking to herself?” José tells him: “She can't talk to you, because she is tired from the trip. That's why she talks to each other and gives thanks.” And approaching her, he said to her: “Get up, my lady and daughter, go up to the bed and rest.” 

<span id="v67"><sup><small>67</small></sup></span>  And speaking thus, she came out of her. A little later Simeon followed her out to say: “Hurry, my lord and father; Come quickly, because Mary ardently demands you. I think she is ready to give birth. Joseph said to her: “I will not leave her side; But you, as a young man that you are, go quickly, enter the city and look for a midwife to come to the maiden; “Well, a midwife is of great help to the woman who is about to give birth.” Simeon responded, saying, “How can I find a midwife, since I am unknown in this city? Listen to me rather, my lord and father: I know perfectly well and I am sure that the Lord cares about her and that He will provide her with a midwife, a nurse and everything that she needs. 

<span id="v68"><sup><small>68</small></sup></span>  And just then, here comes a girl with the stool that she used to assist women in labor. She this she stood up. When they saw her, they were filled with admiration and Joseph said to her: “Daughter, where are you going with that stool?” The girl responded in these terms: «My teacher sent me here, because a young man went looking for her in a hurry, saying: Come with all speed to collect a new birth, because a maiden is about to give birth for the first time. When my teacher heard this, she sent me ahead. She comes after her. José took a look and, seeing her coming from her, went to meet her and exchanged a greeting with her. The midwife said to him: “Where are you going, good man?” To which Joseph replied: 4 I am going in search of a Hebrew midwife. The woman said to him, “Are you from Israel?” Joseph answers: “Yes, I am from Israel.” The midwife continues: “Who is the maiden who is ready to give birth in the cave?” Joseph answered: “It is Mary, my wife, who was educated in the temple of the Lord.” The midwife said to him: “Is she not your wife?” Joseph replied: “It is true that she is espoused to me, but she has conceived by virtue of the Holy Spirit.” She says to him: “Is what you say true?” Joseph says to him: “Come and see.”

<span id="v69"><sup><small>69</small></sup></span>  Finally they entered the cave. And Joseph said to him, “Go and assist Mary.” She felt overcome with fear when she wanted to go inside, before the great light that shone there and that did not disappear day or night while Mary was there. So Joseph said to her: “Look, I have brought you to the midwife Zaquel. She is outside, at the entrance of the cave, and she does not dare to come here because of the excessive glare; and (in addition) this is impossible for him. Mary smiled when she heard this and Joseph told her: “Don't smile. Be rather cautious, because he has come to see if you need any medicine. And with this he ushered her in. This she stood before the presence of Mary. After she consented to be examined for (a few) hours, the midwife exclaimed and said in a loud voice: “Mercy, Lord and great God, for it has never been heard, nor seen, nor could it be suspected ( human) that breasts are swollen with milk and that at the same time a newborn child is denouncing his mother's virginity.” “A virgin conceived, a virgin gave birth and she continues to be a virgin.” 


<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span>  Given the midwife's delay, José entered the cave. He then came to meet him and they both went out, finding Simeon standing. He asked her: “Lady, what becomes of the maiden? Can she have any hope of life?” The midwife says to him: «What are you saying, man? Sit down and I will tell you a wonderful thing. And raising her eyes to heaven, the midwife said in a clear voice: “Omnipotent Father, what is the reason why it has been my lot to witness such a miracle, which fills me with astonishment? What have I done to be worthy of seeing your holy mysteries, so that you would have your servant come at that precise moment to witness the wonders of your goods? Lord, what do I have to do? How can I narrate what my eyes saw?” Simeon says to him: “Please let me know what you have seen.” The midwife tells her: «This will not be hidden from you, since it is a matter (full) of many goods. So pay attention to my words and retain them in your heart. 

<span id="v71"><sup><small>71</small></sup></span>  «When I had entered to examine the maiden, I found her with her face turned upward, looking at the sky and speaking With Herself. I believe she was in prayer and blessing the Almighty. When I had reached her, therefore, I said to her: “Tell me, daughter, are you not perhaps feeling some discomfort or do you have any pain in your limbs?” But she continued motionless looking at the sky, like a solid rock and as if she heard nothing.

<span id="v72"><sup><small>72</small></sup></span>  «At that moment all things stopped, silent and afraid: the winds stopped blowing; Not a leaf moved on the trees, nor was the sound of the waters heard; The rivers remained motionless and the sea without waves; The springs of water fell silent and the echo of human voices ceased. A great silence reigned (everywhere). Even the pole itself abandoned its vertiginous course from that moment on. The measurements of the hours had almost passed. All things had fallen into silence, frightened and stupefied. “We (were) waiting for the arrival of the high God, the goal of the ages.” 

<span id="v73"><sup><small>73</small></sup></span>  «So when the hour came, the virtue of God was revealed. And the maiden, who was looking intently at the sky, was turned (like) into a vineyard, since she was already overtaking the height of good things. And as soon as the light came out, the maiden worshiped Him whom she acknowledged having illuminated herself. The child was shining brightly, just like the sun. He was very clean and was very pleasing to the eye, since He alone appeared as peace that appeases everything (the universe). At the very hour of birth the voice of many invisible spirits was heard saying with one voice: “Amen.” And that light multiplied and obscured the brilliance of the sun with its brilliance, while this cave was flooded with intense clarity and a very soft aroma. This light was born in the same way that dew descends from heaven to earth. Its aroma is more penetrating than the perfume of all the ointments on earth. 

<span id="v74"><sup><small>74</small></sup></span>  «I, for my part, was filled with astonishment and admiration and fear took hold of me, because I had my gaze fixed on the intense glow emitted by the light that had been born. And this light little by little condensed and took the form of a child, until an infant appeared (such) as men usually are at birth. I then gained courage: I bent down, touched him, lifted him in my hands with great reverence and was filled with horror when I saw that he did not have the weight of a newborn. I examined him and saw that he was not stained in the least, but that his whole body was clear, as happens with the sprinkling of the Most High God; he was light in weight and radiant to look at. And while I was surprised to see that he was not crying, as newborns usually do, and was staring at him, he gave me a very pleasant smile; Then, opening his eyes, he fixed a penetrating gaze on me; and immediately a great light came out of his sight, as if it were lightning.

<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span>  Simeon responded when he heard this: «Blessed are you, O woman, who were worthy to witness and announce this news and holy vision; and blessed am I also for having heard this, (for) although I did not see it, I have believed it. The midwife tells her: “I still have to tell you (another) wonder so that you will be filled with astonishment.” Simeon answered: “Tell me, lady, for I feel joy when I hear these things.” The midwife tells her: "When I took the infant in my hands, I saw that his body was clean, without the stains with which men are usually born, and I thought to myself that perhaps other fetuses had been left in the maiden's womb. Well, it is something that usually happens to women during childbirth; which causes them to be in danger and to lose heart. And immediately I called José and put the child in his arms. I then approached the maiden, touched her, and verified that she was not stained with blood. How will I refer it? what will I say? I don't get it. I don't know how to describe such great clarity of the living God. But you, Lord, are my witness that I have touched her with my hands and that I have found this postpartum maiden a virgin, not only as a result of childbirth, but also... [ .... . .. ] of the sex of a masculine man. At that moment I began to shout with a loud voice, glorified God, fell on my face and worshiped Him. Then I went outside. Joseph, for his part, wrapped the child in swaddling clothes and laid him in the manger. 

<span id="v76"><sup><small>76</small></sup></span>  Simeon said to him, “Has he given you any reward?” The midwife responded: «It is rather I who feel obligated by a debt of mercy, gratitude and prayer. I have made a promise to offer God an immaculate sacrifice for having deigned to grant me the grace of being a spectator and conscious witness of this mystery. For I myself directly offer a gift for the gifts that are offered in the temple of the Lord. And, saying this, he said to his apprentice: “My daughter, take the stool and let's go. Today my old age has been able to see a woman in labor without pain and a virgin who is a mother, if what we have just seen can be called a birth. I believe that she abandoned herself to the will of God, which remains forever. And saying this, he set out with her. 

## ADORATION OF THE MAGICIANS

<span id="v89"><sup><small>89</small></sup></span>  Joseph, seeing the Magi, said: «Who do you think these are who are coming to meet us? I get the feeling that they are getting closer after a long journey. “So I will arise and go out to meet him.” And, coming forward, he said to Simeon: «I think they are soothsayers: for in fact they do not sit still for a moment, they are (always) observing and arguing among themselves. And they also seem like foreigners to me, because their clothing is different from ours: their suit is very loose and dark in color. Finally, they also have caps on their heads and wear sarabaras tied around their legs like... But behold, they stopped and looked at me. Now they continue their march towards us again. When they had therefore arrived at the cave, Joseph said to them: “Who are you? Tell me.” But they tried to enter boldly, since they were actually heading inside. Joseph said to them: “Tell me, for your health, who you are to go to my shelter like this.” They said: “Our guide has entered here in our sight. Why are you asking us? [God] has sent us here. They said to him: “We can assure you that it is the salvation of all.” 

<span id="v90"><sup><small>90</small></sup></span>  «We have seen the star of the king of the Jews in the sky and we have come to worship him, for thus it is written in the ancient books about the sign of this star: that when this star appears, the eternal king will be born and will give the righteous an immortal life. Joseph tells them: “It would be advisable for you to first make inquiries in Jerusalem, because there is the temple of the Lord.” They answered him: "We have already been to Jerusalem and we have announced to the king that the Christ has been born and that we are going in search of him. But he told us: I for my part do not know where he was born. Then he sent word to all the searchers of the scriptures and to all the magicians, chief priests and doctors, who came to his presence. He asked them where the Christ was to be born. They answered: In Bethlehem. For thus it is written about him: And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah, will not be the least among the chiefs of Judah, for from you will come the leader who governs the destinies of my people Israel. As soon as we heard this, we realized it and came to worship him. It is important to know that the star that appeared to us has been preceding us since we began the journey. But Herod, upon hearing these things, became afraid and asked us secretly about the time of the star, when it appeared to us. As we left, he told us: Be informed with all diligence; And when you have found him, let me know so that I too can go and worship him.

<span id="v91"><sup><small>91</small></sup></span>  «And Herod himself gave us the diadem that he used to wear on his head (this diadem has a white miter ), and a ring in which a precious royal stone is set, an incomparable seal that the king of the Persians sent him as a present; and he commanded us to offer this gift to the child. Herod himself promised to make him a present when we were back in his presence. Having received the gifts, we left Jerusalem. But behold, the star, which had appeared to us, went before us from the time we left Jerusalem to this place and then entered this cave where you are and does not allow us to enter. José tells them: «For my part, I am not opposed. Follow it, for God is your guide, and not only yours, but of all those to whom he wanted to manifest his glory. Upon hearing this, the Magi entered and greeted Mary saying: “Hail, full of grace.” Then they approached the manger, examined it, and saw the infant. 

<span id=“v92”><sup><small>92</small></sup></span>  But Joseph said to Simeon: «Son, look and see what these strangers are doing inside, for they do not “It's okay for me to spy on them.” And so he did it. Then he said to his father: “As soon as they entered, they greeted the child and fell on his face to the ground; Then they began to worship him according to the custom of foreigners and (now) each one separately kisses the soles of the infant. What are they doing at this moment? I do not see it well”. José tells him: “Look carefully.” Simeon answered: “They are opening his treasures and offering him gifts.” José says to him: “What are they offering you?” Simeon replied: «I think that what they offer him are those gifts that King Herod sent. (Now) they have just offered him gold, frankincense and myrrh from his chests and have given many gifts to Mary. Joseph said to him: “These gentlemen have done very well in not kissing the child for nothing; the opposite of those our shepherds who came here empty-handed”: And again he tells him: “Look more closely and see what they do.” So Simeon watching, he says: “Behold, they have worshiped the child again and are already coming towards us.”

<span id="v93"><sup><small>93</small></sup></span>  Finally they went out and said to Joseph: «O blessed man! Now you will know who this child is that you are feeding. José tells them: “I suspect that he is my son.” They say to him: “His name is greater than yours, But perhaps the reason you can call yourself his father is that you serve him, not as your son, but as your Lord and your God, and (in that), touching him with your hands, you respect him with great fear and diligence. So don't consider us ignorant. Know that He, whose nourisher you have been appointed, is the God of the gods and the Lord of those who rule, God and King of all princes and powers, God of the angels and the just. He will be the one who will save all peoples by his name, (for his is the majesty and the empire), and the one who will undo the sting of death and dispel the power of hell. Kings will serve him and all the tribes of the earth will worship him; and every tongue will confess him, saying: You are Christ Jesus, our liberator and savior, for You are God, virtue and splendor of the Eternal Father.” 

<span id="v94"><sup><small>94</small></sup></span>  Joseph said to them: «Where did you know what you are telling me?» The Magi say to him: «You possess the ancient writings of the prophets of God in which it is written about the Christ, how his coming into this world is to take place. We also have writings from older scriptures that refer to Him. Regarding your question about the origin of our knowledge, listen to us: We knew it from the sign of a star, (this appeared to us more resplendent than the sun), of whose brilliance no one could ever speak. And this star means that the race of God will reign in the light of day. This did not rotate in the center of the sky, as fixed stars and also planets usually do, which although they observe a fixed period of time...but only this one is not wandering. For it seemed to us that the entire pole (that is, the sky) could not contain it in all its greatness; and not even the sun itself could ever darken it, as it does with the other stars, due to the brilliance of its light. (Moreover), he seemed to weaken at the sight of the radiance of his coming. Well, this star is the word of God, since there are as many words of God as there are stars. And this word of God, (as himself) God, is ineffable. Just as this star is indescribable, it was our traveling companion on the march (that we undertook) to come to Christ. 

<span id="v95"><sup><small>95</small></sup></span>  So Joseph said to them, “You have given me great pleasure with everything you have just told me. I beg you to deign to remain with me today. They said to him: “We beg you to allow us to undertake our journey (return)”, “Well, the king ordered us to return to his side as soon as possible.” But he stopped them.

<span id="v96"><sup><small>96</small></sup></span>  They opened their treasures and gave Mary and Joseph enormous gifts.