---
title: "Urantia, 606 of Satania"
description: "Concerning the inhabited worlds of the Satania System"
published: true
date: 2023-02-14T14:02:03.086Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-02-14T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2012 Israel Dix<br>© 2012 The Urantia Book Fellowship</p>

## Numbering the Stars 

Said Machiventa to Abraham: “_Look now up to the heavens and number the stars if you are able; so numerous shall your seed be._” [[UB 93:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p6_3)] 

In attempting to do just that, to number the stars, you and I will most certainly be taking a journey over some steep, rocky terrain, number-crunching math, and, out of necessity I’m afraid, plenty of interesting _quotes_—lots of them. Because of this I have attempted to keep reference numbers small and out of the way on the trail, so to avoid distraction from the easy flow of this adventure in star searching. Additionally is the added energy boost in knowing that, staying the course, there is at the end of our trek a beautiful picture, a surprisingly organized structure—the Satania system of worlds. So bear with me up this hill we are about to climb. 

We begin with the problem that set me out on this exploration in the first place: Why does Urantia, a decimal world, end on the peculiar number of six, rather than zero which is a multiple of ten? There must be some explanation for this, and it was a minute hunch that there was an answer that led me first to explore this seemingly unimportant information. The small but nagging question kept returning to mind on occasion, “Ought Urantia to end instead on a zero?” One might get the faint sense that there is an answer to this riddle. But do we have an indication of this, or is it simply a wild chase that dead ends in an attempt to number the stars? Let’s consider some apparent contradictions first, in roughly the order I discovered them, as many contradictions in _The Urantia Book_ lend themselves to greater understanding if we pursue them. 

“_On one world in each ten a greater variance in the standard life designs is permitted than on the other (nonexperimental) worlds._” [[UB 36:2.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p2_15)] This exacting sentence concerns “one world in each ten” and is straight and to the point. But a problem arises because, at least on the surface, it stands somewhat at odds with the following: “_But about one world in ten is designated as a decimal planet and assigned to the special registry of the Life Carriers._” [[UB 58:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p0_1)] Although the phrase “_about one world in ten_” indicates that there is some minor variance which can temporarily relieve our shoulders of a decimal world ending on a six, we now have to reconcile these two quotes. Which is it, one planet in each ten or one planet in about ten? 

Marvelously placed along the trail is this clue: “_You know that every tenth world is a decimal or experimental planet, but you know nothing of the other variables that punctuate the processional of the evolutionary spheres._” [[UB 40:5.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/40#p5_18)] It is confirmed for us here that every tenth world is a decimal sphere, but added to this in reconciliation are “_other variables that punctuate the processional_”. Some have mentioned to me that this particular quote does not help us conclude anything about the two divergent decimal statements. I mention it however, because it is the statement that spurred me on in hopes of an answer. Could these processional punctuations allow for exactly “_every ten_” worlds, and also allow for “_about ten_” worlds? Can both simultaneously be facts? Could these “_other variables_” account for a simple difference in wording? We are cautioned here that “_There are differences too numerous to narrate even between the revealed orders of living creatures as between planets of the same group_” [[UB 40:5.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/40#p5_18)] but we are, as we will see, given just enough clues to discover something of these variables. Let us suspect for the moment that this difference in wording is as wide in implication as “of” and “about” are concerning Christ and his teachings. 

We now need to intentionally follow a path to its dead end, not only to remove it from curiosity, but also from possibility. We must remove those objects that might obstruct our clear stargazing view. When we began, Machiventa challenged us to count the spheres. Fair enough. Starting with inhabited sphere number 6, count up every tenth sphere to number 16, to 26, all the way to 96. You should yield ten decimal spheres. Likewise, do this with planets 106 to 196 to yield another ten. So if we simply count from decimal world 6 all the way up to 606, we will encounter sixty-one decimal worlds, world 596 being number 60, and our world, number 606, being the 61st. Sphere 616 would then, naturally, be the last decimal world, which would give us a count of 62 decimal worlds. Is this correct? It is stated that, “_since life was established on Urantia, the Life Carriers have improved this healing technique as it has been introduced on another Satania world_” [[UB 65:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p4_6)] so there can only be one decimal world following our own. 

One might think we have found our journey’s end. After all, “_in all Satania there are only sixty-one worlds similar to Urantia, life-modification planets._” [[UB 58:0](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p0)] This statement is peculiar because of its ambiguity. On first glance it might read “_sixty-one additional worlds similar to Urantia_” which would support our numerical finding above of sixty-two. But we are reminded by the Life Carriers that “_[Urantia] was to be our six hundred and sixth_[^1] _experience with the initiation of the Nebadon life patterns in Satania and our sixtieth opportunity to make changes and institute modifications in the basic and standard life designs._” [[UB 58:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p1_1)] 

We seem to have picked up one too many worlds along the way by simply counting upwards by ten. Since there has only been one additional life modification world since Urantia, simple counting falls short (in actuality goes too far) when we consider that “_on this planet we made our sixtieth attempt to modify and, if possible, improve the Satania adaptation of the Nebadon life designs._” [[UB 65:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p4_1)] The aforementioned ambiguous statement will then be better read as “_only sixty-one total worlds similar to Urantia_” in the system. So we can discount this “_every ten_” method altogether, as it gives us one world too many. It is a dead end that does not lead us to a view of the stars. 

Having encountered a dead end with simple “_counting by tens_”, we can now reach our main attraction along the trail, that clue which will allow us to unravel something of the “_variables that punctuate the processional_” of inhabited worlds. 

In a section perfectly titled “Universe Organization” we find a star map. “_Satania is not a uniform physical system, a single astronomic unit or organization. Its 619 inhabited worlds are located in over five hundred different physical systems. Only five have more than two inhabited worlds, and of these only one has four peopled planets, while there are forty-six having two inhabited worlds._” [[UB 32:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_10)]

## A House of Cards

If simple counting didn’t get us to the top of things, this certainly will.[^2] This is our last guide post. We are nearing the summit of our journey, a vantage point from where we can map the starry Satania landscape. This star map will be the clue we need to harmonize the still-discrepant _each_ ten and about ten. The worlds are literally about to fall into place. It will also help us discover just why a decimal planet ends on a 6, and further, lead us to clues about a nonbreather world “_in close proximity to Urantia,_” [[UB 49:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p3_6)] as well as what “_close proximity_” actually means. But we have some really hard climbing, and _math_, just ahead, so let’s push forward. This quote, this equation above, though oddly worded, tells us that there are not in fact 619 solar systems. Some solar systems harbor more than one planet, and we are given a basic breakdown of this fact. So there are 619 worlds in Satania, of which: 

* 511 are solitary planets in 511 solar systems. (We will label this category __O__) 

* 92 additional planets are in 46 solar systems, two spheres apiece. (We’ll call them __XX__) 

* 12 inhabited planets are in 4 solar systems of 3 worlds each. (We can call these __YYY__) 

* 4 planets are contained in one solar system. (This single group we will label __ZZZZ__) 

At this point, we must take into account “_Creature-kinship serials. Planets are not only organized vertically into systems, constellations, and so on, but the universe administration also provides for horizontal groupings according to type, series, and other relationships._” [[UB 49:5.29](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p5_29)] Let us suppose, hypothetically for now, that each of these four categories of worlds above constitutes creature kinship. All solar systems with planets by their lonesome would be administered as a separate kinship group, while solar systems having two planets apiece would also be organized and administered separately, and so on. These individual kinship groupings would then be “_presided over by long-experienced finaliters._” [[UB 49:5.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p5_22)] (It makes perfect sense to me that these groupings would be considered as creature kinship serials because two inhabited planets in the same solar system would evolve along drastically different courses than solitary worlds. Once these two worlds discover one another within the same solar system, their courses would certainly alter dramatically. The same is true of three or more interacting worlds.) They are likely constituted as creature kinship worlds because there are “_certain points of similarity in a group of worlds,_” and “_physical relationships among those planetary systems which belong to the same physical circuit, and which closely follow each other in the endless swing around the circle of universes._” [[UB 15:6.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_16)] 

Now let’s go one step further and say that in each of these kinship groupings, every tenth world is a decimal planet. That is, every tenth planet in the group of 511 (__O__) worlds is a decimal planet, giving us 51 decimal spheres. Simple enough. Now let’s do the same for the other groupings. Every tenth planet in the group of 92 (__XX__) spheres yields 9 decimal planets, the tenth planet in the group of 12 planets (__YYY__) is a decimal sphere, and the grouping of 4 worlds in one solar system (__ZZZZ__) has no decimal worlds. (Note here that we are now counting every tenth world as a decimal planet.) To move along quickly, simply subtract the last digit from each number (or divide by ten) to discover how many decimal worlds each category has, as follows: 

* 51 out of 511, with one world remaining. 

* 9 out of 92, with two extra planets. 

* 1 of 12, also with two extra spheres trailing the decimal world. 

* 0 of 4 There are no decimal planets here since this category (of four worlds per solar system) hasn’t reached ten worlds yet. 

Added together, (51, 9, and 1) we arrive at exactly 61 decimal worlds, so we are certainly on the right track! This solves for us the problem of 61 decimal worlds out of 619. Numerical counting, as we saw above, revealed a count of 62. Of consequence here, and key to why Urantia ends on a six, are the remaining spheres in each category. I would point out here that in the 511 category (__O__), world 510 is decimal planet 51, and that _there is one planet remaining_. Make special note of the one remaining planet, as these _remainder_ spheres, as I shall henceforth call them, are crucial! 

As stated previously, we will postulate here that these four groupings are in fact kinship serials and are part of what is meant by the “_variables that punctuate the processional of the evolutionary spheres._” Now we are told that “_Satania itself is an unfinished system containing only 619 inhabited worlds. Such planets are numbered serially in accordance with their registration as inhabited worlds_.” [[UB 49:0.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p0_3)] We have just sorted these kinship serials into separate categories, but we cannot forget their serial procession. To count this processional again from one to 619, after having separated and sorted Satania into kinship groupings, we must, like a deck of cards, _shuffle the categories back together_. 

__O^1^ O^2^ O^3^ O^4^ O^5^ O^6^ O^7^ O^8^ O^9^ <u>O</u>^10^ O^11^ O^12^__

The above diagram shows a procession of (O) worlds, one per solar system, and the normal arrival of a decimal planet at number ten (which I have italicized and underlined to make it easier to identify). But look! Something happens when we shuffle the categories together again! 

__O^1^ O^2^ O^3^ O^4^ O^5^ (X^6^ X^7^) O^8^ O^9^ O^10^ O^11^ <u>O</u>^12^__

You’ll notice that by shuffling in category __XX__, both of which are in the same solar system, the decimal world in the first category (__O__) is shifted by two places! Counting all worlds serially, the first (__O__) decimal world becomes planet number 12, while planets X^1^ X^2^ are serially counted as worlds X^6^ and X^7^! Take a breath. Grasp this concept before moving on. 

Before we get into the details of why Urantia ends on a six, and further how this might possibly relate to a nonbreather planet “_in close proximity_”, we can clear up at least one more puzzle. As shown above, we have discovered concerning decimal worlds that both “every _tenth planet_” and “about _every tenth plane_t” can be factual statements. It is simply a matter of whether one counts _within_ a single creature kinship grouping or counts all kinship serials in the aggregate and according to serial life registry. 

## “606” 

Now, on to why our planet, Urantia of Satania, a decimal world, ends on a six instead of a zero. You will recall the “remainder worlds” as being crucial to this story of displacement. In this system of organization, the only way for our world (or any decimal world) to end on a six, or any number other than a multiple of ten, is for the “remainder worlds” of other and separate categories to push us forward six places. For example: if 12 __XX__ planets, in increments of two, fall somewhere in the middle of 100 __O__ planets, world 112 will be a decimal planet in the __O__ category, as well as planet 10 in the __XX__ category (wherever it happens to fall). 

It is important to recognize that if the __XX__ worlds reach a multiple of ten, a decimal planet of their own, they then shift any decimal (__O__) worlds back to zero, so that only remainder worlds (those worlds beyond a multiple of ten) cause displacement in the aggregate of 619 spheres. This displacement takes place among all worlds. __ZZZZ__, for instance, arriving somewhere in the middle of the procession, displaces all worlds that follow after it, in all categories, and by four spaces. Thus, after these four worlds, all decimal planets in other categories will be seen to end on the number “4”, world 504, 514, 524, etc. 

So we’ve come to the last leg of the hike. If you need to pause to review the journey so far, now would be a good time. There remains one final step to the top. Let’s look at the remainder planets again: 

* __O__ - 510 is a decimal world, and one remainder to displace (by one) any planets that follow it. 

* __XX__ - 90 is a decimal planet, having as a sister sphere world number 89 in the same solar system. We will come back to these two planets in a bit because, well, it’s a surprise! After 90, there are two remainder worlds in this category, worlds 91 and 92, grouped together in the same solar system. 

* __YYY__ - 10 is a decimal planet, and there are two remainder planets that follow it. All three are in the same solar system. 

* __ZZZZ__ - 4 remainder planets are found in the last category, all of which are in the same undoubtedly beautiful solar system teaming with life. It will take two more attempts at 4-world solar systems for the Life Carriers to initiate a decimal planet in such a series of worlds. 

It no longer takes much explanation to say that, because Urantia ends on a six, it must be displaced by six remainder worlds. In fact, it is displaced by a combination of remainder worlds in various categories. You might have noticed that, numerically, and given this theory of organization, there are only a few possible combinations of remainder worlds to derive a multiple of six. From this, we are left with only two or three possibilities for which group of creature kinship serials we belong to. We already know that we do not belong to serial _ZZZZ_, since, in our solar system, “_only three planets are at present suited to harbor life._” [[UB 15:6.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_15)] Let’s look at the possibilities in detail. 

Two combinations[^3] that will shift Urantia by six places are: 

1. All twelve __YYY__ spheres, plus the __ZZZZ__ category, all precede us. This combination leaves us falling within the __XX__ category[^4]. It looks somewhat like this: 

__O^498^O^499^O^500^ (X^89^<u>X</u>^90^ ^(Urantia)^) O^501^O^502^O^503^O^504^O^505^O^506^ (X^91^X^92^) O^507^O^508^O^509^O^510^O^511^__

You will notice that all decimal planets above end on a zero when they are counted within their own categories. I will again place these worlds in order, underlining and italicizing decimal worlds, but count them _serially_, according to life registry in total. 

__O^602^O^603^O^604^X^605^X^606^ ^(Urantia)^ O^607^O^608^O^609^O^610^O^611^O^612^X^613^X^614^O^615^O^616^O^617^<u>O</u>^618^O^619^__ 

In this combination of worlds above we are left with a twin world, a sister sphere in our solar system. From this vantage point we cannot determine all of the locations of planets that went before us, or after, but we can get an approximate picture of the last 15 worlds in the Satania system. I place __XX__ worlds arbitrarily at 613 and 614, but in this combination they could be shifted up or down a bit. Notice that 613 and 614 shift the last decimal planet, __O__ world 510, two positions, serially to world 618. This leaves one remainder world, number 511 in the single world solar systems. 

2. The other possibility is that the final two __X__^91^__X__^92^ worlds plus the entire __ZZZZ__ category precede Urantia. In this case, we must be decimal world ten in the __YYY__ group.5 Worlds __Y__^11^ and __Y__^12^ directly follow Urantia, world __Y__^10^, and therefore do not displace us. Of course, in this scenario, there are two other inhabited planets in our solar system. 

__X^91^X^92^<u>O</u>^500^ (<u>Y</u>^10^ ^(Urantia)^ Y^11^Y^12^ ) O^501^O^502^O^503^O^504^O^505^O^506^O^507^O^508^O^509^<u>O</u>^510^O^511^__

Again we can see that all decimal planets end on a zero when they are counted within their own categories. But counting them serially, decimal sphere numbers are displaced, Urantia landing again in its familiar “place in the universe.”6 

__X^603^X^604^<u>O</u>^605^<u>Y</u>^606^ ^(Urantia)^ Y^607^Y^608^ O^609^O^610^O^611^O^612^O^613^O^614^O^615^O^616^O^617^<u>O</u>^618^O^619^__ 

In possibility number two, we find ourselves among not one but two siblings in our solar system. And _The Urantia Book_ allows for the possibility when it says that “_[i]n your solar system only three planets are at present suited to harbor life._” [[UB 15:6.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_15)] You will note again that the last decimal planet is displaced by two, by a different category of worlds, and again ends as world 618. Again the system ends with one world left over, O world 511, as serial world 619. I placed the last two XX worlds arbitrarily at positions 603 and 604, only for the sake of showing how they, plus __ZZZZ__ somewhere previously, displace Urantia by six. I do not claim to know what their numbers are, though I suspect that successive revelations of God will expand our horizons of the universe around us. I will also point out that, whereas in the first combination world 604 is a decimal planet, in this combination 605, immediately preceding us, is a decimal world. It is ten worlds away (in the __O__ category) from world 618 in both possible circumstances. 

From the vista we now have, we can see the stars much more clearly. From this stargazing viewpoint, there seem to be _only two_ possible answers, two combinations of worlds that displace us by six while maintaining us as a decimal world, with only one decimal planet to follow, and simultaneously obeying all other rules listed above. Urantia, 606 of Satania, decimal world 60 in the aggregate, is either: 

1. Classified as belonging to those solar systems having two planets in them, being world 90 of 92, the 9th decimal planet of group __XX__. We can further postulate the location of those two remainder spheres, worlds __X__^91^ and __X__^92^. They come after Urantia, and displace the last decimal planet by two spaces. Therefore, world 618, not 616 as one might generally assume, is the last decimal planet in the system of Satania, and world 619 is our one odd (__O__) remainder. 

2. Classified as of the _triple-world_ solar systems, there being in the system of Satania currently only four of them, we being the first decimal world of such a category, decimal world 10 of 12. Again world 618, not 616, is a decimal planet, with one remainder. 

Pause here a moment to consider all of this before we continue. It is a huge view to take in from the mountaintop. Let’s look at both combinations side by side: 

1.  __O^602^O^603^<u>O</u>^604^X^605^X^606^ ^(Urantia)^ O^607^O^608^O^609^O^610^O^611^O^612^X^613^X^614^O^615^O^616^O^617^<u>O</u>^618^O^619^__ 

2.  __X^603^X^604^<u>O</u>^605^<u>Y</u>^606^ ^(Urantia)^ Y^607^Y^608^ O^609^O^610^O^611^O^612^O^613^O^614^O^615^O^616^O^617^<u>O</u>^618^O^619^__ 

I will point out, again, that it is not possible to know for certain if world 604 (in the first case) or 605 (in the second case) is a decimal (__O__) world since other categories (perhaps __ZZZZ__) could be shuffled coincidentally right before us. I simply place it in this order for simplicity, and to show the dramatic displacement that this shuffling method of organization causes. The odds are in favor of this arrangement in any case, that __ZZZZ__ is not right in front of us. 

Additionally, it cannot be determined exactly where (__XX__) worlds 613 and 614 are placed (in combination 1). It is only required that they fall somewhere after 606 and before 619. Hypothetically, world 616 could be the last decimal planet if the __X__^91^__X__^92^ group lands on 617 and 618, but the odds, again, are against it. I have placed both worlds arbitrarily at points 613 and 614. 

Three mysteries may have now been solved: 

1. Urantia ends on a six because it is displaced by a processional of other world categories’ worlds. Until this summit was reached, it had been simple assumption on our parts that decimal registry is counted in the same manner as the aggregate—serially according to life registry. The reality is, in total, worlds are numbered according to life registry, yet are numbered decimally according to creature kinship—categorically. This differential method of numbering the worlds is why Urantia, as a decimal planet, ends on a six. 

2. “About every tenth” and “exactly every tenth” concerning decimal worlds are both factual statements. 

3. This is a numerical substantiation in _The Urantia Book_ that there is in fact life elsewhere in our solar system! At the top of the mountain, we are left to speculate the possibilities. 

## Nonbreathers 

We are told that we “_would be more than interested in the planetary conduct of this type of mortal because such a race of [nonbreather] beings inhabits a sphere in close proximity to Urantia._” [[UB 49:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p3_6)] I am constantly encountering Urantia Book readers asking this question of just how close is “_close proximity_”. 

Recall that “_In your solar system only three planets are at present suited to harbor life._” [[UB 15:6.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_15)] All three worlds cannot harbor life if the first organizational structure is correct, or else Urantia belongs to group _YYY_. One planet remains unused for habitation in the first case; all three worlds are inhabited in the second case. For clarification, planets are defined as “_larger aggregations of matter which follow an orbit around a sun or some other space body; they range in size from planetesimals to enormous gaseous, liquid, or solid spheres._” [[UB 15:6.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_9)] Thus, moons can harbor life as well as what we define as a traditional “planet.” We will come back to these nonbreathers after discussing some problems with the wording of that nonbreather statement. I am proposing here that we are of the second category— that we have three inhabitable worlds in our solar system, but that we belong to the _XX_ category, that only two worlds here are inhabited. 

## Ambiguity 

Now the book states that “_[t]he laws of revelation hamper us greatly by their proscription of the impartation of unearned or premature knowledge._” [[UB 101:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/101#p4_1)] Speculative as it is, there is a possible, and definitely interesting, means of circumventing this limitation.[^7] 

There are several statements in _The Urantia Book_ that are so worded as to lend themselves to more than one meaning. Concerning science, this allows for the interpretation of a statement both previous to, and after the fact of, a given scientific discovery. In other words, a soon to be discovered fact can be stated, while simultaneously presenting that which is _thought_ to be fact at present. 

As an example, though unrelated to our search for the stars, consider the moon and Mercury. At the time of the writing of the Urantia papers, it was readily believed in the scientific community that Mercury, like the moon, always faced the same side toward the sun, like the moon does with Earth. Because of better data, we know that to be false today— that its rotation has been slowed down to that point where its day and its year are nearly identical, having an oscillatory year/day ratio. The sun’s gravitational pull will eventually bring it into a more stable situation like the moon. But the statement can be read in two ways: 

> Such gravitational influences also contribute to the stabilization of planetary orbits while acting as a brake on the rate of planetary-axial revolution, causing a planet to revolve ever slower until axial revolution ceases, leaving one hemisphere of the planet always turned toward the sun or larger body, as is illustrated by the planet Mercury and by the moon, which always turns the same face toward Urantia. [[UB 57:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p6_2)] 

Previous to better facts, the quote was able to be read according to our inaccurate science, that it always faced the same side to the sun, just like the moon. But “_as is illustrated by the planet Mercury_” is also an example of, and can be interpreted as, “_acting as a brake on the rate of planetary-axial revolution, causing a planet to revolve ever slower_”. The ambiguity is caused by the lack of a comma after “Mercury,” with the addition of a comma after “moon” which, while neither is necessary, would create more clarity. 

I am of the opinion that such statements as this one are psychologically interpreted differently, leaning to one interpretation or the other, depending upon whether the reader encounters the statement before or after the scientific discovery is made. Such a theory is not unfounded, given the tendency of human beings to think from the perspective of their own times. Thus, in an attempt to abide by, while simultaneously circumvent its revelatory mandate, the revelators might purposely have made such a dubious statement. 

But we come back to our topic of numbering the stars. Another example of the limitation placed upon the revelators as to how much can be said previous to an important discovery is encountered in the following: “_You would be more than interested in the planetary conduct of this type of mortal because such a race of [nonbreather] beings inhabits a sphere in close proximity to Urantia_”. [[UB 49:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p3_6)] This is not a statement of ambiguity, but one of vagueness. I bring it up first to point out that this is likely a sister world, an inhabited planet within our solar system. The numerical juggling we’ve been doing above has given us the possibility of reinterpreting just what close proximity actually means. It is vague concerning distance, because it is a statement made previous to the discovery of alien life in our solar system. And second, I mention it to introduce one other statement, one which has an ambiguous quality (exactly like the Moon-Mercury statement) that lends more credence to other inhabited spheres in Monmatia, our solar system. This particular statement is rarely read to indicate life elsewhere in the solar system, but, having discovered the above numerical circumstances, it suddenly came to mind, for me anyway, as having a dual, ambiguous meaning. And that reinterpretation itself gave rise to the above mentioned temporal bias in the interpretation of ambiguity. Let’s have a look: 

“_But as this era opens, Urantia is in every way evolving toward a state favorable for the support of the initial forms of marine life. Slowly but surely physical developments on earth and in adjacent space regions are preparing the stage for the later attempts to establish such life forms as we had decided would be best adapted to the unfolding physical environment— both terrestrial and spatial._” [[UB 58:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p1_5)] One might commonly read “_adjacent space regions_” as meaning adjacent to Urantia, or just outside our atmosphere, and that conditions in space were ripe for Urantia life. And this would not be amiss since it is clarified later that “_These energy conditions of space are germane to the essential environment of life establishment, but they are not effective in the subsequent modification of the inheritance factors of the germ plasm as are some of the longer rays of radiant energy._” [[UB 58:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p3_4)] 

A factor that is misleading in its interpretation is the context in which the statement is placed. The statement previous to it is concerned with “_initial forms of marine life_” which naturally focuses ones attention on the oceans of Urantia. 

What is ambiguous about it is the fact that “_earth and adjacent space regions_” is enough to convey that life is being initiated solely on Urantia. That is all that is needed, but for some interesting reason the words “_both terrestrial and spatial_” is added. This statement can refer directly back to “_adjacent space regions_” around Urantia. But it can also be referring to a planned implantation of life “in close proximity” to Urantia. Test the statement for yourself, by reading it several times, removing one or the other clause. Also, read it with both clauses, and without both clauses. Then read it with “_both terrestrial and spatial_” as referring once to “on earth and adjacent space regions” and once to “_such life forms as we had decided would be best adapted to the unfolding physical environment._” It was the discovery of the organization of the Satania system as stated above that caused me to later read that statement in its second meaning. And this led me to the conclusion of pre- and post-interpretive ambiguity as a possibility of circumventing revelatory limitations.[^8] 

So we now find ourselves with a statement that speaks both of regions in space that concern life implantation on Urantia, and also a statement concerning both life implantation on Urantia and elsewhere in our space region. “_Both terrestrial and spatial” can refer then to “such life forms_”. As it concerns such a monumental scientific discovery, a limitation was placed on what could be said, which constrained it to cater to the era of pre-discovery of otherworldly life. 

I would point out our first ambiguous quote concerning sixty-one decimal worlds vs. sixty-two. In addition, we have the oddly worded “star map” of how many worlds were contained within each solar system, which prevents the significance of universe organization from becoming immediately apparent. This, in combination with the Moon-Mercury ambiguity, the ambiguity of “_adjacent space regions,_” and the initial contradiction of “_one in each ten_” and “_one in about ten_,” caught my eye and led me to this entire theory of Satania’s organization, as well as the possibility of revelatory wording as the cause for such ambiguous statements. There are enough gaps in what is said to prevent instant recognition of this beautiful pattern of the spheres, this “universe organization.”[^9] 

## Options are Good 

Now, having discussed life implantation in “_adjacent space regions_” in “close proximity to Urantia,” as well as numerical-organizational evidence of having a sister nonbreather sphere, we can move on to a fascinating pattern within this organizational vista. The question still remains: Which of the two combinations of worlds do we belong to? Do we have a sister nonbreather world in our solar system, or two worlds, one of which is a nonbreather sphere, the other unknown as to type? 

Consider these two sequential and complimentary statements: 

> Of the electric groupings of mortal life, almost twentythree per cent belong to class number four, the Urantia type of existence. These types are distributed as follows: number 1, one per cent; number 2, two per cent; number 3, five per cent; number 4, twenty-three per cent; number 5, twenty-seven per cent; number 6, twenty-four per cent; number 7, eight per cent; number 8, five per cent; number 9, three per cent; number 10, two per cent—in whole percentages. [[UB 49:2.23](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p2_23)]

The first sentence gives a figure of “_almost twenty-three per cent,_” to which Urantia belongs. The second statement however, gives us these same figures “_in whole percentages._” Here we have yet another seemingly contradictory finding, and within the same paragraph no less! Something is going on here. 

With a little bit of thought we can determine that the first percentage is _actual_; it is the current ratio of planets with a class four atmosphere. Every new world that is added to the life registry will again change this actual percentage slightly. The second sentence on the other hand, concerns a projection, a plan, something I have since termed the _Satania Life Template_. It is a projected plan containing all final ratios, relationships, and organizations, as they will be when Satania definitely reaches 1000 worlds, a completed system. The only way for whole percentages to be reached would be to have some final value of proportions. Thus, in the final counting, there will be exactly 23% of 1000 worlds (230 worlds) with a class four electric-reaction in the completed Satania system. 

The importance in pointing this out is that, having a template of this sort, the Life Carriers can find suitable worlds, or combinations of worlds, upon which to bestow life. And it shouldn’t be so hard to do if we consider the vast number of worlds and solar systems they have, and will have, from which to choose. In the system of Satania, and as of the year 1934, “_There are thirty-six uninhabited planets nearing the life-endowment stage, and several are now being made ready for the Life Carriers. There are nearly two hundred spheres which are evolving so as to be ready for life implantation within the next few million years._” [[UB 49:0.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p0_3)] In such a fruitful universe, it is easy to conceive that four inhabitable planets and other combinations could regularly, at least in the later and more stable half of the system, be found in which to prosecute their plans for living beings. 

I will remind you that we are still exploring the vista, that question of which combination of worlds we belong to, option one or two. This template for life establishment implies an interesting possibility. If we are to extend these worlds to the finished Satania Life Template, we will discover that there is only one possible combination of worlds that reaches one thousand worlds, organized according to four separate creature kinship serials, as whole percentages. I propose the following for the finished Satania system of 1000 worlds: 

1. Creature kinship serial one (__O__ worlds, containing only one inhabited planet per solar system), will consist of 800 worlds. This will yield 80 decimal worlds. 

2. Creature kinship group number two (__XX__ worlds, containing two planets of mortal life per solar system), will consist of 150 worlds. This will yield 15 decimal planets. 

3. Creature kinship three (consisting of worlds __YYY__, three planets per solar system), will, in the finished Satania system, amount to 30 worlds, thus containing 3 experimental spheres. 

4. Creature kinship serial four (__ZZZZ__, four inhabited planets per solar system) will consist of 20 worlds. This group of planets will eventually have two decimal worlds. 

The system is just slightly half way complete in the aggregate, as well as among the four categories, diminishing slightly among plural-world solar systems. The template at least gives numerical values that approximate the proportions that prevail now in the unfinished system. Kinship serials three and four are numerically weak in that regard, likely because it requires an aged system to regularly produce so many inhabitable worlds in a single solar system. 

This numerical formula, though tentative, seems the most likely for the finished Satania system. There could just as likely be a finished product of three __ZZZZ__ solar systems instead of five, with the 8 remaining worlds being picked up by various combinations of the other categories, but the reason this particular combination is so appealing however, is that, both in the aggregate, as well as in each category, 10%
of all worlds are experimental. So I will hold to this as the primary grouping of worlds in the Satania Life Template. 

Now you will notice that in the XX category of worlds, having two planets per solar system, there are just 9 decimal worlds out of 92, with an intended total in the finished Satania system as 15. The whole percentage of dual-solar system experimental worlds is one and one half percent. [[UB 49:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p2_7)] 

Curiously “_In all Satania there are only nine such worlds [of nonbreathers]_.” [[UB 49:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p3_1)] Is it coincidental that the number of experimental worlds in the __XX__ serial is the same as the number of nonbreather worlds in all Satania? And that the projected complete system will have in that specific category, 15 worlds, or 1.5%? 

_The Urantia Book_ does not give us a definite percentage for Satania’s intended amount of nonbreather worlds, but it does narrow in on a percentage. I speculate that this, like the ambiguity discussed previously, is an attempt at being vague, so as not to make the surety of this System Template so sealed in stone. It leaves room for speculation and possibilities. We are reminded that “_Such conceptual expansion would hardly be desirable as it would deprive the thinking mortals of the next thousand years of that stimulus to creative speculation which these partially revealed concepts supply. It is best that man not have an overrevelation; it stifles imagination_.” [[UB 30:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p0_2)] 

Though we have no direct percentage for nonbreathers, we are told that “_Of the Orvonton inhabited worlds this type amounts to less than seven per cent. In Nebadon this percentage is less than three. In all Satania there are only nine such worlds._” [[UB 49:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p3_1)] A younger section of space naturally _“still abounds in meteoric space bodies; and worlds without a protective friction atmosphere are subject to incessant bombardment by these wanderers._” [[UB 49:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p3_2)] Orvonton being older than Nebadon, it is much more stable, contains less wandering space bodies, and can therefore have higher levels of nonbreathers. Satania, being younger than Nebadon, would likewise contain fewer possibilities for nonbreather worlds, hence a percentage slightly lower than all of Nebadon. And these decreasing percentages do roughly correspond with the age of universes, as well as their stability. 

Again, are we one of two, or one of three, inhabited planets in the solar system? It is good to speculate, and the circumstances of where we fall in the scheme of things, and given the information we have, there are simply two possibilities. Nothing is definitely revealed about alien life, excepting that there is life elsewhere orbiting the sun. 

Though we cannot be certain, I predict here that every decimal world which occurs in the XX category has as a sister sphere a non-breather world: nine decimal spheres each with a nonbreather world sharing its solar orbit. I also predict that the Satania Life Template has as a projected finished plan of 1½ percent nonbreather worlds. 

Because of this harmony between matching percentiles, I personally exclude a third world of inhabited life in the solar system. 

## Provision for the Future 

“_All inhabited worlds are basically grouped for celestial administration into the local systems, and each of these local systems is limited to about one thousand evolutionary worlds. This limitation is by the decree of the Ancients of Days, and it pertains to actual evolutionary planets whereon mortals of survival status are living. Neither worlds finally settled in light and life nor planets in the prehuman stage of life development are reckoned in this group._” [[UB 49:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p0_2)] Again we see the word “about” 1000 worlds. They are no doubt taking into account worlds long settled in light and life, as well as life not yet of will dignity. 

I suspect that, when the Satania system is completed, a new Life Template will be extended over the current projection of worlds. In that future age, as worlds settle in light and life, the possibility of establishing new forms of life will be permitted. In such a late age, the regions of space will be more settled. They will contain less debris that could harm non-atmospheric worlds. The possibility of increasing the percentage of nonbreather worlds in this future age is likely, and this is supported by the fact that this percentage is in fact higher in older areas of the universe. 

There are several other and substantial facts that cause me to suspect that the Satania Life Template will alter after the achievement of 1000 worlds. We are told concerning planets long settled in light and life that “_all ascenders are destined, before attaining the minor sector, to receive some sort of transient assignment on a planet passing through the earlier stages of evolution._” [[UB 55:3.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p3_11)] If no new planets are produced, such visitations become impossible. The production of more nonbreathers in the system will also provide more son- and spirit-fusion candidates. “_Finaliters acquire a marvelous and far-flung experience of transient service in all seven segments of the grand universe, but they do not ordinarily acquire that intimate knowledge of any one universe which even now characterizes the Spirit-fused veterans of the Nebadon Corps of Completion._” [[UB 40:10.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/40#p10_6)] Such longtime citizens of the local and superuniverses inevitably create a wisdom essential to the achievement of light and life on those respective levels. 

As systems become increasingly established in light and life, the amount of young worlds whereby Adjusters can gain preliminary experience in indwelling mortal minds decreases substantially. With the addition of nonbreather worlds to the Satania Template however, “_Adjusters gain valuable indwelling experience on planets of the loan order._” [[UB 110:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p7_3)] They can thereby gain experience on planets where more, if not all, candidates are of survival status. 

There is a fourth provision for the future. Suppose the third inhabitable world in our solar system is not now inhabited. Suppose that at some future date, Urantia and this nonbreather world, working together, we should be given the opportunity to help in the ministry of a new and younger sister sphere. I believe this is the case, and it is another reason why I believe that only two of three possible worlds are inhabited. The experiential knowledge and training in ministry provided us would be extraordinary! 

## Possibilities to Explore 

The “Satania Life Template” deals with exacting percentiles, and having such a template allows the Life Carriers to group worlds together based on these percentages. I will point out here, briefly, that several other near- and exactpercentages are given in relation to the types of mortals inhabiting the spheres in those sections entitled “Planetary Physical Types,” “Worlds of the Nonbreathers,” and “The Planetary Series of Mortals.” I find myself every now and then attempting to find corresponding percentages in the above shuffling of __O__, __X__, __Y__ and __Z__ categories with these three sections, in hopes that it might lead to further understanding of Satania’s organizational structure. 

Like the hunch that spawned this study, I have a few hunches remaining regarding the system of Satania. I can save these for another article. In the meantime, image #2 shows the completed Satania system. This is the complete system of 1000 worlds, and is a template which the Satania administrators have in mind as a projection. The separate categories are 800 (or 80%) of worlds being solitary inhabited world solar systems, 150 (15%) of worlds are dual solar system worlds, and so forth. The red line indicates the current status of Satania. Notice again that in the two world category, the finished System will have 15 decimal planets (and 15 nonbreather worlds), while within the incomplete system (within the red line), there are just nine decimal worlds and also nine non-breather in _The Urantia Book_, so that this is both the complete and incomplete worlds. I have also included in this chart all other Satania worlds mentioned revealed system. 

In an unfinished system, the percentage is not exact. In a finished system, the ratios are exact because they fulfill the patterns of the template. As I said, there are possibilities to explore in the future. 

The point is, with this Satania Template, and with the numbers given us, I suspect there are solutions. I suspect this because, in the section Planetary Physical Types, [[UB 49:1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p1)] I notice the ambiguity and strange wording, right where it needs to be if someone is attempting to cover up, but not hide, something. The possibilities for these combinations is, however, far greater than are the mere three combinations that can cause Urantia to shift by 6. 

## Reverse Engineering 

What we have done here, this climb to the top of the mountain, is called reverse engineering. Instead of designing a system and breaking it apart into various vague, obscure, and separated quotes, we have taken these various fragmented quotes and utilized them to flesh out some sort of possible picture of the Satania system. _The Urantia Book_ mentions a facet here, another facet there, and these few bits and pieces just happen to be enough to grasp, in part, an organized structure. Satania appears then to be a real object. It has definite dimensions, structures and patterns, and we have been given just enough conclusions to discover something of the “_variables that punctuate the processional of the evolutionary spheres._” [[UB 40:5.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/40#p5_15)] 

It is as if, in describing various other aspects of a reality, that a fleeting glimpse of one aspect of a real structure is portrayed, and that, putting them together again, we can grasp something of what that whole structure might look like. We have reverse engineered Satania from the few images we can grasp from the amazing, albeit highly limited, view from the mountain top. Again, this is a real object being described. Let’s talk about human authorship, and I’ll tell you about somebody inventing this structure, embedding it in a dozen simple yet ambiguous quotes across sections and pages, mentioned only in passing, with only luck that someone might find it. 

But why not just tell us outright? Why tell us through various limited facets in fact? And for that matter, why leave just enough clues to tell us at all? Why was I able to derive these conclusions from the information? 

To answer the last question first, we must realize that _The Urantia Book_ claims to be a revelation designed to enhance our cosmic orientation. In fact, “_Man’s terrestrial orientation, his cosmic insight, and his spiritual directionization are all enhanced by a better comprehension of universe realities and their techniques of interassociation, integration, and unification._” [[UB 106:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p0_1)] “_The real purpose of all universe education is to effect the better co-ordination of the isolated child of the worlds with the larger realities of his expanding experience._” [[UB 2:7.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/2#p7_12)] Considering that “_in more recent times a divisional headquarters of the archangels has been maintained on Urantia,_” and “_that many ascendant activities of the Brilliant Evening Stars are directed from the capital of a local system, Satania,_” [[UB 37:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p3_3)] it appears that Urantia, the bestowal world of Christ Michael, is destined to take on more responsibilities of universe affairs. And the revelators speculate concerning worlds whereon the Sons of God have bestowed themselves, “_that on such worlds practically all Adjusters indwelling intelligent men and women of survival capacity belong to the advanced or to the supreme type._” [[UB 109:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p3_6)] 

Incredibly, it is only in the era of the Trinity Teacher Sons that “_The revelation of truth is now extended to the central universe and to Paradise._” [[UB 52:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/52#p7_3)] Yet we, on this unenlightened and backward world still tainted with the consequences of sin and rebellion, are given such revelation of Havona and Paradise. The fact that within the pages of _The Urantia Book_, a numerical formula for understanding the worlds of Satania exists, is significant to our (Urantia’s) future responsibility, “_locally known as ‘the world of the cross.’_” [[UB 20:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p6_6)] It should be noted, present differential “_the civilization of Urantia is the joint product of the Urantia mortals and the Urantia midwayers, and this is true despite the present differential between the two levels of culture, a differential which will not be compensated prior to the ages of light and life._” [[UB 77:9.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/77#p9_8)] It seems conclusive that a knowledge of the Satania system allows for a better cosmic orientation, as well as the future possibility of open participation with that system. This knowledge is intended then to begin bridging the differential gap between our world and our system of worlds. _The Urantia Book_ is a real attempt at the harmonization of these divergent and differential cultures. 

As our world matures, the transfer of experiential sovereignty from top to bottom is certain to occur. We are told that the “_mind which can effect a partial abridgment of time and space, by this very act proves itself possessed of the seeds of wisdom which can effectively serve in lieu of the transcended barrier of restraint._” [[UB 118:8.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/118#p8_8)] We are given some glimpse of Satania’s organization because we are simultaneously given those revelatory statements that foster the morality- and responsibility-restraints that can handle such a liberation of concept. 

And this brings us to why the revelators didn’t simply tell us directly of this organized structure. Something of it has to do with this knowledge and experiential participation being earned. We have to explore, study, and experientially attain these levels of understanding in universe participation. We have not, as yet, discovered life on any other planet in our solar system. By finding this structure, rather than it being stated outright, it is therefore speculative, tentative. It is based on my authority, rather than that of _The Urantia Book_. This to me is brilliant. They couldn’t reveal it. They made it possible to find. 

At the time of this publication, mankind is increasing its efforts at probing the worlds and moons of our solar system, especially of late, Saturn’s moons. We have even begun a rapid discovery and advance in finding worlds around other stars.10 Having discovered these facets of Satania’s organization in _The Urantia Book_, this author is simply waiting for that hour of discovery, fully confident that it will sometime come. I have no doubt that there are nonbreathers somewhere in our solar system. I am fairly certain we are world 90 of 92 in the dual solar system category of worlds, and that world 89 is a nonbreather world that shares our sun. Some in the Urantia community have an eye to Ganymede, moon of Jupiter, for our sister sphere, while others are eyeing Callisto. Still others, especially Arthur C. Clarke fans, are holding out for life on Iapetus. Opinions differ. Maybe they are on a moon of Saturn, though I speculate with a bit of irony for a moon of Uranus. Think of it: Urantians and Uranians! Perhaps they live of a world as yet undetected whose gravity well shepherds the asteroids of the Kuiper belt into nice uniform rotation. 

One further prospect is the moon of Titan, descendants of the Gods. True, this planet has an atmosphere, but I often wonder whether nonbreathers might exist there. It is not required that such beings breathe the atmosphere, and such an atmosphere would provide protection from the swarms of meteoroids that abound in the solar system. Recent photos show, from the moon’s upper atmosphere, numerous chemical lakes at the polar regions. Time will tell. I think Titan is inhabitable, but not inhabited—a third world in waiting for a future age. 

As for Abraham’s ability to count, if his posterity was destined to be as numerous as the stars, as Melchizedek promised, then perhaps our own posterity is destined to be as wisely organized as is the system of Satania. 

> Israel Dix lives with his family in Stockholm, Sweden. He is a student at Stockholm University. 
{.is-info}

## References

- Article obtained from: https://urantia-book.org/archive/newsletters/herald/

## Notes 

[^1]: A note here about New Gateways to Creative Living, by Hornell Hart, Abingdon Cokesbury Press (194 1). According to Matthew Block, News Gateways was used as a source text for Paper 111, specifically the section entitled “The Inner Life” (see Block’s post # 45 080, dated May 23rd, 2003, entitled “606”, in the UBRON.org archive). On page 43 is mentioned “606”, a laboratory chemical used in the treatment of Syphilis. A google.com search of books and articles on “’six hundred and sixth’ experiment” will yield many results for this chemical on the 606th experimental attempt. It is interesting to note that the idea of 606 in connection with an experiment is to be found in a source text of the Jesus papers. It is clear that the idea was derived in some way from these thought patterns, but things deviate from there, as our world is the 60th experiment, not the 606th experiment. We will soon see just how far that deviation extends. Matthew has commented via email that he has not yet found any further sources concerning 606. Perhaps the card tricks of Harry Houdini as a possible source for such complex combinations of numbers? I am doubtful. 

[^2]: An anecdote about the night of my realization. It was late in September, 2002, in Budapest, Hungary, as I was headed for the Old Man’s Pub with several companions whom I met at the hostel I was staying at. While in conversation with one of them, it suddenly occurred to me that the spheres of Satania were organized as described herein. Upon the realization of these possibilities, my excitement was complimented by fireworks which erupted in another part of town, our location as we walked giving us a grand view of the display. Later at the pub, I scrawled down the various numbers of worlds and combinations on a small note pad. It was a slight deviation from the night’s conversation, and so drew attention. Though I insisted what I was writing was boring, they were persistent, and so I told them of a mathematical formula for determining, not alien life in our solar system, but mere… apples and oranges. Upon hearing this they agreed, it was boring, and so I finished jotting down my notes, and went back to the lively conversation. 

[^3]: I must say here that the jury is still out. I cannot be sure I have tried all combinations. I am certain there are only three, two of which I discuss here. I am fairly certain I have found all combinations possible and I believe that of the two discussed in this article, one combination is more likely than the other. 

[^4]: We must belong to the XX category in this case, since, if we belonged to the O category, we would of course have to be a decimal planet. This would either cause two decimal worlds to follow us (breaking rule #6), or, being world 510, we would not have 13 worlds to follow us (breaking rule #5). 

[^5]: This is so because, if __Y__^10^__Y__^11^__Y__^12^ follows Urantia, and since all three worlds are in the same solar system, they would all have to go after Urantia. This creates a number of problems. First, it would leave nine worlds (3x3) in front of us, displacing us by the odd number of nine. Recall that we still have __X__^91^__X__^92^ and __ZZZZ__ before Urantia displacing us by six places. Adding these 9 remainder worlds (with three after us) displaces us by 15 (in reality 5) worlds (breaking rule #3). Additionally, we would then have to be the last decimal planet O, followed only by one other world, number 511 (breaking rule #5). 

[^6]: I quote those words above as an aside, the name “Urantia” itself means ”Place in the universe” or ”Place in the heavens” in Latin. I have Chris Halvorson to thank for this beautiful piece of information. 

[^7]: It has been noted by not a mere few that _The Urantia Book_ is often quite ambiguous in its wording. While I entirely agree with this assessment, I cannot limit this alone to the fact that _The Urantia Book_ draws heavily on other works to give basic overviews of various subjects, for the sake of their coordination. I can also not relegate its often vague writing style to sloppy use of source text, as has been suggested by some critics of the book. There are other possibilities. I have noted that several of these ambiguous statements happen to take place in just those places where 1934 science was inaccurate to the reality of the cosmos. Such ambiguity intriguingly yields interpretations applicable to both pre- and post discovery of actual scientific facts. It is the seeming intentional use of ambiguity that causes me to explore the possibility here. 

[^8]: I must note here the opinion I hold that some ambiguities in _The Urantia Book_ are simply ambiguities. 

[^9]: It should be mentioned here that I only realized after the fact that the ”star map” quote is stated in the section entitled ”universe organization. Once I realized this, I came to understand that the entire system of organization was embedded within the references of over 10 passages across as many papers. I have since found twice as many statements that hinge upon these statements, further supporting this organizational pattern of the Satania system. 

[^10]: When I first wrote this article, that exo-planet exploration hadn’t even begun! 
