---
title: "Historic Timeline of Events in the Urantia Community — 1875 - 1900"
description:
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: The Urantia Book, The Urantia Book—Authorship, The Urantia Book—History, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2 py-1">© 2000 David Kantor<br>© 2000 The Urantia Book Fellowship</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/David_Kantor/Historic_Timeline_in_Revelation#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/David_Kantor/Historic_Timeline_in_Revelation/1901_1925">
          <span class="pr-2">1901 - 1925</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Apocryphal stories exist that the Midwayers had been planning for a revelation on the order of The Urantia Book since the middle ages — the time of the development of the printing press and the Protestant Reformation — and had petitioned the Melchizedeks as early as the fifteenth century for help. Dr. Sadler is reported to have told a number of people that the Midwayers tried a number of different methods with several different groups before developing a working liason with the Sadler/Forum group early in the twentieth century. This is apocryphal only — there are informed sources who view this story as nonsense. 25

## 1875

June 9 — Lena Celestia Kellogg born, Abscota, Michigan to Smith Moses Kellogg, son of John Preston Kellogg. He was a broommaker; resident of Battle Creek, Michigan and later in Omro, Wisconsin, where he dealt in patent medicines.[^1]

June 24 — William Samuel Sadler born, Spencer Indiana, to Samuel Cavins Sadler and Sarah Isabelle (Wilson) Sadler. S. C. Sadler was a graduate of Chicago Conservatory of Music, a teacher, performer and “great Bible salesman” of his day.[^2]

## 1876

October 3 — Birth of Wilfred C. Kellogg, Berkshire, Vermont; born to Rev. Charles Leonidas Sobeski Kellogg. His father was a traveling salesman and later a minister of the Seventh-Day Adventists; resident of Battle Creek, Michigan. He was a soldier in the Civil War serving one year in the First Regiment, Vermont Volunteer Heavy Artillery. He was honorably discharged at the end of the war having served at Cedar Creek and Appomattox, being an eye witness of Sheridan's ride from Winchester to Cedar Creek.[^1] Wilfred's birth certificate lists his father's occupation as “farmer”. His mother was Emma Kellogg, daughter of John Preston Kellogg.

## 1897

June 3 — Birth of Anna Kellogg, Waupum, Wisconsin [^3]

## 1890

January 29 — Birth of Emma Christensen, Gem Township, South Dakota [^2]

## 1893

William S. Sadler meets student nurse Lena Celestia Kellogg, neice of J.H. Kellogg [^4]

## 1897

William S. Sadler marries Lena Celestia Kellogg [^4]

## 1899

William S. Sadler becomes licensed Seventh Day adventist minister.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/David_Kantor/Historic_Timeline_in_Revelation#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/David_Kantor/Historic_Timeline_in_Revelation/1901_1925">
          <span class="pr-2">1901 - 1925</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Notes

[^1]: “The Kelloggs in the New World”

[^2]: Martin Gardner, “Urantia: The Great Cult Mystery”

[^3]: Notes of Ken Raveill

[^4]: Misc. documents and correspondence on file, author's personal notes — additional verification is being sought for some of these items