== About Urantiapedia ==

''Urantiapedia'' is a collaborative website based on [https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/MediaWiki ''MediaWiki''] with the purpose of serving as a unified center for the dissemination of all knowledge related to ''The Urantia Book.''

== About Blue Fields ==

''Blue Fields'' (https://blue-fields.netlify.app/) is a website that has been created to unite and organize readers of ''The Urantia Book'' who wish to participate in intelligent, purposeful projects and altruists all over the world.

== About GitHub ==

The ''Urantiapedia'' project on GitHub (https://github.com/JanHerca/urantiapedia) is a project created to serve as a quick start-up procedure for the ''Urantiapedia''. It contains files in certain formats and software that help automate the creation of initial content.

== Who is this manual for? ==

This manual is intended for users called "GitHub editors", that is, users who meet the following requirements:
* are registered users with an account at [https://blue-fields.netlify.app/ Blue Fields] and at [https://github.com/ GitHub].
* are users who have been authorized as project collaborators by the team that leads the project on the platform [https://blue-fields.netlify.app/ Blue Fields].
* They are users with a minimum knowledge of GitHub management.
* are users with some knowledge of ''The Urantia Book'' in at least one language in which it is published.
* wish to cooperate in a selfless way in the incorporation of information related to ''The Urantia Book'' in the ''Urantiapedia''.

"GitHub publishers" do not need to be registered on the ''Urantiapedia'' website because a "GitHub publisher" will only use their GitHub account to submit the results of their work to the ''Urantiapedia'' project on GitHub. All the necessary work will be carried out only through GitHub, and the website's "administrators" will be in charge of uploading changes to the ''Urantiapedia'' website to check the results of the work.

== Phases of the Urantiapedia project ==

The ''Urantiapedia'' will be created in two phases for each of the languages ​​to be incorporated:
# '''Preparation phase''': in this phase the content creation is done using the ''Urantiapedia'' project on GitHub. In this phase, user creation will be blocked on the ''Urantiapedia'' website and the only users capable of making changes to it will be the "administrator" users. In this phase, users, called "GitHub editors," make changes only to the existing project on GitHub.
# '''Public phase''': the ''Urantiapedia'' page is open to the public, so that any user who wishes to do so and meets certain security requirements, can create their own account and add or modify content from within the web. These users, called "web editors", must comply with certain privacy policies and good practices that will govern the use of the ''Urantiapedia'' website. Along with the "administrators" users, there will be users called "reviewers" who will ensure the correct use of the website and will be able to ban users who do not comply with the rules.

== Work procedure in the preparation phase ==

The process to follow will be as follows:
# The "GitHub editor" creates a ''fork'' (a copy in its own account) of the ''Urantiapedia'' project on GitHub: https://github.com/JanHerca/urantiapedia.
# The "GitHub editor" creates a local copy of the project on your PC. The local copy must be of the latest version of the content of the ''Urantiapedia'' (the master branch).
# The "GitHub editor" makes the changes wanted in the local copy to the files indicated in this manual and as it is explained.
# The "GitHub editor" performs a ''pull request'' uploading its changes to GitHub.
# The ''pull requests'' of the "GitHub editors" are reviewed by the "administrators", who are in charge of doing a ''merge'' with the main branch (master) of all those changes that are correct. Any changes that are not correct will be rejected and the "GitHub editors" will be notified what changes they should correct, usually by email or through notifications on the GitHub platform itself.
# The changes that are correct will be uploaded to the ''Urantiapedia'' website by the "administrators" in order to check and validate that they are correct and so that anyone can see the result.
# The process is repeated as many times as necessary, returning to task 3 until the entire ''Urantiapedia'' has completed its preparation phase.

== Planned content for Urantiapedia ==

For each language, we will seek to have content such as the following:

{| class="wikitable"
| Content || Adding procedure
|-
| ''The Urantia Book'' || One page for each paper
|-
| The Bible || One central page for each book <br> One page for each chapter of each book
|-
| Extra-biblical religious books that appear as direct or indirect references to ''The Urantia Book'' || One central page for each book <br> One page for each chapter of each book
|-
| Scientific and humanities books that have been proven to have been material used by revelators to compose ''The Urantia Book'' || One central page for each book <br> One page for each chapter of each book
|-
| Book Topics || One page for each topic
|-
| Indexes: people, places, chronologies, references... || One page for each index
|-
| Articles, study aids, diagrams, schematics, maps, etc. || One page for each article, help, diagram, etc.
|-
| Images, art, animations, videos... || These are resource files. ''MediaWiki'' has a system to add them. If they are large as long videos, they would only be added as links.
|}

During the preparation phase, an initial version of only three contents of everything planned will be created: ''The Urantia Book'' with Biblical references, ''The Bible'' and the ''Topics'' of the book.

<blockquote>Each ''MediaWiki'' page supports a talk page, just like ''Wikipedia'' does. This discussion page is very useful and could serve as a discussion area for pages that address certain topics. These discussion pages are similar to a forum or message wall where the comments of all users are registered in chronological order and with indentation of answers, so that they allow you to see conversations between different participants.</blockquote>

== Create a copy of the Urantiapedia project on GitHub ==

To make the copy, follow these steps:
* Go to https://github.com
* If you already have an account, click on ''Sign in'' and validate.
* If you don't have an account, create one by clicking ''Sign up''. Enter a username, an email address, and a password. Once you have an account, log into GitHub with it.
* The first time we enter GitHub it will ask us to do a verification through our email account. Once verified, we will appear on the GitHub home page.
* Open the project page ''Urantiapedia'': https://github.com/JanHerca/urantiapedia
* Create a ''fork'' of the project. A ''fork'' is nothing but a copy of an existing project in our account, so that the changes we make to this project do not affect the original project. To do the ''fork'' click on the ''Fork'' button in the upper right corner of the GitHub page.
* In a few seconds a copy of the project ''Urantiapedia'' will be created within your GitHub account. This project is a fresh copy in which you can make the changes you need, without affecting the original project.
* To download a copy of a project there are several ways:
** Download all by clicking on the green menu ''Code'' and then selecting ''Download ZIP''. This creates a compressed file with all the project files. Then you have to unzip the file in any path on your PC to have it installed.
** Use GitHub Desktop software (https://desktop.github.com/). It is more recommended because this software allows us to show us which files we have changed, send our changes to the original project, and see what other participants are changing.

In one way or another, we will finally have a folder with several subfolders with the ''Urantiapedia'' project.

== Organization of the project ''Urantiapedia'' on GitHub ==

The most prominent folders that make up the ''Urantiapedia'' project on Github are these:
* '''.vscode''': configuration files for Visual Studio Code, which is the software with which the ''Urantiapedia Tools'' are being developed. ''Urantiapedia Tools'' is an application created to facilitate the massive loading of pages in ''Urantiapedia'' during the project preparation phase.
* '''app''': source code files in JavaScript with the application  ''Urantiapedia Tools''.
* '''converter''' <code>DEPRECATED</code>: old project in C # and now it has been replaced by the application contained in the app folder.
* '''docs''': project documentation.
* '''input''': main folder containing the input files (inputs) used to generate the pages of the ''Urantiapedia'' for a language. These are the only folders that the "GitHub editors" should modify in the project.
** '''html''': folder with files in HTML format.
*** '''book-xx''': for each translation of ''The Urantia Book'' there should be a folder with the files in HTML format. For example, <code>book-en</code>, <code>book-en</code>, etc.
** '''json''': folder with files in JSON format.
*** '''book-xx''': for each translation of ''The Urantia Book'' there must be a folder with the files in JSON format. For example, <code>book-en</code>, <code>book-en</code>, etc.
*** '''footnotes-book-xx.json''': for each translation of ''The Urantia Book'' there must be a JSON file with footnotes that are references to ''The Bible''.
** '''tex''': folder with the files in LaTeX format.
*** '''bible-xx''': for each translation of ''The Bible'' there must be a folder with the files in LaTeX format, such as <code>bible-es</code>, <code>bible-en</code>, etc.
*** '''book-xx''' <code>DEPRECATED</code>: old folder with ''The Urantia Book'' in LaTeX format that is no longer needed.
** '''txt''': folder with the Paramony and Topic files in TXT format. See the sections TXT Format for Paramony and TXT Format for Topics.
*** '''bible-refs-xx''' <code>DEPRECATED</code>: old folder with references to ''The Bible'' from ''The Urantia Book''. This content is no longer required.
*** '''topic-index-xx''': for each language in which ''The Urantia Book'' is translated there should be a folder with the files of the ''Topic Index'', such as <code>topic-index-en</code>, <code>topic-index-en</code>, etc.)
** '''wiki''': folder with the files in Wikitext format. These files are the output files that will be uploaded to Urantiapedia once generated by the "administrators." GitHub editor users should not edit these files directly, but through the ''Urantiapedia Tools''.
*** '''bible-xx''': one folder per language (<code>bible-es</code>, etc.) with ''The Bible'' in Wikitext format.
*** '''book-xx''': one folder per language (<code>book-es</code>, etc.) with ''The Urantia Book'' in Wikitext format.
*** '''modules''': modules written in Lua, the scripting language with which to create templates for MediaWiki.
*** '''templates''': templates for the '' Urantipedia '', which are fragments in MediaWiki format that can be reused.
*** '''topic-index-xx''': a folder per language (<code>topic-index-es</code>, etc.) with the ''Topic Index'' in Wikitext format.
** '''xml''' <code>DEPRECATED</code>: this folder can be ignored as it is no longer needed.
* '''tests''': some sample files that are tested when developing the application.

This list includes the most important folders. Any other folder can be ignored because it contains material that is no longer being used in the process and will surely be eliminated in the future.

The language codes to be used in the folders must follow the ISO 639-1 standard with two letters for each language. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ISO_639-1_codes

The only folders users "GitHub editors" need to worry about are the following:
* <code>input / html</code>
* <code>input / json</code>
* <code>input / tex</code>
* <code>input / txt</code>

The <code>input / wiki</code> folder is the output folder to be used with the  ''Urantiapedia Tools''. It should never be edited by hand by the "GitHub editors". This is where the results of running the ''Urantiapedia Tools'' against the previous input files will be saved.

It should be borne in mind that there are currently three translations in the Spanish language. All three translations are going to be available on the ''Urantiapedia.'' For that reason there will be these folders:
* <code>book-es</code>, with the so-called European translation, made in 2009;
* <code>book-es-1993</code>, with the first Spanish translation made in 1993;
* <code>book-es-2021</code>, with the new translation made in 2021.

== Workflow ==

For each language to be incorporated into the ''Urantiapedia'' the following input will be used:
* An official translation of ''The Urantia Book'', or the original for English, in HTML format. This content will be left in the <code>input/html/book-xx</code> folder of the project on GitHub, where <code>xx</code> is the two-letter code for the language (<code>es</code> = Spanish, <code>en</code> = English, etc.). In the case of the Spanish language, since there are several translations, <code>book-es</code> will contain the so-called European edition, <code>book-es-1993</code> the 1993 translation, and <code>book-en-2021</code> the translation of 2021.
* A copyright-free translation of ''The Bible'' that is as standard as possible in the language in question. The format will be LaTeX and the files will be left in the <code>input/tex/bible-xx</code> folder of the project on GitHub, where <code>xx</code> is the language code.
* A copy of the English language file of the cross references between ''The Bible'' and ''The Urantia Book''. This file is found in <code>input/json/footnotes-book-en.json</code> and contains the cross-reference list developed by Duane L. Faw, in English, which we will refer to from here as the ''Paramony''. This Paramony has been converted from its original TXT format to a JSON format that is easier to process. The copy must be renamed by modifying the last two letters by those of the language code. For example, for French, create a copy of the file in English and call that copy as <code>input/json/footnotes-book-fr.json</code>.
* A copy of the ''Topic Index'' in English. This index is made up of a collection of files found in the <code>input/txt/topic-index-en</code> folder. These TXT files are obtained from an appendix to an edition of ''The Urantia Book'' of the ''Urantia Fellowship'', which we will refer to hereinafter as the ''Fellowship Index'' or ''Topic Index''. This ''Topic Index'' has been converted to a group of TXT files, one for each letter of the alphabet, with the topics beginning with each letter in English. The copy must be renamed by modifying the last two letters by those of the language code. For example, for French, create a copy of the English folder and call that copy <code>input/txt/topic-index-fr</code>.

In summary, for the French language example, the content to create as input would be:

<pre>
input
    html
        book-fr
            * .html
    json
        footnotes-book-fr.json
    tex
        bible-fr
            * .tex
    txt
        topic-index-fr
            * .txt
</pre>

For any other language it would be done in a similar way. Some of this content may already be available in the current project on GitHub. It is convenient to review what exists before incorporating new content.

Once we have the input in the correct folders, the steps to take are:
# Translation of ''Paramony'' from English to the target language.
# Translation and revision of the ''Topic Index'' from English to the target language.
# Obtaining a translation of the Bible in the target language.
# Converting ''The Urantia Book'' from HTML to JSON without footnotes.
# Adding footnotes to ''The Urantia Book'' in JSON.
# Conversion of the ''Topic Index'' from TXT to Wikitext.
# Conversion of ''The Urantia Book'' from JSON with footnotes to Wikitext including references to topics.
# Converting ''The Bible'' from LaTeX to Wikitext with footnotes.

The "GitHub Editors" will perform Tasks 1-3. The "Administrators" will perform Tasks 4-8. We detail each "GitHub Editors" task in the following sections.

== Translation of ''Paramony'' from English to the target language ==

We start from the English version of ''Paramony'' found in <code>input/json/footnotes-book-en.json</code>. Make a copy and change the name to the target language.

These files contain footnotes (with references to ''The Bible'') to be included in each paper of ''The Urantia Book''.

You have to translate the sections marked as texts (<code>texts</code>), as well as update the abbreviations of the books of ''The Bible'' with a replace operation.

The structure of the JSON file is a three column table. For each paper in ''The Urantia Book'' there is a section in the file that contains the index of the paper (<code>paperIndex</code>) and a subsection (<code>footnotes</code>) that contains three columns:
* the first are the texts (<code>texts</code>) that appear in the footnote.
* the second are the biblical references (<code>bible_refs</code>) that correspond to each text.
* the third are the references to the paragraph and phrase within the paragraph of ''The Urantia Book'' (<code>locations</code>). The pattern of these references is <code>x:y.z#n</code>, where <code>x:y.z</code> is the paragraph reference and <code>n</code> indicates the phrase within the paragraph in which the footnote must exist, starting with the first sentence with a period as 0 and so on.

This way of presenting the texts makes it easier to copy and paste them into a translator such as Google Translator and then paste the translation result again.

Example of a snippet:

<pre>
{
    "content": [
        {
            "paperIndex": 0,
            "footnotes": {
                "texts" : [
                    [
                        "Spirit light"
                    ],
                    [
                        "Paradise Trinity",
                        "Paradise Trinity (Paul's early view)"
                    ]
                ],
                "bible_refs": [
                   [
                        "Esd 7:55; Is 9:2; Mt 4:16; 1 Jn 1:5; 1 Jn 2:8"
                    ],
                    [
                        "Mt 28:19; Hch 2:32-33; 2 Co 13:14; 1 Jn 5:7",
                        "1 Co 12:4-6"
                    ]
                ],
                "locations": [
                    "0:6.9#0",
                    "0:12.2#0"
                ]
            }
        }
    ]
}
</pre>

<blockquote>Care must be taken to properly copy any quotation marks that may exist in the texts. Check here the valid quotes for each language: [[Smart quotes]]</blockquote>

== Translation and revision of ''Topic Index'' from English to the target language ==

We start from the English version of the ''Topic Index'' found in <code>input/txt/topic-index-en</code>. Make a copy of that folder and change the name to the target language.

The folder contains a file for each letter of the alphabet (<code>a.txt</code>, <code>b.txt</code>, etc.) plus a file <code>_.txt</code> that contains entries that begin with a numeric digit. The reference ordering of the topics is always that of English, so each file contains the topics or topics whose initial letter in the English topic matches that letter. For example, the Spanish topic "Espíritu Infinito" must be found in the i.txt file because that English topic begins with I ("Infinite Spirit").

The format is slightly similar to [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/YAML YAML] format but simplified to the maximum to be very easy to edit.

<blockquote>IMPORTANT: this file contains tabs and must be edited with a text editor that supports the display of tabs. Recommended editors are: [https://code.visualstudio.com/ Visual Studio Code], [https://notepad-plus-plus.org/ Notepad ++], or [https://www.sublimetext.com/ Sublime Text ]. </blockquote>

Each file must consist of:
* A header that explains its content in which each line begins with #. These lines are ignored when the file is processed.
* A list of topics. Each topic is preceded by a blank line and contains several lines:
** The first line is a short table of description of the topic with the values ​​or cells separated by | (pipe). The values ​​are:
*** The name of the topic. If after the name one or more names appear separated by (;) those denominations are aliases that will be searched in the text of ''The Urantia Book'' as an alternative form to the real name of the topic. The first name will always be the one used as the title of the page in the "Urantiapedia." The rest of the names separated by (;) will be the names or aliases that, higher than the first, will be searched within ''The Urantia Book'' to create links to these topics.
*** General or global references to ''The Urantia Book'' of the entire topic. This value can be blank. These links will be displayed on the ''Urantiapedia'' page as a short upper section that will say "See" and behind the list of links.
*** Links to other topics. This value can be blank. Represents one or more topics that are related to the current topic. They will appear at the bottom of the page that will be generated, in the list of the "Links" section.
*** Category of the topic. This value can be blank. There are five categories: People (<code>PERSON</code> or <code>PERSONA</code>), places (<code>PLACE</code> or <code>LUGAR</code>), orders of beings ( <code>ORDER</code> or <code>ORDEN</code>), religions (<code>RELIGION</code>), and races (<code>RACE</code> or <code>RAZA</code>). These categories allow you to work only in one of them to allow a greater division of labor.
*** Status indication. "GitHub editors" users should <code>OK</code> when they have finished their job of reviewing a topic. If the topic is still pending review, it will be blank.
** The following lines, if they exist, represent the content of the topic. These lines are also short tables that may or may not have values ​​separated by | (pipe). There are three types of tables:
*** Table of a single cell without pipe: it will contain a text, the text of a line from the page of the ''Urantiapedia'' and behind, enclosed in parentheses, if they exist, one or more references to paragraphs of ''The Urantia Book.''
*** Table with two cells: the first data is the text of a line from the page of the ''Urantiapedia''. The second piece of information if it begins with "Ver" (in Spanish) or "See" or "See also" (in English) will be considered a collection of links to other pages of the ''Urantiapedia'' that will be added in the "Links" section, and if does not start with those words, it will be considered a collection of references enclosed in parentheses.
*** Table of three cells: the first data is the text of a line of the page of the ''Urantiapedia''. The second piece of information must necessarily begin with "Ver" (in Spanish) or "See"/"See also" (in English) and will be considered a collection of links to other Urantiapedia pages that will be added in the "Links" section. The third piece of information will necessarily be considered a collection of references enclosed in parentheses.

The construction rules for each line of topics other than the first are these:
* It does not have to start with a capital letter or end on a period. It will automatically capitalize and automatically end on the period when converting the file to Wikitext format.
* The text of each line can be a single sentence or several. If there are several and there are periods and followed then the next sentence must begin in capital letter because that sentence will not be corrected.
* The text of each line should not contain parentheses because those characters are reserved to indicate references to ''The Urantia Book.''
* Each line can have tabs at the beginning. Each tab indicates that those lines will be contained within the one immediately above without a tab, which will act as a section or subsection title.

Example (file <code>a.txt</code>, line 896):

<pre>
Alpheus twins | (143:3.5) | See also apostles of Jesus | PERSON | OK
James and Judas Alpheus or Alpheus twins were two apostles of Jesus
his mother was named Mary and his father Alphaeus (138:4.1) (189:4.4) (190:3.1)
James Alpheus or Thaddeus
    he was a fisherman and farmer from Jeresa, selected by James Zebedee as the new apostle (138:2.6)
    he was married and had three children. He was also called Thaddeus (139:10.1,5)
</pre>

In the previous extract we can see that it is the beginning of the content related to the topic «Alpheus twins». At the top of the resulting page an indication will be added that will say "See" followed by the reference to LU 143:3.5. The page will have a "Links" section added at the end, including one to the "Apostles of Jesus" page. The type of topic is relative to persons, in this case two apostles of Jesus, and the indication <code>OK</code> means that this topic has been revised.

After the first line of the topic the excerpt contains five lines of page content. The first line is a single cell without pipe and contains no references. The second line is a single cell without pipe with three references to three paragraphs of ''The Urantia Book.'' The third line is a section title because the fourth and fifth lines have tabs in front of them.

The result of converting this content can be seen here:

https://urantiapedia.site/index.php/Alpheus_twins

=== Lists ===

To create lists in the topic file, use the character (*) in front of each line. For example, this is how it has been used in the topic related to Alexander the Great:

<pre>
Alexander the great; Alexander | | | PERSON | OK
Facts about Alexander the Great mentioned in The Urantia Book
* his campaign in Punjab introduced Aryan heritage to India (79:4.3)
* his royal mausoleum at Alexandria was visited by Jesus (130:3.4)
* The Samaritans assisted Alexander and that angered the Jews against them (143:4.2-3)
* Alexander spread Hellenistic civilization in the Middle East (195: 1.7-10)
> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_the_Great
</pre>

=== External links ===

To add external links to a topic in the topic file, use the character (&gt;) in front of each line. The example above shows how a link to the website of the English Wikipedia on Alexander the Great has been added. You can add multiple links, each one on one line, as long as they start with the character > and follow a blank space before the URL.

=== Synchronization in all languages ​​===

It is important to keep all files in all languages ​​in sync, so that the same lines of the same topics occupy the same position in all files. When adding content to a file in one language, it is important to ensure that the same content is also on the same line number in all other languages. This then eases the review process.

For example, the topic about Alexander the Great is in the file <code>a.txt</code> on line 838 in both the Spanish and English versions.

=== Review of topics ===

The content of the topics has been generated using as a starting point an appendix to an edition of ''The Urantia Book'' published in English by the "Urantia Fellowship". This appendix is ​​a brief index of each topic so the content is concise and telegraphic. Therefore, there is an extra work to be done to make this content clearer and more explanatory. This work consists of going to each reference of ''The Urantia Book'' and checking that the text is sufficiently explanatory regarding what the book comments, and if not, modifying it.

== Obtaining a translation of ''The Bible'' in the target language ==

A good source to obtain translations of ''The Bible'' that are also free of copyright is to use the software [https://www.e-sword.net/ e-Sword], a free application that allows you to download translations of ''The Bible'' in different languages ​​and then export or copy its content to other files.

Any other way to obtain a copyright-free translation of ''The Bible'' is valid as long as the content is then copied to the correct files. These files must follow these rules:
* The files will be created in the folder <code>input/tex/bible-xx</code>, where <code>xx</code> is the language code of ''The Bible''.
* Each file will have a name following this pattern: <code>xxx_name.tex</code> where <code>xxx</code> will always be a sequential number with three digits starting at 1 (<code>001</code>, <code>002</code>, etc.) and <code>name</code> will be the name of the book. The names should be in each language, but if not, they could be in English. Below is a provisional list of the books to include, with their number. It should be noted that the order of the numbering of the books places first the books that are canonical to all creeds before the books that are canonical only in some creeds. This order is not essential but is useful to facilitate the identification of each book simply by the initial number, especially when the names of each book are used in each particular language.
* The content of each book must come in LaTeX format. The format will only use a few LaTeX commands (<code>\begin{document}</code>, <code>\end{document}</code>, <code>\title</code>, <code>\chapter</code>, <code>\section</code> and <code>\par</code>) as detailed in the following excerpt from the Gospel of Matthew:

<pre>
\begin {document}
% \title{THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO SAINT MATTHEW}
\title {Gospel of Matthew}

\chapter {1}

\section*{Genealogy of Jesus Christ}

\par 1 The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
. . .

\section*{Birth of Jesus Christ}

\par 18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When his mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together she was found with child of the Holy Spirit.
. . .

\chapter {2}

\section*{The visit of the magicians}

\par 1 Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king, behold, Wise-men from the east came to Jerusalem, saying,
. . .

\end{document}
</pre>

As you can see in the previous extract, the rules to follow are:
* Each Bible book will start with a <code>\begin{document}</code> line and end with a <code>\end{document}</code> line.
* Comments can be placed, which will be ignored, using <code>%</code> in front of each line.
* Each book will have its title within a <code>\title{}</code> command at the very beginning.
* Each chapter will have a start mark with the command <code>\chapter{}</code> and inside the chapter number starting at 1.
* If there are sections (some subtitles that are sometimes put in some editions) its beginning will be marked with the command <code>\section{}</code> and within the title of the section.
* After the beginning of a section or a chapter beginning if there are no sections, the verses will go, each one starting with the command <code>\par</code>, then separated by the verse number always starting at 1 and then separated the content. Each verse will be a line.
* To improve readability you can put blank lines before and after chapters and sections, which will be ignored.

=== List of biblical books ===

{| class="wikitable"
| No. || Abr. || Spanish name || English name
|-
| 001 || Gn || Génesis || Genesis
|-
| 002 || Ex || Éxodo || Exodus
|-
| 003 || Lv || Levítico || Leviticus
|-
| 004 || Nm || Números || Numbers
|-
| 005 || Dt || Deuteronomio || Deuteronomy
|-
| 006 || Jos || Josué || Joshua
|-
| 007 || Jue || Jueces || Judges
|-
| 008 || Rt, Rth || Rut || Ruth
|-
| 009 || 1 Sam || I Samuel || 1 Samuel
|-
| 010 || 2 Sam || II Samuel || 2 Samuel
|-
| 011 || 1 Re, 1 Ki || I Reyes || 1 Kings
|-
| 012 || 2 Re, 2 Ki || II Reyes || 2 Kings
|-
| 013 || 1 Cr, 1 Ch || I Crónicas || 1 Chronicles
|-
| 014 || 2 Cr, 2 Ch || II Crónicas || 2 Chronicles
|-
| 015 || Esd, Ez || Esdras || Ezra
|-
| 016 || Neh || Nehemías || Nehemiah
|-
| 017 || Est || Ester || Esther
|-
| 018 || Job || Job || Job
|-
| 019 || Sal, Ps || Salmos || Psalms
|-
| 020 || Pr || Proverbios || Proverbs
|-
| 021 || Ec || Eclesiastés || Ecclesiastes
|-
| 022 || Cnt, Song || Cantar de los Cantares || Song of Solomon
|-
| 023 || Is || Isaías || Isaiah
|-
| 024 || Jer || Jeremías || Jeremiah
|-
| 025 || Lm, Lam || Lamentaciones de Jeremías || Lamentations
|-
| 026 || Ez, Ezk || Ezequiel || Ezekiel
|-
| 027 || Dn || Daniel || Daniel
|-
| 028 || Os, Ho || Oseas || Hosea
|-
| 029 || Jl || Joel || Joel
|-
| 030 || Am || Amós || Amos
|-
| 031 || Abd || Abdías || Obadiah
|-
| 032 || Jon || Jonás || Jonah
|-
| 033 || Miq, Mic || Miqueas || Micah
|-
| 034 || Nah || Nahum || Nahum
|-
| 035 || Hab || Habacuc || Habakkuk
|-
| 036 || Sof, Zep || Sofonías || Zephaniah
|-
| 037 || Hag || Hageo || Haggai
|-
| 038 || Zac, Zec || Zacarías || Zechariah
|-
| 039 || Mal || Malaquías || Malachi
|-
| 040 || Mt || Evangelio de Mateo || Gospel of Matthew
|-
| 041 || Mc, Mk || Evangelio de Marcos || Gospel of Mark
|-
| 042 || Lc, Lk || Evangelio de Lucas || Gospel of Luke
|-
| 043 || Jn || Evangelio de Juan || Gospel of John
|-
| 044 || Hch, Acts || Hechos de los Apóstoles || Acts of the Apostles
|-
| 045 || Ro || Epístola a los Romanos || Epistle to the Romans
|-
| 046 || 1 Co || Epístola a los Corintios I || First Epistle to the Corinthians
|-
| 047 || 2 Co || Epístola a los Corintios II || Second Epistle to the Corinthians
|-
| 048 || Gl, Ga || Epístola a los Gálatas || Epistle to the Galatians
|-
| 049 || Ef, Eph || Epístola a los Efesios || Epistle to the Ephesians
|-
| 050 || Flp, Phil || Epístola a los Filipenses || Epistle to the Philippians
|-
| 051 || Col || Epístola a los Colosenses || Epistle to the Colossians
|-
| 052 || 1 Ts, 1 Th || Epístola a los Tesalonicenses I || First Epistle to the Thessalonians
|-
| 053 || 2 Ts, 2 Th || Epístola a los Tesalonicenses II || Second Epistle to the Thessalonians
|-
| 054 || 1 Ti || Epístola a Timoteo I || First Epistle to Timothy
|-
| 055 || 2 Ti || Epístola a Timoteo II || Second Epistle to Timothy
|-
| 056 || Tit || Epístola a Tito || Epistle to Titus
|-
| 057 || Flm, Pm || Epístola a Filemón || Epistle to Philemon
|-
| 058 || Heb || Epístola a los Hebreos || Epistle to the Hebrews
|-
| 059 || Stg, Jm || Epístola de Santiago || Epistle of James
|-
| 060 || 1 P || Epístola de Pedro I || First Epistle of Peter
|-
| 061 || 2 P || Epístola de Pedro II || Second Epistle of Peter
|-
| 062 || 1 Jn || Epístola de Juan I || First Epistle of John
|-
| 063 || 2 Jn || Epístola de Juan II || Second Epistle of John
|-
| 064 || 3 Jn || Epístola de Juan III || Third Epistle of John
|-
| 065 || Jud || Epístola de Judas || Epistle of Jude
|-
| 066 || Ap, Rev || Apocalipsis de Juan || Revelation
|-
| 067 || Tb || Tobit || Tobit
|-
| 068 || Jdt || Judith || Judith
|-
| 069 || 1 Mac, 1 Macc || I Macabeos || First Book of Maccabees
|-
| 070 || 2 Mac, 2 Macc || II Macabeos || Second Book of Maccabees
|-
| 071 || Sab, Wis || Sabiduría || Book of Wisdom
|-
| 072 || Eclo, Sir || Eclesiástico || Ecclesiastes
|-
| 073 || Bar || Baruc || Baruch
|-
| 074 || Bel || Historia de Bel y el Dragón || Bel and the Dragon
|-
| 075 || Man || Oración de Manasés || Prayer of Manasseh
|-
| 076 || 1 Hen, 1 Eno || Enoc || Book of Enoch
|-
| 077 || AsMo || Asunción de Moisés || Assumption of Moses
|}

== Links of interest ==

''Urantiapedia'' user manual:
* [[Manual:Manual_for_developers]]
* [[Manual:Manual_for_administrators]]
* [[Manual:Manual_for_GitHub_editors]]
* [[Manual:Manual_for_web_editors]]
** [[Manual:Basic edition guide]]
*** [[Manual:How to use references]]
* [[Manual:How to add content]]
* [[Manual:How to send suggestions]]
* [[Urantiapedia_Status|Current project progress]]

''MediaWiki'' software:
* [https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Manual:Contents Basic MediaWiki Guide]
* [https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/Manual:Configuration_settings Configuration settings]
* [https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/Manual:FAQ FAQ about MediaWiki]
* [https://lists.wikimedia.org/mailman/listinfo/mediawiki-announce Mailist news about MediaWiki]
* [https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/Localisation#Translation_resources Translation in MediaWiki]
* [https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Special:MyLanguage/Manual:Combating_spam Combating spam in Wiki]