---
title: "Spring: Study of the Future"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Future, Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 2008 Henry Begemann<br>© 2008 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>


_Wassenaar, Netherlands, “The URANTIAN Journal”, “The URANTIA Brotherhood”, Summer 1988 While searching among the different religions in the Netherlands, Henry Begemann found The Urantia Book as he was retiring from a career in insurance. Realizing its importance, he immediately began translating the book into Dutch. His dedication inspired him to facilitate the organization of study groups as the European representative of Urantia Foundation. He served on the General Council within the Brotherhood before his death in 1990._

Because readers of _The Urantia Book_ are certainly interested in the subject of prophecy, it would seem timely and useful to study in more depth what our book has to say about the near future.

The most significant things Jesus said about this can be found in the 2nd chapter of Paper 176, where he says: “...The state of things which you now regard with contempt is coming to an end, but that end will constitute a new beginning, from which the gospel of the kingdom will spread throughout the world and salvation will be extended to all peoples. When the kingdom has reached its full maturity, be assured that the Father in heaven will not fail to bring you an enlarged revelation of the truth...” [UB 176:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_3)

This “expanded revelation of truth” has already manifested itself: The Urantia Book. The Master is very clear that this is our book, because he continues: “... He has already bestowed upon this world him who became the prince of darkness, [Caligastia, the first epochal revelation] then Adam, [the second epochal revelation] followed by Melchizedek [the third revelation with epochal significance] and now the Son of Man.” [The fourth epochal revelation]. [UB 176:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_3)

It is said on page 1007.4: “The religion of revelation has had many events, of which only five have been epoch-making...” The first four are the same as those mentioned above by Jesus. The fifth is referred to as the Urantia Papers, as it is called by the Melchizedek—one of the authors of our book. It is evident that already 2000 years ago Jesus predicted the coming of our book, a book of epochal significance and even more, for it announces a new dispensation.

From the fulfillment of his promise we could also deduce that the kingdom indeed: “...will have come to maturity...” [UB 176:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_3) as Jesus stated was a condition for the arrival of the increased revelation of truth. Now, since this revelation has indeed come to fruition, this proves that the kingdom has indeed come to maturity. But what did Jesus mean by these words? Has the whole world become followers of Jesus or even Christians? Certainly not; the meaning must be different.

For evolutionary reasons, Jesus could not reveal the truth contained in the fifth epochal revelation. Revelation is progressive. Therefore, to me, the meaning of “...will have reached full maturity...” is all that can reasonably be expected of the fourth epochal revelation considering the circumstances and the time that has passed.

Jesus taught the fatherhood of the Father, the relationship between the individual and his personal Father. Our book augments this revelation with the revelation of the Universal Father, the Father of the entire planet and all planets. Jesus purposely limited his revelation to the spiritual realm, primarily the personal spiritual realm. Our book also includes the material and physical realms, which are not merely personal. The universe, the planet, the population, the group, and the community are also studied in depth. But in complete accord with the careful study of the universe, the book carefully studies at length the early revelations, particularly those of Part IV. Turning back to page 1914, we find immediately after the words, “...an enlarged revelation of truth...”, in the same sentence Jesus also promised, “...an increased demonstration of righteousness.” ([UB 176:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_3)).

For many years I neglected these words, at least they did not attract my attention. I considered them in my subconscious as a kind of embellishment of the part of “an enlarged revelation of the truth”. But the authors, and especially Jesus, do not amuse themselves by using embellished and useless terminologies.

Let us try to find the meaning of these words. Their meaning must be closely related to “an enlarged revelation”; for they are the immediate continuation of the same phrase. So far in our discussion of the fifth epochal revelation, we find that apart from the realm of religious experience, on which the fourth revelation was concentrated, it also includes the various aspects of the population. And in the social community, righteousness is a fundamental value. Indeed, it is also fundamental in individual experience, but in a personal way we can and must discover righteousness, the will of God, in communion with the great indwelling teacher, the Adjuster. However, the community at large has not reached this indispensable level. Therefore, the Father and his Son, our Planetary Prince, will send us, moved by love, a demonstration of righteousness. On the next page Jesus explains that this demonstration involves a demonstrator. ([UB 176:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_5)) Apparently this does not refer to his personal return to earth.

## I WILL COME BACK

After repeating his promise that “I will return,” he explains that this return “will be in power and in spirit” visible only to the “spiritual eye,” not to the “eye of the flesh.” Therefore, this return can hardly be identical with “another dispensational bestowal,” mentioned in the following paragraph ([UB 176:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_5)). Furthermore, Jesus adds, “...the time of the reappearance of the Son of Man is known only in the councils of Paradise. Even the angels of heaven do not know when it will be.” ([UB 176:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_5)). And the midwayers surmise, “But if every eye must see him, and if only spiritual eyes can discern his presence, then his coming must be long deferred.” ([UB 176:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p4_5))

Inasmuch as there is no official interpretation of the teachings of _The Urantia Book_ on the part of the Urantia Brotherhood or the Foundation, the views expressed herein are based entirely on the personal and religious understanding of the individual author.

As we continue to study and meditate on Jesus' words, we read: “...Nevertheless, you should understand this: When the gospel of the kingdom has been preached in all the world for the salvation of all people...” ([UB 176:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_5)) This is a repetition of the conditions for the appearance of a: “...wider revelation of the truth...” from page 1914.4. And we have already seen that because of the appearance of the wider revelation of the truth, this condition must already have been met. And because in this paragraph Jesus is discussing “...another dispensational outpouring...”, this condition has also been met, as far as this outpouring is concerned.

But Jesus adds another condition: “...and when the age has reached its fullness...” ([UB 176:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_5)). More than once it has been written that the book was given before its time or a hundred years before its time. “Its time” is the new age or dispensation. The new dispensation can only come “...when the age [this dispensation] has reached its fullness...”, this has not yet happened, so we are living in an interim period between the appearance of the book and the dispensation that begins with a dispensational outpouring. Jesus is referring to this interim period when he adds this new condition. Jesus chooses his words carefully on this memorable Tuesday night! And this is of course further proof of Jesus' statement: “...the Father and the Son know all things...”. ([UB 142:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/142#p2_3))

What could be the purpose of such an interim period? A bestowal is far more than an accident in the evolution of a planet; it is carefully planned in the universe. And this planning includes some activity on the part of the interim administrators of such an bestowal. This is well illustrated in the cases of Adam and Jesus. In the latter case there were prophecies of such magnitude that the whole Jewish people were expecting a new Messiah. And John the Baptist had been appointed to become the forerunner of the new kingdom. The world must be prepared for the new dispensational bestowal. Therefore, our book, as a phase of the new dispensation, has been given to us before its time to be followed later by the complementary phase of the “demonstrator of righteousness.” And we, as provisional trustees of the book announcing a new outpouring, have been commissioned “to form thousands of study groups,” so that eventually there will be teachers and leaders when the “age has reached its fullness.”

The Urantia Papers, though of epochal significance, and belonging to the new epoch, do not in themselves constitute a new dispensation. But the dispensational bestowal, the demonstrator of righteousness, does constitute a new dispensation. Apparently The Urantia Book was transmitted in advance, and this gives the book a new meaning and dimension for us who live in this interim time. We should not study it only for our personal salvation, essential as that may be. Having secured his personal salvation, the vigilant and discerning reader turns his attention to the responsibility and task assigned to him for the coming bestowal.

And then Jesus adds something that has troubled me many times: “...the Father will send you another dispensational bestowal, or else the Son of Man will come to judge the age....” ([UB 176:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_5)) In itself, it is not remarkable that the Son of Man should come back for judicial action. We know that: “...When a Paradise Son visits an evolutionary world and becomes like one of its inhabitants, his presence closes a dispensation and constitutes a judgment of the kingdom..” ([UB 20:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p3_4)) Jesus closed the Adamic dispensation and inaugurated a new one, the dispensation of the Spirit of Truth. We have not had a Magisterial Son to accomplish this, so it seems logical that our Paradise Son should come back to judge this age. Such a judicial mission is not a bestowal, and for such a mission the Son is not visible. But my trouble lies in the word “or.” Taken literally, and by itself, this could mean that there will be no further outpouring! Still, I feel that when the condition “... has reached its fullness...” is fulfilled, and the appearance in fact of “... the enlarged revelation of the truth...”; the second part of Jesus' promise will also be fulfilled; nevertheless, this last part of the sentence may, for us, include a caution. Could it be that we, who have been privileged and blessed with the knowledge of these promises of the Master, and who have a special responsibility in preparing for this dispensational outpouring, may fail in our task? Does it matter whether we should or should not do our duty in carrying out Michael's plans? We also belong to the group who are called “stewards of the truth,” and we might also be called “fruitless stewards.” Why is there no increase, no growing increase in the number of study groups? “The Teacher of truth will demand an accounting according to the truth committed to your care. [The URANTIA Papers]” ([UB 176:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p3_7))

After having discussed “...the fate of Jerusalem...”, ([UB 176:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_6)), and the return of the Son of Man for whom “...no one in heaven or on earth can claim to speak.” he continues with the subject that interests us at present, in our time. “...you should show wisdom concerning the maturation of an age and discern promptly the signs of the times. When the fig tree shows its tender branches and puts out its leaves, you know that summer is near. Likewise, when the world has passed through the long winter of the materialistic mentality and you discern the coming of the spiritual spring of a new dispensation, you should know that the summer of a new visitation is approaching.” ([UB 176:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p2_6))

We discern well the signs of the times: “the gospel of the kingdom” has been proclaimed throughout the world and to all peoples, “the fullness of maturity” has been accomplished, and last, but not in order of importance, “the enlarged revelation of truth” has been manifested. The midwayers declare: “...At the time of this writing, the worst moments of the materialistic age are past...” ([UB 195:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p6_4)). Therefore, the spiritual springtime is now.

## GIVEN BEFORE ITS TIME

If we return for a moment to the statement that the book was given to us a century before its time, it is remarkable to find that our book also mentions this. “...Master, this is the truth that you entrusted to us a hundred or a thousand years ago...” ([UB 176:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p3_7)) (The number “one thousand” is not there by chance, as will be explained later.) It is not uncommon for our book to reveal something to us in such an unobtrusive way. The book was given to us to be studied, not for superficial reading. A superficial reader does not notice such things, but an attentive student will try to associate them with other points and thus often gain surprising new insights and indications, thus confirming that his line of thought is correct.

Another fact that corroborates this statement, and gives food for thought to many of us, is that the book for the first hundred years was entrusted to the “angels of the churches”, and after that period, the “angels of progress” would take over. The angels of the churches: “...strive to maintain the ideals of what has survived, in order to ensure the safe transit of moral values between two epochs...”, while the angels of progress “...have the task of inaugurating the evolutionary progress of successive social ages.” ([UB 114:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p6_6)-7)

## A NEW OUTFLOW

There are several places in the book which point to a new bestowal. It is said of the Trinity Teacher Sons: “...But the Teacher Sons are even now visiting your world in order to lay plans for their intended sojourn on your sphere. They will be ready to appear on Urantia when its inhabitants have sufficiently freed themselves from the fetters of animality and the chains of materialism.” ([UB 20:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p9_1)) Remember the declaration of the midwayers: “...the worst of the materialistic age is past.” ([UB 195:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p6_4))

The Teacher Sons come to initiate a spiritual age, “a millennium of cosmic illumination.” Future dispensations will not last tens of thousands of years; they become shorter as evolution advances. In light of this, the “thousands of years” mentioned above must be taken into account.

The Teacher Sons are normally accompanied by a Magisterial Son for the necessary judicial action. Because we have not had a Magisterial Son, the Son of Man could (invisibly to mortals living on earth) appear again to judge the truth-keepers.

Chapters 7-9 of Paper 20 (pp. [UB 20:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p7_1)-[UB 20:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p9_5)) are worth reading for a better understanding of the purposes of the Trinity Teacher Sons. “They make manifest the spiritual counterparts of material knowledge and temporal wisdom.” ([UB 20:9.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p9_2)) We now have “...a society reeling under the guilt of tolerating science without idealism, politics without principles, wealth without work, pleasure without restraint, knowledge without character, power without conscience, and industry without morality.” ([UB 195:10.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_20)) The Teacher Sons will make real the spiritual counterparts of otherwise empty and meaningless acquisitions. Is this not in full accord with an outpouring of demonstration of righteousness?

The Trinity Teacher Sons remain invisible, but are accompanied by the Brilliant Evening Stars, who serve “...as a liaison between the mortals of the realm and the invisible corps of the Teacher Sons.” ([UB 37:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p2_9)) The Brilliant Evening Stars are also invisible to mortals, but they “...possess a force of spirit which can manifest itself independently of their personal presence.” ([UB 37:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p2_5)) “This entire world [Jerusem] has acquired a spiritual aroma through the transference of many of the activities of the Evening Stars to it from Salvington.” ([UB 46:5.25](/en/The_Urantia_Book/46#p5_25))

Such a transfer to the capital of our system is also important. The Teacher Sons, in conjunction with the Brilliant Evening Stars, have a very powerful influence on a planet, even when invisible. When this is enriched by a visible demonstrator and his liaison agents, considerable changes in the spiritual atmosphere of a planet may be expected.

In the chapter on the archangels is the well-known paragraph dealing with their divisional headquarters on Urantia. “Do you grasp the significance of the fact that your humble, confused planet has become a divisional headquarters for the administration of the universe and the direction of certain archangelic activities connected with the Paradise ascension plan? It undoubtedly foreshadows that further ascension activities will be concentrated on the bestowal world of Michael, and it gives a stupendous and solemn importance to the Master's personal promise: 'I will come again.'” ([UB 37:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/37#p3_4)) Another example of a universal hypothesis!

Urantia, in Michael's plans, is evidently to become an important center. This “humble planet in confusion” has rejected its rightful Sovereign. And this is the divine punishment: Urantia will become a jewel in the crown of Michael, our Master, through an intense effort of his ministry and that of the Father. Should this now concern us? Not if we are only interested in organizing our personal salvation, or if we are not interested in universal events. Even now his plans are partially revealed. This means a challenge to our study and understanding as well as a call to our cooperation.

We belong to Urantia, now and even after death. But let us not repeat the nonsense of mere human activities without spiritual insight, and let us not be proud, we are only servants! Let us be sure to truly cooperate with the authorities in place. And the first step in this cooperation is the increasing communion with the Father within us. This represents the first “phase of the kingdom.” ([UB 170:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p4_2)) Then, we should animate the second phase, “The knowledge of the [expanded] brotherhood of believers in the gospel...” ([UB 170:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p4_3)) by the realization of phase 1 (much work to be done here), and what phase 3 “The supramortal brotherhood of invisible spirit beings...” ([UB 170:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p4_5)) awaits.

As we have seen, Michael is already engaged in the working out of his plans. The clear evidence of this is the assignment of Machiventa Melchizedek as Vicegerent Planetary Prince of Urantia. For some unknown reason he has not yet assumed his office. But since we are free to speculate, I think it is because Urantia is not yet fully ready for it. Caligastia is hardly recognized in his sinister and vile deeds, often even among Urantians. But we might at least begin to realize and learn from what the acceptance of Melchizedek implies. It is always the relatively few who are the deciding factor, the vanguard. Our Lanonandek Son will be succeeded by a Melchizedek of the order of the “eldest Sons of the local universe,” even more than a Constellation Father. “They are the teachers who so often bring whole worlds of evolved life into full and final recognition of the Creator Son and his Paradise Father.” ([UB 35:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p2_7)) They are “...understanding friends, sympathetic teachers, and wise counselors..” ([UB 35:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p2_2)) and they are powerful.

Then, in Paper 170, The Kingdom of Heaven, it is predicted: “Sooner or later a new and greater John the Baptist [note that this is not plural] will arise proclaiming that 'the kingdom of God is at hand'—meaning a return to the higher concept of Jesus...” ([UB 170:5.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p5_19)) John the Baptist was the forerunner and herald of the bestowal of Jesus. This new and greater John the Baptist will likely be the forerunner of a new bestowal, as has apparently been confirmed by the revelators. Such a preacher, through the international media, could bring about a dramatic change in the religious mindset of this world: "...that his doctrine be re-explained in such a way as to rectify the work of the original disciples who undertook to create a socio-philosophical system of beliefs concerning the fact of the indwelling of

Michael on earth... » ([UB 170:5.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p5_19))

This is a tremendous prediction! Rectifying the work of Jesus' original disciples! Don't read it superficially, Realize what this can mean especially for the Orthodox churches. And what does it mean for us? If such a spiritual revolution takes place, are we prepared to become a guide to those who are in confusion? This event is not ages away from us!

## STUDY WITHOUT PREJUDICE

So far we have discussed the references our book makes to future events; discerning students can find more. Let us study without prejudice. We are all somewhat prejudiced, because we are not accustomed to or prepared for sudden events. “When physical conditions are ripe, sudden mental evolutions can take place. When the condition of the mind is propitious, sudden spiritual transformations can occur...” (740.2) For us, personally, the greatest transformation remains the growing and instructive communion with the Father within us, and also when we direct our thought to these matters. This will prevent inappropriate human actions. Remember that our most important action is to seek and discover the will of the Father through the realization of values.

“...Urantia now quivers on the very brink of one of its most astounding and exciting epochs of social adjustment, moral stimulation, and spiritual enlightenment.” ([UB 195:9.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p9_2))

We have already referred to the five phases of the kingdom, mentioned in [UB 170:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p3_4). Phase 4 is “The prospect of the more perfect accomplishment of the will of God, the progress toward the dawn of a new social order in connection with an improved spiritual life—the next era of humanity.” ([UB 170:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p4_5)) It should be noted that this phase follows phase 3: “The supermortal brotherhood of invisible spirit beings prevailing on earth and in heaven, the superhuman kingdom of God.” ([UB 170:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p4_4)) The five phases demonstrate a causal order. And the midwayers add: "Jesus alluded to a phase of the kingdom as lying in the future, [phase 5] and suggested, on many occasions, that it might appear as part of a world crisis. ([UB 170:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p4_15))

Jesus' attitude toward temporal catastrophes or earthly cataclysms is represented in the statement: “To you who believe this gospel of the kingdom, what is it to you if nations are overthrown, or the age comes to an end, or if all visible things are in ruin, since you know that your life is the gift of the Son, and is secure with the Father for ever?” ([UB 176:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p3_2))

Jesus was very consistent. Eternal things are more real than temporal things. There is no reason to be afraid, although he understands our human reactions. His statement is psychologically and spiritually practical. It reminds me of the war, when the bomber fleets from England roared over us on their way to Germany. It was helpful then to think of the worst that could happen and say, So what! It calmed us. Jesus mentions the worst that could happen: “...all visible things are falling away...”

I do not think that a crisis reaches this magnitude, because there are so many passages in our book that make this eventuality very unlikely. What could a “demonstrator of righteousness” accomplish when there are no more mortals to teach? But psychologically and spiritually it is a good thing to consider it. It is a challenge to our faith. Let us trust in our wise and merciful Father and his ministers. Remember what has been said about Providence. Providence works for the whole, the group. If individually we are important, for the spiritual welfare of others, Providence works. The best protection we can have is to be spiritually active and vigilant. And let our hearts always keep this phrase: “The builders of the kingdom... must not be disturbed by temporal upheavals or... earthly cataclysms.” ([UB 176:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/176#p3_2)).

There are so many things we can do for the fourth phase of the kingdom. Our invisible brothers of the kingdom are waiting for us. Let us put our spiritual imagination into action, in line with God. The movements for peace are, in general, active in a negative way: anti-nuclear movements etc. Our book shows us, for example in the Urmia conferences, how we could be positively active in promoting a world government. Such a thing must always become real in the minds of a small number of people, and when for them it becomes more and more real, it spreads more and more among other people, because it is healthy and positive.

In this and many other ways we could prepare ourselves for the “next age.” And thus we cooperate with our superiors. If we sincerely try to realize what changes are coming, it will bring ample opportunities for constructive thinking. What we need is spiritual insight and universe consciousness, (which comes second only to God consciousness). But we could begin with the consciousness of the universe mind, the will to overcome the prejudices of inertia and lack of imagination. The lack of belief in what has already been revealed to us of our Master's plans. God and men need each other and

CRM

