---
title: "Qur'an — 20.  Ta Ha: Ta Ha"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---



<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Ta. Ha.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  We have not revealed unto thee (Muhammad) this Qur'an that thou shouldst be distressed,
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  But as a reminder unto him who feareth,
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  A revelation from Him Who created the earth and the high heavens,
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  The Beneficent One, Who is established on the Throne.
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  Unto Him belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is in the earth, and whatsoever is between them, and whatsoever is beneath the sod.
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And if thou speakest aloud, then lo! He knoweth the secret (thought) and (that which is yet) more hidden.
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  Allah! There is no God save Him. His are the most beautiful names.
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  Hath there come unto thee the story of Moses ?
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  When he saw a fire and said unto his folk: Lo! Wait! I see a fire afar off. Peradventure I may bring you a brand therefrom or may find guidance at the fire.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And when he reached it, he was called by name: O Moses!
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  Lo! I, even I, am thy Lord, So take off thy shoes, for lo! thou art in the holy valley of Tuwa.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  And I have chosen thee, so hearken unto that which is inspired.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  Lo! I, even I, am Allah, There is no God save Me. So serve Me and establish worship for My remembrance.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  Lo! the Hour is surely coming. But I will to keep it hidden, that every soul may be rewarded for that which it striveth (to achieve).
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  Therefor, let not him turn thee aside from (the thought of) it who believeth not therein but followeth his own desire, lest thou perish.
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  And what is that in thy right hand, O Moses ?
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  He said: This is my staff whereon I lean, and wherewith I bear down branches for my sheep, and wherein I find other uses.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  He said: Cast it down, O Moses!
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  So he cast it down, and lo! it was a serpent, gliding.
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  He said: Grasp it and fear not. We shall return it to its former state.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  And thrust thy hand within thine armpit, it will come forth white without hurt. (That will be) another token.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  That We may show thee (some) of Our greater portents,
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  Go thou unto Pharaoh! Lo! he hath transgressed (the bounds).
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  (Moses) said: My Lord! relieve my mind
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  And ease my task for me;
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  And loose a knot from my tongue,
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  That they may understand my saying.
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  Appoint for me a henchman from my folk,
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  Aaron, my brother.
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span>  Confirm my strength with him
<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span>  And let him share my task,
<span id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span>  That we may glorify Thee much
<span id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span>  And much remember Thee.
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span>  Lo! Thou art ever Seeing us.
<span id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span>  He said: Thou art granted thy request, O Moses.
<span id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup></span>  And indeed, another time, already We have shown thee favour,
<span id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup></span>  When we inspired in thy mother that which is inspired,
<span id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span>  Saying: Throw him into the ark, and throw it into the river, then the river shall throw it on to the bank, and there an enemy to Me and an enemy to him shall take him. And I endued thee with love from Me that thou mightest be trained according to My will,
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span>  When thy sister went and said: Shall I show you one who will nurse him ? and we restored thee to thy mother that her eyes might be refreshed and might not sorrow. And thou didst kill a man and We delivered thee from great distress, and tried thee with a heavy trial. And thou didst tarry years among the folk of Midian. Then camest thou (hither) by (My) providence, O Moses,
<span id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup></span>  And I have attached thee to Myself.
<span id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup></span>  Go, thou and thy brother, with My tokens, and be not faint in remembrance of Me.
<span id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup></span>  Go, both of you, unto Pharaoh. Lo! he hath transgressed (the bounds).
<span id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup></span>  And speak unto him a gentle word, that peradventure he may heed or fear.
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span>  They said: Our Lord! Lo! we fear that he may be beforehand with us or that he may play the tyrant.
<span id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup></span>  He said: Fear not. Lo! I am with you twain, Hearing and Seeing.
<span id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup></span>  So go ye unto him and say: Lo! we are two messengers of thy Lord. So let the children of Israel go with us, and torment them not. We bring thee a token from thy Lord. And peace will be for him who followeth right guidance.
<span id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup></span>  Lo! it hath been revealed unto us that the doom will be for him who denieth and turneth away.
<span id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup></span>  (Pharaoh) said: Who then is the Lord of you twain, O Moses ?
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span>  He said: Our Lord is He Who gave unto everything its nature, then guided it aright.
<span id="v51"><sup><small>51</small></sup></span>  He said: What then is the state of the generations of old ?
<span id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup></span>  He said: The knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a Record. My Lord neither erreth nor forgetteth,
<span id="v53"><sup><small>53</small></sup></span>  Who hath appointed the earth as a bed and hath threaded roads for you therein and hath sent down water from the sky and thereby We have brought forth divers kinds of vegetation,
<span id="v54"><sup><small>54</small></sup></span>  (Saying): Eat ye and feed your cattle. Lo! herein verily are portents for men of thought.
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span>  Thereof We created you, and thereunto We return you, and thence We bring you forth a second time.
<span id="v56"><sup><small>56</small></sup></span>  And We verily did show him all Our tokens, but he denied them and refused.
<span id="v57"><sup><small>57</small></sup></span>  He said: Hast come to drive us out from our land by thy magic, O Moses ?
<span id="v58"><sup><small>58</small></sup></span>  But we surely can produce for thee magic the like thereof; so appoint a tryst between us and you, which neither we nor thou shall fail to keep, at a place convenient (to us both).
<span id="v59"><sup><small>59</small></sup></span>  (Moses) said: Your tryst shall be the day of the feast, and let the people assemble when the sun hath risen high.
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span>  Then Pharaoh went and gathered his strength, then came (to the appointed tryst).
<span id="v61"><sup><small>61</small></sup></span>  Moses said unto them: Woe unto you! Invent not a lie against Allah, lest He extirpate you by some punishment. He who lieth faileth miserably.
<span id="v62"><sup><small>62</small></sup></span>  Then they debated one with another what they must do, and they kept their counsel secret.
<span id="v63"><sup><small>63</small></sup></span>  They said: Lo! these are two wizards who would drive you out from your country by their magic, and destroy your best traditions;
<span id="v64"><sup><small>64</small></sup></span>  So arrange your plan, and come in battle line. Whoso is uppermost this day will be indeed successful.
<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span>  They said: O Moses! Either throw first, or let us be the first to throw ?
<span id="v66"><sup><small>66</small></sup></span>  He said: Nay, do ye throw! Then lo! their cords and their staves, by their magic, appeared to him as though they ran.
<span id="v67"><sup><small>67</small></sup></span>  And Moses conceived a fear in his mind.
<span id="v68"><sup><small>68</small></sup></span>  We said: Fear not! Lo! thou art the higher.
<span id="v69"><sup><small>69</small></sup></span>  Throw that which is in thy right hand! It will eat up that which they have made. Lo! that which they have made is but a wizard's artifice, and a wizard shall not be successful to whatever point (of skill) he may attain.
<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span>  Then the wizards were (all) flung down prostrate, crying: We believe in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.
<span id="v71"><sup><small>71</small></sup></span>  (Pharaoh) said: Ye put faith in him before I give you leave. Lo! he is your chief who taught you magic. Now surely I shall cut off your hands and your feet alternately, and I shall crucify you on the trunks of palm trees, and ye shall know for certain which of us hath sterner and more lasting punishment.
<span id="v72"><sup><small>72</small></sup></span>  They said: We choose thee not above the clear proofs that have come unto us, and above Him Who created us. So decree what thou wilt decree. Thou wilt end for us only this life of the world.
<span id="v73"><sup><small>73</small></sup></span>  Lo! we believe in our Lord, that He may forgive us our sins and the magic unto which thou didst force us. Allah is better and more lasting.
<span id="v74"><sup><small>74</small></sup></span>  Lo! whoso cometh guilty unto his Lord, verily for him is hell. There he will neither die nor live.
<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span>  But whoso cometh unto Him a believer, having done good works, for such are the high stations;
<span id="v76"><sup><small>76</small></sup></span>  Gardens of Eden underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide for ever. That is the reward of him who groweth.
<span id="v77"><sup><small>77</small></sup></span>  And verily We inspired Moses, saying: Take away My slaves by night and strike for them a dry path in the sea, fearing not to be overtaken, neither being afraid (of the sea).
<span id="v78"><sup><small>78</small></sup></span>  Then Pharaoh followed them with his hosts and there covered them that which did cover them of the sea.
<span id="v79"><sup><small>79</small></sup></span>  And Pharaoh led his folk astray, he did not guide them.
<span id="v80"><sup><small>80</small></sup></span>  O Children of Israel! We delivered you from your enemy, and we made a covenant with you on the holy mountain's side, and sent down on you the manna and the quails,
<span id="v81"><sup><small>81</small></sup></span>  (Saying): Eat of the good things wherewith We have provided you, and transgress not in respect thereof lest My wrath come upon you: and he on whom My wrath cometh, he is lost indeed.
<span id="v82"><sup><small>82</small></sup></span>  And lo! verily I am Forgiving toward him who repenteth and believeth and doeth good, and afterward walketh aright.
<span id="v83"><sup><small>83</small></sup></span>  And (it was said): What hath made thee hasten from thy folk, O Moses ?
<span id="v84"><sup><small>84</small></sup></span>  He said: They are close upon my track. I hastened unto Thee, my Lord, that Thou mightest be well pleased.
<span id="v85"><sup><small>85</small></sup></span>  He said: Lo! We have tried thy folk in thine absence, and As-Samiri hath misled them.
<span id="v86"><sup><small>86</small></sup></span>  Then Moses went back unto his folk, angry and sad. He said: O my people! Hath not your Lord promised you a fair promise ? Did the time appointed then appear too long for you, or did ye wish that wrath from your Lord should come upon you, that ye broke tryst with me ?
<span id="v87"><sup><small>87</small></sup></span>  They said: We broke not tryst with thee of our own will, but we were laden with burdens of ornaments of the folk, then cast them (in the fire), for thus As-Samiri proposed.
<span id="v88"><sup><small>88</small></sup></span>  Then he produced for them a calf, of saffron hue, which gave forth a lowing sound. And they cried: This is your god and the god of Moses, but he hath forgotten.
<span id="v89"><sup><small>89</small></sup></span>  See they not, then, that it returneth no saying unto them and possesseth for them neither hurt nor use ?
<span id="v90"><sup><small>90</small></sup></span>  And Aaron indeed had told them beforehand: O my people! Ye are but being seduced therewith, for lo! your Lord is the Beneficent, so follow me and obey my order.
<span id="v91"><sup><small>91</small></sup></span>  They said: We shall by no means cease to be its votaries till Moses return unto us.
<span id="v92"><sup><small>92</small></sup></span>  He (Moses) said: O Aaron! What held thee back when thou didst see them gone astray,
<span id="v93"><sup><small>93</small></sup></span>  That thou followedst me not ? Hast thou then disobeyed my order ?
<span id="v94"><sup><small>94</small></sup></span>  He said: O son of my mother! Clutch not my beard nor my head! I feared lest thou shouldst say: Thou hast caused division among the Children of Israel, and hast not waited for my word.
<span id="v95"><sup><small>95</small></sup></span>  (Moses) said: And what hast thou to say, O Samiri ?
<span id="v96"><sup><small>96</small></sup></span>  He said: I perceived what they perceive not, so I seized a handful from the footsteps of the messenger, and then threw it in. Thus my soul commended to me.
<span id="v97"><sup><small>97</small></sup></span>  (Moses) said: Then go! and lo! in this life it is for thee to say: Touch me not! and lo! there is for thee a tryst thou canst not break. Now look upon thy god of which thou hast remained a votary. Verily we will burn it and will scatter its dust over the sea.
<span id="v98"><sup><small>98</small></sup></span>  Your God is only Allah, than Whom there is no other God. He embraceth all things in His knowledge.
<span id="v99"><sup><small>99</small></sup></span>  Thus relate We unto thee (Muhammad) some tidings of that which happened of old, and We have given thee from Our presence a reminder.
<span id="v100"><sup><small>100</small></sup></span>  Whoso turneth away from it, he verily will bear a burden on the Day of Resurrection,
<span id="v101"><sup><small>101</small></sup></span>  Abiding under it - an evil burden for them on the Day of Resurrection,
<span id="v102"><sup><small>102</small></sup></span>  The day when the Trumpet is blown. On that day we assemble the guilty white-eyed (with terror),
<span id="v103"><sup><small>103</small></sup></span>  Murmuring among themselves: Ye have tarried but ten (days).
<span id="v104"><sup><small>104</small></sup></span>  We are Best Aware of what they utter when their best in conduct say: Ye have tarried but a day.
<span id="v105"><sup><small>105</small></sup></span>  They will ask thee of the mountains (on that day). Say: My Lord will break them into scattered dust.
<span id="v106"><sup><small>106</small></sup></span>  And leave it as an empty plain,
<span id="v107"><sup><small>107</small></sup></span>  Wherein thou seest neither curve nor ruggedness.
<span id="v108"><sup><small>108</small></sup></span>  On that day they follow the summoner who deceiveth not, and voices are hushed for the Beneficent, and thou hearest but a faint murmur.
<span id="v109"><sup><small>109</small></sup></span>  On that day no intercession availeth save (that of) him unto whom the Beneficent hath given leave and whose word He accepteth.
<span id="v110"><sup><small>110</small></sup></span>  He knoweth (all) that is before them and (all) that is behind them, while they cannot compass it in knowledge.
<span id="v111"><sup><small>111</small></sup></span>  And faces humble themselves before the Living, the Eternal. And he who beareth (a burden of) wrongdoing is indeed a failure (on that day).
<span id="v112"><sup><small>112</small></sup></span>  And he who hath done some good works, being a believer, he feareth not injustice nor begrudging (of his wage).
<span id="v113"><sup><small>113</small></sup></span>  Thus we have revealed it as a Lecture in Arabic, and have displayed therein certain threats, that peradventure they may keep from evil or that it may cause them to take heed.
<span id="v114"><sup><small>114</small></sup></span>  Then exalted be Allah, the True King! And hasten not (O Muhammad) with the Qur'an ere its revelation hath been perfected unto thee, and say: My Lord! Increase me in knowledge.
<span id="v115"><sup><small>115</small></sup></span>  And verily We made a covenant of old with Adam, but he forgot, and We found no constancy in him.
<span id="v116"><sup><small>116</small></sup></span>  And when We said unto the angels: Fall prostrate before Adam, they fell prostrate (all) save Iblis; he refused.
<span id="v117"><sup><small>117</small></sup></span>  Therefor we said: O Adam! This is an enemy unto thee and unto thy wife, so let him not drive you both out of the Garden so that thou come to toil.
<span id="v118"><sup><small>118</small></sup></span>  It is (vouchsafed) unto thee that thou hungerest not therein nor art naked,
<span id="v119"><sup><small>119</small></sup></span>  And that thou thirstest not therein nor art exposed to the sun's heat.
<span id="v120"><sup><small>120</small></sup></span>  But the devil whispered to him, saying: O Adam! Shall I show thee the tree of immortality and power that wasteth not away ?
<span id="v121"><sup><small>121</small></sup></span>  Then they twain ate thereof, so that their shame became apparent unto them, and they began to hide by heaping on themselves some of the leaves of the Garden. And Adam disobeyed his Lord, so went astray.
<span id="v122"><sup><small>122</small></sup></span>  Then his Lord chose him, and relented toward him, and guided him.
<span id="v123"><sup><small>123</small></sup></span>  He said: Go down hence, both of you, one of you a foe unto the other. But when there come unto you from Me a guidance, then whoso followeth My guidance, he will not go astray nor come to grief.
<span id="v124"><sup><small>124</small></sup></span>  But he who turneth away from remembrance of Me, his will be a narrow life, and I shall bring him blind to the assembly on the Day of Resurrection.
<span id="v125"><sup><small>125</small></sup></span>  He will say: My Lord! Wherefor hast Thou gathered me (hither) blind, when I was wont to see ?
<span id="v126"><sup><small>126</small></sup></span>  He will say: So (it must be). Our revelations came unto thee but thou didst forget them. In like manner thou art forgotten this Day.
<span id="v127"><sup><small>127</small></sup></span>  Thus do We reward him who is prodigal and believeth not the revelations of his Lord; and verily the doom of the Hereafter will be sterner and more lasting.
<span id="v128"><sup><small>128</small></sup></span>  Is it not a guidance for them (to know) how many a generation We destroyed before them, amid whose dwellings they walk ? Lo! therein verily are signs for men of thought.
<span id="v129"><sup><small>129</small></sup></span>  And but for a decree that had already gone forth from thy Lord, and a term already fixed, the judgment would have been inevitable (in this world).
<span id="v130"><sup><small>130</small></sup></span>  Therefor (O Muhammad), bear with what they say, and celebrate the praise of thy Lord ere the rising of the sun and ere the going down thereof. And glorify Him some hours of the night and at the two ends of the day, that thou mayst find acceptance.
<span id="v131"><sup><small>131</small></sup></span>  And strain not thine eyes toward that which We cause some wedded pairs among them to enjoy, the flower of the life of the world, that We may try them thereby. The provision of thy Lord is better and more lasting.
<span id="v132"><sup><small>132</small></sup></span>  And enjoin upon thy people worship, and be constant therein. We ask not of thee a provision: We provided for thee. And the sequel is for righteousness.
<span id="v133"><sup><small>133</small></sup></span>  And they say: If only he would bring us a miracle from his Lord! Hath there not come unto them the proof of what is in the former scriptures ?
<span id="v134"><sup><small>134</small></sup></span>  And if we had destroyed them with some punishment before it, they would assuredly have said: Our Lord! If only Thou hadst sent unto us a messenger, so that we might have followed Thy revelations before we were (thus) humbled and disgraced!
<span id="v135"><sup><small>135</small></sup></span>  Say: Each is awaiting; so await ye! Ye will come to know who are the owners of the path of equity, and who is right.