---
title: "Qur'an — 22.  al-Hajj: The Pilgrimage"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/21">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">21. al-Anbiya': The Prophets</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/23">
          <span class="pr-2">23. al-Mu'minun: The Believers</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  O mankind! Fear your Lord. Lo! the earthquake of the Hour (of Doom) is a tremendous thing.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  On the day when ye behold it, every nursing mother will forget her nursling and every pregnant one will be delivered of her burden, and thou (Muhammad) wilt see mankind as drunken, yet they will not be drunken, but the Doom of Allah will be strong (upon them).
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Among mankind is he who disputeth concerning Allah without knowledge, and followeth each froward devil;
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  For him it is decreed that whoso taketh him for friend, he verily will mislead him and will guide him to the punishment of the Flame.
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  O mankind! if ye are in doubt concerning the Resurrection, then lo! We have created you from dust, then from a drop of seed, then from a clot, then from a little lump of flesh shapely and shapeless, that We may make (it) clear for you. And We cause what We will to remain in the wombs for an appointed time, and afterward We bring you forth as infants, then (give you growth) that ye attain your full strength. And among you there is he who dieth (young), and among you there is he who is brought back to the most abject time of life, so that, after knowledge, he knoweth naught. And thou (Muhammad) seest the earth barren, but when We send down water thereon, it doth thrill and swell and put forth every lovely kind (of growth).
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  That is because Allah, He is the Truth and because He quickeneth the dead, and because He is Able to do all things;
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And because the Hour will come, there is no doubt thereof; and because Allah will raise those who are in the graves.
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And among mankind is he who disputeth concerning Allah without knowledge or guidance or a scripture giving light,
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  Turning away in pride to beguile (men) from the way of Allah. For him in this world is ignominy, and on the Day of Resurrection We make him taste the doom of burning.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  (And unto him it will be said): This is for that which thy two hands have sent before, and because Allah is no oppressor of His slaves.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And among mankind is he who worshippeth Allah upon a narrow marge so that if good befalleth him he is content therewith, but if a trial befalleth him, he falleth away utterly. He loseth both the world and the Hereafter. That is the sheer loss.
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  He calleth, beside Allah, unto that which hurteth him not nor benefiteth him. That is the far error.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  He calleth unto him whose harm is nearer than his benefit; verily an evil patron and verily an evil friend!
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  Lo! Allah causeth those who believe and do good works to enter Gardens underneath which rivers flow. Lo! Allah doth what He intendeth.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  Whoso is wont to think (through envy) that Allah will not give him (Muhammad) victory in the world and the Hereafter (and is enraged at the thought of his victory), let him stretch a rope up to the roof (of his dwelling), and let him hang himself. Then let him see whether his strategy dispelleth that whereat he rageth!.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  Thus We reveal it as plain revelations, and verily Allah guideth whom He will.
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  Lo! those who believe (this revelation), and those who are Jews, and the Sabaeans and the Christians and the Magians and the idolaters - Lo! Allah will decide between them on the Day of Resurrection. Lo! Allah is Witness over all things.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  Hast thou not seen that unto Allah payeth adoration whosoever is in the heavens and whosoever is in the earth, and the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and the hills, and the trees, and the beasts, and many of mankind, while there are many unto whom the doom is justly due. He whom Allah scorneth, there is none to give him honour. Lo! Allah doeth what He will.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  These twain (the believers and the disbelievers) are two opponents who contend concerning their Lord. But as for those who disbelieve, garments of fire will be cut out for them; boiling fluid will be poured down on their heads,
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  Whereby that which is in their bellies, and their skins too, will be melted;
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  And for them are hooked rods of iron.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  Whenever, in their anguish, they would go forth from thence they are driven back therein and (it is said unto them): Taste the doom of burning.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  Lo! Allah will cause those who believe and do good works to enter Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will be allowed armlets of gold, and pearls, and their raiment therein will be silk.
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  They are guided unto gentle speech; they are guided unto the path of the Glorious One.
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  Lo! those who disbelieve and bar (men) from the way of Allah and from the Inviolable Place of Worship, which We have appointed for mankind together, the dweller therein and the nomad: whosoever seeketh wrongful partiality therein, him We shall cause to taste a painful doom.
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  And (remember) when We prepared for Abraham the place of the (holy) House, saying: Ascribe thou no thing as partner unto Me, and purify My House for those who make the round (thereof) and those who stand and those who bow and make prostration.
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  And proclaim unto mankind the pilgrimage. They will come unto thee on foot and on every lean camel; they will come from every deep ravine,
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  That they may witness things that are of benefit to them, and mention the name of Allah on appointed days over the beast of cattle that He hath bestowed upon them. Then eat thereof and feed therewith the poor unfortunate.
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  Then let them make an end of their unkemptness and pay their vows and go around the ancient House.
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  That (is the command). And whoso magnifieth the sacred things of Allah, it will be well for him in the sight of his Lord. The cattle are lawful unto you save that which hath been told you. So shun the filth of idols, and shun lying speech,
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span>  Turning unto Allah (only), not ascribing partners unto Him; for whoso ascribeth partners unto Allah, it is as if he had fallen from the sky and the birds had snatched him or the wind had blown him to a far-off place.
<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span>  That (is the command). And whoso magnifieth the offerings consecrated to Allah, it surely is from devotion of the hearts,
<span id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span>  Therein are benefits for you for an appointed term; and afterward they are brought for sacrifice unto the ancient House.
<span id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span>  And for every nation have We appointed a ritual, that they may mention the name of Allah over the beast of cattle that He hath given them for food; and your God is One God, therefor surrender unto Him. And give good tidings (O Muhammad) to the humble,
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span>  Whose hearts fear when Allah is mentioned, and the patient of whatever may befall them, and those who establish worship and who spend of that We have bestowed on them.
<span id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span>  And the camels! We have appointed them among the ceremonies of Allah. Therein ye have much good. So mention the name of Allah over them when they are drawn up in lines. Then when their flanks fall (dead), eat thereof and feed the beggar and the suppliant. Thus have We made them subject unto you, that haply ye may give thanks.
<span id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup></span>  Their flesh and their food reach not Allah, but the devotion from you reacheth Him. Thus have We made them subject unto you that ye may magnify Allah that He hath guided you. And give good tidings (O Muhammad) to the good.
<span id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup></span>  Lo! Allah defendeth those who are true. Lo! Allah loveth not each treacherous ingrate.
<span id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span>  Sanction is given unto those who fight because they have been wronged; and Allah is indeed Able to give them victory;
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span>  Those who have been driven from their homes unjustly only because they said: Our Lord is Allah - For had it not been for Allah's repelling some men by means of others, cloisters and churches and oratories and mosques, wherein the name of Allah is oft mentioned, would assuredly have been pulled down. Verily Allah helpeth one who helpeth Him. Lo! Allah is Strong, Almighty -
<span id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup></span>  Those who, if We give them power in the land, establish worship and pay the poor-due and enjoin kindness and forbid iniquity. And Allah's is the sequel of events.
<span id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup></span>  If they deny thee (Muhammad), even so the folk of Noah, and (the tribes of) A'ad and Thamud, before thee, denied (Our messengers);
<span id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup></span>  And the folk of Abraham and the folk of Lot;
<span id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup></span>  (And) the dwellers in Midian. And Moses was denied; but I indulged the disbelievers a long while, then I seized them, and how (terrible) was My abhorrence!
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span>  How many a township have We destroyed while it was sinful, so that it lieth (to this day) in ruins, and (how many) a deserted well and lofty tower!
<span id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup></span>  Have they not travelled in the land, and have they hearts wherewith to feel and ears wherewith to hear ? For indeed it is not the eyes that grow blind, but it is the hearts, which are within the bosoms, that grow blind.
<span id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup></span>  And they will bid thee hasten on the Doom, and Allah faileth not His promise, but lo! a Day with Allah is as a thousand years of what ye reckon.
<span id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup></span>  And how many a township did I suffer long though it was sinful! Then I grasped it. Unto Me is the return.
<span id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup></span>  Say: O mankind! I am only a plain warner unto you.
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span>  Those who believe and do good works, for them is pardon and a rich provision;
<span id="v51"><sup><small>51</small></sup></span>  While those who strive to thwart Our revelations, such are rightful owners of the Fire.
<span id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup></span>  Never sent We a messenger or a prophet before thee but when He recited (the message) Satan proposed (opposition) in respect of that which he recited thereof. But Allah abolisheth that which Satan proposeth. Then Allah establisheth His revelations. Allah is Knower, Wise;
<span id="v53"><sup><small>53</small></sup></span>  That He may make that which the devil proposeth a temptation for those in whose hearts is a disease, and those whose hearts are hardened - Lo! the evil-doers are in open schism -
<span id="v54"><sup><small>54</small></sup></span>  And that those who have been given knowledge may know that it is the truth from thy Lord, so that they may believe therein and their hearts may submit humbly unto Him. Lo! Allah verily is guiding those who believe unto a right path.
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span>  And those who disbelieve will not cease to be in doubt thereof until the Hour come upon them unawares, or there come unto them the doom of a disastrous day.
<span id="v56"><sup><small>56</small></sup></span>  The Sovereignty on that day will be Allah's, He will judge between them. Then those who believed and did good works will be in Gardens of Delight,
<span id="v57"><sup><small>57</small></sup></span>  While those who disbelieved and denied Our revelations, for them will be a shameful doom.
<span id="v58"><sup><small>58</small></sup></span>  Those who fled their homes for the cause of Allah and then were slain or died, Allah verily will provide for them a good provision. Lo! Allah, He verily is Best of all who make provision.
<span id="v59"><sup><small>59</small></sup></span>  Assuredly He will cause them to enter by an entry that they will love. Lo! Allah verily is Knower, Indulgent.
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span>  That (is so). And whoso hath retaliated with the like of that which he was made to suffer and then hath (again) been wronged, Allah will succour him. Lo! Allah verily is Mild, Forgiving.
<span id="v61"><sup><small>61</small></sup></span>  That is because Allah maketh the night to pass into the day and maketh the day to pass into the night, and because Allah is Hearer, Seer.
<span id="v62"><sup><small>62</small></sup></span>  That is because Allah, He is the True, and that whereon they call instead of Him, it is the false, and because Allah, He is the High, the Great.
<span id="v63"><sup><small>63</small></sup></span>  Seest thou not how Allah sendeth down water from the sky and then the earth becometh green upon the morrow ? Lo! Allah is Subtile, Aware.
<span id="v64"><sup><small>64</small></sup></span>  Unto Him belongeth all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth. Lo! Allah, He verily is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise.
<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span>  Hast thou not seen how Allah hath made all that is in the earth subservient unto you ? And the ship runneth upon the sea by His command, and He holdeth back the heaven from falling on the earth unless by His leave. Lo! Allah is, for mankind, Full of Pity, Merciful.
<span id="v66"><sup><small>66</small></sup></span>  And He it is Who gave you life, then He will cause you to die, and then will give you life (again). Lo! man is verily an ingrate.
<span id="v67"><sup><small>67</small></sup></span>  Unto each nation have We given sacred rites which they are to perform; so let them not dispute with thee of the matter, but summon thou unto thy Lord. Lo! thou indeed followest right guidance.
<span id="v68"><sup><small>68</small></sup></span>  And if they wrangle with thee, say: Allah is Best Aware of what ye do.
<span id="v69"><sup><small>69</small></sup></span>  Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein ye used to differ.
<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span>  Hast thou not known that Allah knoweth all that is in the heaven and the earth ? Lo! it is in a record. Lo! that is easy for Allah.
<span id="v71"><sup><small>71</small></sup></span>  And they worship instead of Allah that for which He hath sent down no warrant, and that whereof they have no knowledge. For evil-doers there is no helper.
<span id="v72"><sup><small>72</small></sup></span>  And when Our revelations are recited unto them, thou knowest the denial in the faces of those who disbelieve; they all but attack those who recite Our revelations unto them. Say: Shall I proclaim unto you worse than that ? The Fire! Allah hath promised it for those who disbelieve. A hapless journey's end!
<span id="v73"><sup><small>73</small></sup></span>  O mankind! A similitude is coined, so pay ye heed to it: Lo! those on whom ye call beside Allah will never create a fly though they combine together for the purpose. And if the fly took something from them, they could not rescue it from it. So weak are (both) the seeker and the sought!
<span id="v74"><sup><small>74</small></sup></span>  They measure not Allah His rightful measure. Lo! Allah is Strong, Almighty.
<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span>  Allah chooseth from the angels messengers, and (also) from mankind. Lo! Allah is Hearer, Seer.
<span id="v76"><sup><small>76</small></sup></span>  He knoweth all that is before them and all that is behind them, and unto Allah all things are returned.
<span id="v77"><sup><small>77</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Bow down and prostrate yourselves, and worship your Lord, and do good, that haply ye may prosper.
<span id="v78"><sup><small>78</small></sup></span>  And strive for Allah with the endeavour which is His right. He hath chosen you and hath not laid upon you in religion any hardship; the faith of your father Abraham (is yours). He hath named you Muslims of old time and in this (Scripture), that the messenger may be a witness against you, and that ye may be witnesses against mankind. So establish worship, pay the poor-due, and hold fast to Allah. He is your Protecting friend. A blessed Patron and a blessed Helper!

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/21">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">21. al-Anbiya': The Prophets</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/23">
          <span class="pr-2">23. al-Mu'minun: The Believers</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>