---
title: "Qur'an — 23.  al-Mu'minun: The Believers"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/22">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">22. al-Hajj: The Pilgrimage</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/24">
          <span class="pr-2">24. an-Nur: The Light</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Successful indeed are the believers
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Who are humble in their prayers,
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And who shun vain conversation,
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And who are payers of the poor-due;
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And who guard their modesty -
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  Save from their wives or the (slaves) that their right hands possess, for then they are not blameworthy,
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  But whoso craveth beyond that, such are transgressors -
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And who are shepherds of their pledge and their covenant,
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And who pay heed to their prayers.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  These are the heirs
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  Who will inherit paradise. There they will abide.
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  Verily We created man from a product of wet earth;
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  Then placed him as a drop (of seed) in a safe lodging;
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  Then fashioned We the drop a clot, then fashioned We the clot a little lump, then fashioned We the little lump bones, then clothed the bones with flesh, and then produced it as another creation. So blessed be Allah, the Best of creators!
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  Then lo! after that ye surely die.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  Then lo! on the Day of Resurrection ye are raised (again).
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  And We have created above you seven paths, and We are never unmindful of creation.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  And we send down from the sky water in measure, and We give it lodging in the earth, and lo! We are Able to withdraw it.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  Then We produce for you therewith gardens of date-palms and grapes, wherein is much fruit for you and whereof ye eat;
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  And a tree that springeth forth from Mount Sinai that groweth oil and relish for the eaters.
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  And lo! in the cattle there is verily a lesson for you. We give you to drink of that which is in their bellies, and many uses have ye in them, and of them do ye eat;
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  And on them and on the ship ye are carried.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  And We verily sent Noah unto his folk, and he said: O my people! Serve Allah. Ye have no other God save Him. Will ye not ward off (evil) ?
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  But the chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved, said: This is only a mortal like you who would make himself superior to you. Had Allah willed, He surely could have sent down angels. We heard not of this in the case of our fathers of old.
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  He is only a man in whom is a madness, so watch him for a while.
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  He said: My Lord! Help me because they deny me.
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  Then We inspired in him, saying: Make the ship under Our eyes and Our inspiration. Then, when Our command cometh and the oven gusheth water, introduce therein of every (kind) two spouses, and thy household save him thereof against whom the Word hath already gone forth. And plead not with Me on behalf of those who have done wrong. Lo! they will be drowned.
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  And when thou art on board the ship, thou and whoso is with thee, then say: Praise be to Allah Who hath saved us from the wrongdoing folk!
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  And say: My Lord! Cause me to land at a blessed landing-place, for Thou art Best of all who bring to land.
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  Lo! herein verily are portents, for lo! We are ever putting (mankind) to the test.
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span>  Then, after them, We brought forth another generation;
<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span>  And we sent among them a messenger of their own, saying: Serve Allah, Ye have no other God save Him. Will ye not ward off (evil) ?
<span id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span>  And the chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved and denied the meeting of the Hereafter, and whom We had made soft in the life of the world, said: This is only a mortal like you, who eateth of that whereof ye eat and drinketh of that ye drink.
<span id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span>  If ye were to obey a mortal like yourselves, then, lo! ye surely would be losers.
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span>  Doth he promise you that you, when ye are dead and have become dust and bones, will (again) be brought forth ?
<span id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span>  Begone, begone, with that which ye are promised!
<span id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup></span>  There is naught but our life of the world; we die and we live, and we shall not be raised (again).
<span id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup></span>  He is only a man who hath invented a lie about Allah. We are not going to put faith in him.
<span id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span>  He said: My Lord! Help me because they deny me.
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span>  He said: In a little while they surely will become repentant.
<span id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup></span>  So the (Awful) Cry overtook them rightfully, and We made them like as wreckage (that a torrent hurleth). A far removal for wrongdoing folk!
<span id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup></span>  Then after them We brought forth other generations.
<span id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup></span>  No nation can outstrip its term, nor yet postpone it.
<span id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup></span>  Then We sent our messengers one after another. Whenever its messenger came unto a nation they denied him; so We caused them to follow one another (to disaster) and We made them bywords. A far removal for folk who believe not!
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span>  Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our tokens and a clear warrant
<span id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup></span>  Unto Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they scorned (them) and they were despotic folk.
<span id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup></span>  And they said: Shall we put faith in two mortals like ourselves, and whose folk are servile unto us ?
<span id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup></span>  So they denied them, and became of those who were destroyed.
<span id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup></span>  And We verily gave Moses the Scripture, that haply they might go aright.
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span>  And We made the son of Mary and his mother a portent, and We gave them refuge on a height, a place of flocks and watersprings.
<span id="v51"><sup><small>51</small></sup></span>  O ye messengers! Eat of the good things, and do right. Lo! I am Aware of what ye do.
<span id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup></span>  And lo! this your religion is one religion and I am your Lord, so keep your duty unto Me.
<span id="v53"><sup><small>53</small></sup></span>  But they (mankind) have broken their religion among them into sects, each group rejoicing in its tenets.
<span id="v54"><sup><small>54</small></sup></span>  So leave them in their error till a time.
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span>  Think they that in the wealth and sons wherewith We provide them
<span id="v56"><sup><small>56</small></sup></span>  We hasten unto them with good things ? Nay, but they perceive not.
<span id="v57"><sup><small>57</small></sup></span>  Lo! those who go in awe for fear of their Lord.
<span id="v58"><sup><small>58</small></sup></span>  And those who believe in the revelations of their Lord,
<span id="v59"><sup><small>59</small></sup></span>  And those who ascribe not partners unto their Lord,
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span>  And those who give that which they give with hearts afraid because they are about to return unto their Lord,
<span id="v61"><sup><small>61</small></sup></span>  These race for the good things, and they shall win them in the race.
<span id="v62"><sup><small>62</small></sup></span>  And we task not any soul beyond its scope, and with Us is a Record which speaketh the truth, and they will not be wronged.
<span id="v63"><sup><small>63</small></sup></span>  Nay, but their hearts are in ignorance of this (Qur'an), and they have other works, besides, which they are doing;
<span id="v64"><sup><small>64</small></sup></span>  Till when We grasp their luxurious ones with the punishment, behold! they supplicate.
<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span>  Supplicate not this day! Assuredly ye will not be helped by Us.
<span id="v66"><sup><small>66</small></sup></span>  My revelations were recited unto you, but ye used to turn back on your heels,
<span id="v67"><sup><small>67</small></sup></span>  In scorn thereof. Nightly did ye rave together.
<span id="v68"><sup><small>68</small></sup></span>  Have they not pondered the Word, or hath that come unto them which came not unto their fathers of old ?
<span id="v69"><sup><small>69</small></sup></span>  Or know they not their messenger, and so reject him ?
<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span>  Or say they: There is a madness in him ? Nay, but he bringeth them the Truth; and most of them are haters of the Truth.
<span id="v71"><sup><small>71</small></sup></span>  And if the Truth had followed their desires, verily the heavens and the earth and whosoever is therein had been corrupted. Nay, We have brought them their Reminder, but from their Reminder they now turn away.
<span id="v72"><sup><small>72</small></sup></span>  Or dost thou ask of them (O Muhammad) any tribute ? But the bounty of thy Lord is better, for He is Best of all who make provision.
<span id="v73"><sup><small>73</small></sup></span>  And lo! thou summonest them indeed unto a straight path.
<span id="v74"><sup><small>74</small></sup></span>  And lo! those who believe not in the Hereafter are indeed astray from the path.
<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span>  Though We had mercy on them and relieved them of the harm afflicting them, they still would wander blindly on in their contumacy.
<span id="v76"><sup><small>76</small></sup></span>  Already have We grasped them with punishment, but they humble not themselves unto their Lord, nor do they pray,
<span id="v77"><sup><small>77</small></sup></span>  Until, when We open for them the gate of extreme punishment, behold! they are aghast thereat.
<span id="v78"><sup><small>78</small></sup></span>  He it is Who hath created for you ears and eyes and hearts. Small thanks give ye!
<span id="v79"><sup><small>79</small></sup></span>  And He it is Who hath sown you broadcast in the earth, and unto Him ye will be gathered.
<span id="v80"><sup><small>80</small></sup></span>  And He it is Who giveth life and causeth death, and His is the difference of night and day. Have ye then no sense ?
<span id="v81"><sup><small>81</small></sup></span>  Nay, but they say the like of that which said the men of old;
<span id="v82"><sup><small>82</small></sup></span>  They say: When we are dead and have become (mere) dust and bones, shall we then, forsooth, be raised again ?
<span id="v83"><sup><small>83</small></sup></span>  We were already promised this, we and our forefathers. Lo! this is naught but fables of the men of old.
<span id="v84"><sup><small>84</small></sup></span>  Say: Unto Whom (belongeth) the earth and whosoever is therein, if ye have knowledge ?
<span id="v85"><sup><small>85</small></sup></span>  They will say: Unto Allah. Say: Will ye not then remember ?
<span id="v86"><sup><small>86</small></sup></span>  Say: Who is Lord of the seven heavens, and Lord of the Tremendous Throne ?
<span id="v87"><sup><small>87</small></sup></span>  They will say: Unto Allah (all that belongeth). Say: Will ye not then keep duty (unto Him) ?
<span id="v88"><sup><small>88</small></sup></span>  Say: In Whose hand is the dominion over all things and He protecteth, while against Him there is no protection, if ye have knowledge ?
<span id="v89"><sup><small>89</small></sup></span>  They will say: Unto Allah (all that belongeth). Say: How then are ye bewitched ?
<span id="v90"><sup><small>90</small></sup></span>  Nay, but We have brought them the Truth, and lo! they are liars.
<span id="v91"><sup><small>91</small></sup></span>  Allah hath not chosen any son, nor is there any god along with Him; else would each god have assuredly championed that which he created, and some of them would assuredly have overcome others. Glorified be Allah above all that they allege.
<span id="v92"><sup><small>92</small></sup></span>  Knower of the Invisible and the Visible! and Exalted be He over all that they ascribe as partners (unto Him)!
<span id="v93"><sup><small>93</small></sup></span>  Say: My Lord! If Thou shouldst show me that which they are promised.
<span id="v94"><sup><small>94</small></sup></span>  My Lord! then set me not among the wrongdoing folk.
<span id="v95"><sup><small>95</small></sup></span>  And verily We are Able to show thee that which We have promised them.
<span id="v96"><sup><small>96</small></sup></span>  Repel evil with that which is better. We are Best Aware of that which they allege.
<span id="v97"><sup><small>97</small></sup></span>  And say: My Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from suggestions of the evil ones,
<span id="v98"><sup><small>98</small></sup></span>  And I seek refuge in Thee, my Lord, lest they be present with me,
<span id="v99"><sup><small>99</small></sup></span>  Until, when death cometh unto one of them, he saith: My Lord! Send me back,
<span id="v100"><sup><small>100</small></sup></span>  That I may do right in that which I have left behind! But nay! It is but a word that he speaketh; and behind them is a barrier until the day when they are raised.
<span id="v101"><sup><small>101</small></sup></span>  And when the trumpet is blown there will be no kinship among them that day, nor will they ask of one another.
<span id="v102"><sup><small>102</small></sup></span>  Then those whose scales are heavy, they are the successful.
<span id="v103"><sup><small>103</small></sup></span>  And those whose scales are light are those who lose their souls, in hell abiding.
<span id="v104"><sup><small>104</small></sup></span>  The fire burneth their faces, and they are glum therein.
<span id="v105"><sup><small>105</small></sup></span>  (It will be said): Were not My revelations recited unto you, and then ye used to deny them ?
<span id="v106"><sup><small>106</small></sup></span>  They will say: Our Lord! Our evil fortune conquered us, and we were erring folk.
<span id="v107"><sup><small>107</small></sup></span>  Our Lord! Oh, bring us forth from hence! If we return (to evil) then indeed we shall be wrong-doers.
<span id="v108"><sup><small>108</small></sup></span>  He saith: Begone therein, and speak not unto Me.
<span id="v109"><sup><small>109</small></sup></span>  Lo! there was a party of My slaves who said: Our Lord! We believe, therefor forgive us and have mercy on us for Thou art Best of all who show mercy;
<span id="v110"><sup><small>110</small></sup></span>  But ye chose them for a laughing-stock until they caused you to forget remembrance of Me, while ye laughed at them.
<span id="v111"><sup><small>111</small></sup></span>  Lo! I have rewarded them this day forasmuch as they were steadfast in that they, even they, are the triumphant.
<span id="v112"><sup><small>112</small></sup></span>  He will say: How long tarried ye in the earth, counting by years ?
<span id="v113"><sup><small>113</small></sup></span>  They will say: We tarried by a day or part of a day. Ask of those who keep count!
<span id="v114"><sup><small>114</small></sup></span>  He will say: Ye tarried but a little if ye only knew.
<span id="v115"><sup><small>115</small></sup></span>  Deemed ye then that We had created you for naught, and that ye would not be returned unto Us ?
<span id="v116"><sup><small>116</small></sup></span>  Now Allah be Exalted, the True King! There is no God save Him, the Lord of the Throne of Grace.
<span id="v117"><sup><small>117</small></sup></span>  He who crieth unto any other god along with Allah hath no proof thereof. His reckoning is only with his Lord. Lo! disbelievers will not be successful.
<span id="v118"><sup><small>118</small></sup></span>  And (O Muhammad) say: My Lord! Forgive and have mercy, for Thou art Best of all who show mercy.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/22">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">22. al-Hajj: The Pilgrimage</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/24">
          <span class="pr-2">24. an-Nur: The Light</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>