---
title: "Qur'an — 24.  an-Nur: The Light"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/23">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">23. al-Mu'minun: The Believers</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/25">
          <span class="pr-2">25. al-Furqan: The Criterion</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  (Here is) a surah which We have revealed and enjoined, and wherein We have revealed plain tokens, that haply ye may take heed.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  The adulterer and the adulteress, scourge ye each one of them (with) a hundred stripes. And let not pity for the twain withhold you from obedience to Allah, if ye believe in Allah and the Last Day. And let a party of believers witness their punishment.
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  The adulterer shall not marry save an adulteress or an idolatress, and the adulteress none shall marry save an adulterer or an idolater. All that is forbidden unto believers.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And those who accuse honourable women but bring not four witnesses, scourge them (with) eighty stripes and never (afterward) accept their testimony - They indeed are evil-doers -
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Save those who afterward repent and make amends. (For such) lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  As for those who accuse their wives but have no witnesses except themselves; let the testimony of one of them be four testimonies, (swearing) by Allah that he is of those who speak the truth;
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And yet a fifth, invoking the curse of Allah on him if he is of those who lie.
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And it shall avert the punishment from her if she bear witness before Allah four times that the thing he saith is indeed false,
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And a fifth (time) that the wrath of Allah be upon her if he speaketh truth.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you, and that Allah is Clement, Wise, (ye had been undone).
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  Lo! they who spread the slander are a gang among you. Deem it not a bad thing for you; nay, it is good for you. Unto every man of them (will be paid) that which he hath earned of the sin; and as for him among them who had the greater share therein, his will be an awful doom.
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  Why did not the believers, men and women, when ye heard it, think good of their own own folk, and say: It is a manifest untruth ?
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  Why did they not produce four witnesses ? Since they produce not witnesses, they verily are liars in the sight of Allah.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  Had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you in the world and the Hereafter an awful doom had overtaken you for that whereof ye murmured.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  When ye welcomed it with your tongues, and uttered with your mouths that whereof ye had no knowledge, ye counted it a trifle. In the sight of Allah it is very great.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  Wherefor, when ye heard it, said ye not: It is not for us to speak of this. Glory be to Thee (O Allah)! This is awful calumny.
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  Allah admonisheth you that ye repeat not the like thereof ever, if ye are (in truth) believers.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  And He expoundeth unto you the revelations. Allah is Knower, Wise.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  Lo! those who love that slander should be spread concerning those who believe, theirs will be a painful punishment in the world and the Hereafter. Allah knoweth. Ye know not.
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  Had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you, and that Allah is Clement, Merciful, (ye had been undone).
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Follow not the footsteps of the devil. Unto whomsoever followeth the footsteps of the devil, lo! he commandeth filthiness and wrong. Had it not been for the grace of Allah and His mercy unto you, not one of you would ever have grown pure. But Allah causeth whom He will to grow. And Allah is Hearer, Knower.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  And let not those who possess dignity and ease among you swear not to give to the near of kin and to the needy, and to fugitives for the cause of Allah. Let them forgive and show indulgence. Yearn ye not that Allah may forgive you ? Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  Lo! as for those who traduce virtuous, believing women (who are) careless, cursed are they in the world and the Hereafter. Theirs will be an awful doom
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  On the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet testify against them as to what they used to do,
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  On that day Allah will pay them their just due, and they will know that Allah, He is the Manifest Truth.
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  Vile women are for vile men, and vile men for vile women. Good women are for good men, and good men for good women; such are innocent of that which people say: For them is pardon and a bountiful provision.
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Enter not houses other than your own without first announcing your presence and invoking peace upon the folk thereof. That is better for you, that ye may be heedful.
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  And if ye find no-one therein, still enter not until permission hath been given. And if it be said unto you: Go away again, then go away, for it is purer for you. Allah knoweth what ye do.
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  (It is) no sin for you to enter uninhabited houses wherein is comfort for you. Allah knoweth what ye proclaim and what ye hide.
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and be modest. That is purer for them. Lo! Allah is aware of what they do.
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span>  And tell the believing women to lower their gaze and be modest, and to display of their adornment only that which is apparent, and to draw their veils over their bosoms, and not to reveal their adornment save to their own husbands or fathers or husbands' fathers, or their sons or their husbands' sons, or their brothers or their brothers' sons or sisters' sons, or their women, or their slaves, or male attendants who lack vigour, or children who know naught of women's nakedness. And let them not stamp their feet so as to reveal what they hide of their adornment. And turn unto Allah together, O believers, in order that ye may succeed.
<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span>  And marry such of you as are solitary and the pious of your slaves and maid- servants. If they be poor, Allah will enrich them of His bounty. Allah is of ample means, Aware.
<span id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span>  And let those who cannot find a match keep chaste till Allah give them independence by His grace. And such of your slaves as seek a writing (of emancipation), write it for them if ye are aware of aught of good in them, and bestow upon them of the wealth of Allah which He hath bestowed upon you. Force not your slave-girls to whoredom that ye may seek enjoyment of the life of the world, if they would preserve their chastity. And if one force them, then (unto them), after their compulsion, lo! Allah will be Forgiving, Merciful.
<span id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span>  And verily We have sent down for you revelations that make plain, and the example of those who passed away before you. An admonition unto those who ward off (evil).
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span>  Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The similitude of His light is as a niche wherein is a lamp. The lamp is in a glass. The glass is as it were a shining star. (This lamp is) kindled from a blessed tree, an olive neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil would almost glow forth (of itself) though no fire touched it. Light upon light. Allah guideth unto His light whom He will. And Allah speaketh to mankind in allegories, for Allah is Knower of all things.
<span id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span>  (This lamp is found) in houses which Allah hath allowed to be exalted and that His name shall be remembered therein. Therein do offer praise to Him at morn and evening.
<span id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup></span>  Men whom neither merchandise nor sale beguileth from remembrance of Allah and constancy in prayer and paying to the poor their due; who fear a day when hearts and eyeballs will be overturned;
<span id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup></span>  That Allah may reward them with the best of what they did, and increase reward for them of His bounty. Allah giveth blessings without stint to whom He will.
<span id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span>  As for those who disbelieve, their deeds are as a mirage in a desert. The thirsty one supposeth it to be water till he cometh unto it and findeth it naught, and findeth, in the place thereof, Allah Who payeth him his due; and Allah is swift at reckoning.
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span>  Or as darkness on a vast, abysmal sea. There covereth him a wave, above which is a wave, above which is a cloud. Layer upon layer of darkness. When he holdeth out his hand he scarce can see it. And he for whom Allah hath not appointed light, for him there is no light.
<span id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup></span>  Hast thou not seen that Allah, He it is Whom all who are in the heavens and the earth praise, and the birds in their flight ? Of each He knoweth verily the worship and the praise; and Allah is Aware of what they do.
<span id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup></span>  And unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and unto Allah is the journeying.
<span id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup></span>  Hast thou not seen how Allah wafteth the clouds, then gathereth them, then maketh them layers, and thou seest the rain come forth from between them; He sendeth down from the heaven mountains wherein is hail, and smiteth therewith whom He will, and averteth it from whom He will. The flashing of His lightning all but snatcheth away the sight.
<span id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup></span>  Allah causeth the revolution of the day and the night. Lo! herein is indeed a lesson for those who see.
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span>  Allah hath created every animal of water. Of them is (a kind) that goeth upon its belly and (a kind) that goeth upon two legs and (a kind) that goeth upon four. Allah createth what He will. Lo! Allah is Able to do all things.
<span id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup></span>  Verily We have sent down revelations and explained them. Allah guideth whom He will unto a straight path.
<span id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup></span>  And they say: We believe in Allah and the messenger, and we obey; then after that a faction of them turn away. Such are not believers.
<span id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup></span>  And when they appeal unto Allah and His messenger to judge between them, lo! a faction of them are averse;
<span id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup></span>  But if right had been with them they would have come unto him willingly.
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span>  Is there in their hearts a disease, or have they doubts, or fear they lest Allah and His messenger should wrong them in judgment ? Nay, but such are evil-doers.
<span id="v51"><sup><small>51</small></sup></span>  The saying of (all true) believers when they appeal unto Allah and His messenger to judge between them is only that they say: We hear and we obey. And such are the successful.
<span id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup></span>  He who obeyeth Allah and His messenger, and feareth Allah, and keepeth duty (unto Him): such indeed are the victorious.
<span id="v53"><sup><small>53</small></sup></span>  They swear by Allah solemnly that, if thou order them, they will go forth. Say: Swear not; known obedience (is better). Lo! Allah is Informed of what ye do.
<span id="v54"><sup><small>54</small></sup></span>  Say: Obey Allah and obey the messenger. But if ye turn away, then (it is) for him (to do) only that wherewith he hath been charged, and for you (to do) only that wherewith ye have been charged. If ye obey him, ye will go aright. But the messenger hath no other charge than to convey (the message) plainly.
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span>  Allah hath promised such of you as believe and do good work that He will surely make them to succeed (the present rulers) in the earth even as He caused those who were before them to succeed (others); and that He will surely establish for them their religion which He hath approved for them, and will give them in exchange safety after their fear. They serve Me. They ascribe no thing as partner unto Me. Those who disbelieve henceforth, they are the miscreants.
<span id="v56"><sup><small>56</small></sup></span>  Establish worship and pay the poor-due and obey the messenger, that haply ye may find mercy.
<span id="v57"><sup><small>57</small></sup></span>  Think not that the disbelievers can escape in the land. Fire will be their home - a hapless journey's end!
<span id="v58"><sup><small>58</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Let your slaves, and those of you who have not come to puberty, ask leave of you at three times (before they come into your presence): Before the prayer of dawn, and when ye lay aside your raiment for the heat of noon, and after the prayer of night. Three times of privacy for you. It is no sin for them or for you at other times, when some of you go round attendant upon others (if they come into your presence without leave). Thus Allah maketh clear the revelations for you. Allah is Knower, Wise.
<span id="v59"><sup><small>59</small></sup></span>  And when the children among you come to puberty then let them ask leave even as those before them used to ask it. Thus Allah maketh clear His revelations for you. Allah is Knower, Wise.
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span>  As for women past child-bearing, who have no hope of marriage, it is no sin for them if they discard their (outer) clothing in such a way as not to show adornment. But to refrain is better for them. Allah is Hearer, Knower.
<span id="v61"><sup><small>61</small></sup></span>  No blame is there upon the blind nor any blame upon the lame nor any blame upon the sick nor on yourselves if ye eat from your houses, or the houses of your fathers, or the houses of your mothers, or the houses of your brothers, or the houses of your sisters, or the houses of your fathers' brothers, or the houses of your fathers' sisters, or the houses of your mothers' brothers, or the houses of your mothers' sisters, or (from that) whereof ye hold the keys, or (from the house) of a friend. No sin shall it be for you whether ye eat together or apart. But when ye enter houses, salute one another with a greeting from Allah, blessed and sweet. Thus Allah maketh clear His revelations for you, that haply ye may understand.
<span id="v62"><sup><small>62</small></sup></span>  They only are the true believers who believe in Allah and His messenger and, when they are with him on some common errand, go not away until they have asked leave of him. Lo! those who ask leave of thee, those are they who believe in Allah and His messenger. So, if they ask thy leave for some affair of theirs, give leave to whom thou wilt of them, and ask for them forgiveness of Allah. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
<span id="v63"><sup><small>63</small></sup></span>  Make not the calling of the messenger among you as your calling one of another. Allah knoweth those of you who steal away, hiding themselves. And let those who conspire to evade orders beware lest grief or painful punishment befall them.
<span id="v64"><sup><small>64</small></sup></span>  Lo! verily unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. He knoweth your condition. And (He knoweth) the Day when they are returned unto Him so that He may inform them of what they did. Allah is Knower of all things.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/23">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">23. al-Mu'minun: The Believers</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/25">
          <span class="pr-2">25. al-Furqan: The Criterion</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>