---
title: "Qur'an — 33.  al-Ahzab: The Allies"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/32">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">32. as-Sajdah: The Adoration</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/34">
          <span class="pr-2">34. Saba': Sheba</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  O Prophet! Keep thy duty to Allah and obey not the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Lo! Allah is Knower, Wise.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And follow that which is inspired in thee from thy Lord. Lo! Allah is Aware of what ye do.
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And put thy trust in Allah, for Allah is sufficient as Trustee.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Allah hath not assigned unto any man two hearts within his body, nor hath He made your wives whom ye declare (to be your mothers) your mothers, nor hath He made those whom ye claim (to be your sons) your sons. This is but a saying of your mouths. But Allah saith the truth and He showeth the way.
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Proclaim their real parentage. That will be more equitable in the sight of Allah. And if ye know not their fathers, then (they are) your brethren in the faith, and your clients. And there is no sin for you in the mistakes that ye make unintentionally, but what your hearts purpose (that will be a sin for you). Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  The Prophet is closer to the believers than their selves, and his wives are (as) their mothers. And the owners of kinship are closer one to another in the ordinance of Allah than (other) believers and the fugitives (who fled from Mecca), except that ye should do kindness to your friends. This is written in the Book (of nature).
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And when We exacted a covenant from the prophets, and from thee (O Muhammad) and from Noah and Abraham and Moses and Jesus son of Mary. We took from them a solemn covenant;
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  That He may ask the loyal of their loyalty. And He hath prepared a painful doom for the unfaithful.
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Remember Allah's favour unto you when there came against you hosts, and We sent against them a great wind and hosts ye could not see. And Allah is ever Seer of what ye do.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  When they came upon you from above you and from below you, and when eyes grew wild and hearts reached to the throats, and ye were imagining vain thoughts concerning Allah.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  There were the believers sorely tried, and shaken with a mighty shock.
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  And when the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, were saying: Allah and His messenger promised us naught but delusion.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  And when a party of them said: O folk of Yathrib! There is no stand (possible) for you, therefor turn back. And certain of them (even) sought permission of the Prophet, saying: Our homes lie open (to the enemy). And they lay not open. They but wished to flee.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  If the enemy had entered from all sides and they had been exhorted to treachery, they would have committed it, and would have hesitated thereupon but little.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  And verily they had already sworn unto Allah that they would not turn their backs (to the foe). An oath to Allah must be answered for.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  Say: Flight will not avail you if ye flee from death or killing, and then ye dwell in comfort but a little while.
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  Say: Who is he who can preserve you from Allah if He intendeth harm for you, or intendeth mercy for you. They will not find that they have any friend or helper other than Allah.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  Allah already knoweth those of you who hinder, and those who say unto their brethren: “Come ye hither unto us!” and they come not to the stress of battle save a little,
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  Being sparing of their help to you (believers). But when the fear cometh, then thou (Muhammad) seest them regarding thee with rolling eyes like one who fainteth unto death. Then, when the fear departeth, they scald you with sharp tongues in their greed for wealth (from the spoil). Such have not believed. Therefor Allah maketh their deeds fruitless. And that is easy for Allah.
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  They hold that the clans have not retired (for good); and if the clans should advance (again), they would fain be in the desert with the wandering Arabs, asking for the news of you; and if they were among you, they would not give battle, save a little.
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  Verily in the messenger of Allah ye have a good example for him who looketh unto Allah and the Last Day, and remembereth Allah much.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  And when the true believers saw the clans, they said: This is that which Allah and His messenger promised us. Allah and His messenger are true. It did but confirm them in their faith and resignation.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  Of the believers are men who are true to that which they covenanted with Allah. Some of them have paid their vow by death (in battle), and some of them still are waiting; and they have not altered in the least;
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  That Allah may reward the true men for their truth, and punish the hypocrites if He will, or relent toward them (if He will). Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  And Allah repulsed the disbelievers in their wrath; they gained no good. Allah averted their attack from the believers. Allah is ever Strong, Mighty.
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  And He brought those of the People of the Scripture who supported them down from their strongholds, and cast panic into their hearts. Some ye slew, and ye made captive some.
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  And He caused you to inherit their land and their houses and their wealth, and land ye have not trodden. Allah is ever Able to do all things.
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  O Prophet! Say unto thy wives: If ye desire the world's life and its adornment, come! I will content you and will release you with a fair release.
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  But if ye desire Allah and His messenger and the abode of the Hereafter, then lo! Allah hath prepared for the good among you an immense reward.
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  O ye wives of the Prophet! Whosoever of you committeth manifest lewdness, the punishment for her will be doubled, and that is easy for Allah.
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span>  And whosoever of you is submissive unto Allah and His messenger and doeth right, We shall give her her reward twice over, and We have prepared for her a rich provision.
<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span>  O ye wives of the Prophet! Ye are not like any other women. If ye keep your duty (to Allah), then be not soft of speech, lest he in whose heart is a disease aspire (to you), but utter customary speech.
<span id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span>  And stay in your houses. Bedizen not yourselves with the bedizenment of the Time of Ignorance. Be regular in prayer, and pay the poor-due, and obey Allah and His messenger. Allah's wish is but to remove uncleanness far from you, O Folk of the Household, and cleanse you with a thorough cleansing.
<span id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span>  And bear in mind that which is recited in your houses of the revelations of Allah and wisdom. Lo! Allah is Subtile, Aware.
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span>  Lo! men who surrender unto Allah, and women who surrender, and men who believe and women who believe, and men who obey and women who obey, and men who speak the truth and women who speak the truth, and men who persevere (in righteousness) and women who persevere, and men who are humble and women who are humble, and men who give alms and women who give alms, and men who fast and women who fast, and men who guard their modesty and women who guard (their modesty), and men who remember Allah much and women who remember - Allah hath prepared for them forgiveness and a vast reward.
<span id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span>  And it becometh not a believing man or a believing woman, when Allah and His messenger have decided an affair (for them), that they should (after that) claim any say in their affair; and whoso is rebellious to Allah and His messenger, he verily goeth astray in error manifest.
<span id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup></span>  And when thou saidst unto him on whom Allah hath conferred favour and thou hast conferred favour: Keep thy wife to thyself, and fear Allah. And thou didst hide in thy mind that which Allah was to bring to light, and thou didst fear mankind whereas Allah hath a better right that thou shouldst fear Him. So when Zeyd had performed that necessary formality (of divorce) from her, We gave her unto thee in marriage, so that (henceforth) there may be no sin for believers in respect of wives of their adopted sons, when the latter have performed the necessary formality (of release) from them. The commandment of Allah must be fulfilled.
<span id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup></span>  There is no reproach for the Prophet in that which Allah maketh his due. That was Allah's way with those who passed away of old - and the commandment of Allah is certain destiny -
<span id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span>  Who delivered the messages of Allah and feared Him, and feared none save Allah. Allah keepeth good account.
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span>  Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but he is the messenger of Allah and the Seal of the Prophets; and Allah is ever Aware of all things.
<span id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Remember Allah with much remembrance.
<span id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup></span>  And glorify Him early and late.
<span id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup></span>  He it is Who blesseth you, and His angels (bless you), that He may bring you forth from darkness unto light; and He is ever Merciful to the believers.
<span id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup></span>  Their salutation on the day when they shall meet Him will be: Peace. And He hath prepared for them a goodly recompense.
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span>  O Prophet! Lo! We have sent thee as a witness and a bringer of good tidings and a warner.
<span id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup></span>  And as a summoner unto Allah by His permission, and as a lamp that giveth light.
<span id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup></span>  And announce unto the believers the good tidings that they will have great bounty from Allah.
<span id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup></span>  And incline not to the disbelievers and the hypocrites. Disregard their noxious talk, and put thy trust in Allah. Allah is sufficient as Trustee.
<span id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! If ye wed believing women and divorce them before ye have touched them, then there is no period that ye should reckon. But content them and release them handsomely.
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span>  O Prophet! Lo! We have made lawful unto thee thy wives unto whom thou hast paid their dowries, and those whom thy right hand possesseth of those whom Allah hath given thee as spoils of war, and the daughters of thine uncle on the father's side and the daughters of thine aunts on the father's side, and the daughters of thine uncle on the mother's side and the daughters of thine aunts on the mother's side who emigrated with thee, and a believing woman if she give herself unto the Prophet and the Prophet desire to ask her in marriage - a privilege for thee only, not for the (rest of) believers - We are Aware of that which We enjoined upon them concerning their wives and those whom their right hands possess - that thou mayst be free from blame, for Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
<span id="v51"><sup><small>51</small></sup></span>  Thou canst defer whom thou wilt of them and receive unto thee whom thou wilt, and whomsoever thou desirest of those whom thou hast set aside (temporarily), it is no sin for thee (to receive her again); that is better; that they may be comforted and not grieve, and may all be pleased with what thou givest them. Allah knoweth what is in your hearts (O men), and Allah is ever Forgiving, Clement.
<span id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup></span>  It is not allowed thee to take (other) women henceforth, nor that thou shouldst change them for other wives even though their beauty pleased thee, save those whom thy right hand possesseth. And Allah is ever Watcher over all things.
<span id="v53"><sup><small>53</small></sup></span>  O Ye who believe! Enter not the dwellings of the Prophet for a meal without waiting for the proper time, unless permission be granted you. But if ye are invited, enter, and, when your meal is ended, then disperse. Linger not for conversation. Lo! that would cause annoyance to the Prophet, and he would be shy of (asking) you (to go); but Allah is not shy of the truth. And when ye ask of them (the wives of the Prophet) anything, ask it of them from behind a curtain. That is purer for your hearts and for their hearts. And it is not for you to cause annoyance to the messenger of Allah, nor that ye should ever marry his wives after him. Lo! that in Allah's sight would be an enormity.
<span id="v54"><sup><small>54</small></sup></span>  Whether ye divulge a thing or keep it hidden, lo! Allah is ever Knower of all things.
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span>  It is no sin for them (thy wives) to converse freely) with their fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or the sons of their sisters or of their own women, or their slaves. O women! Keep your duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is ever Witness over all things.
<span id="v56"><sup><small>56</small></sup></span>  Lo! Allah and His angels shower blessings on the Prophet. O ye who believe! Ask blessings on him and salute him with a worthy salutation.
<span id="v57"><sup><small>57</small></sup></span>  Lo! those who malign Allah and His messenger, Allah hath cursed them in the world and the Hereafter, and hath prepared for them the doom of the disdained.
<span id="v58"><sup><small>58</small></sup></span>  And those who malign believing men and believing women undeservedly, they bear the guilt of slander and manifest sin.
<span id="v59"><sup><small>59</small></sup></span>  O Prophet! Tell thy wives and thy daughters and the women of the believers to draw their cloaks close round them (when they go abroad). That will be better, so that they may be recognised and not annoyed. Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span>  If the hypocrites, and those in whose hearts is a disease, and the alarmists in the city do not cease, We verily shall urge thee on against them, then they will be your neighbours in it but a little while.
<span id="v61"><sup><small>61</small></sup></span>  Accursed, they will be seized wherever found and slain with a (fierce) slaughter.
<span id="v62"><sup><small>62</small></sup></span>  That was the way of Allah in the case of those who passed away of old; thou wilt not find for the way of Allah aught of power to change.
<span id="v63"><sup><small>63</small></sup></span>  Men ask thee of the Hour. Say: The knowledge of it is with Allah only. What can convey (the knowledge) unto thee ? It may be that the Hour is nigh.
<span id="v64"><sup><small>64</small></sup></span>  Lo! Allah hath cursed the disbelievers, and hath prepared for them a flaming fire,
<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span>  Wherein they will abide for ever. They will find (then) no protecting friend nor helper.
<span id="v66"><sup><small>66</small></sup></span>  On the day when their faces are turned over in the Fire, they say: Oh, would that we had obeyed Allah and had obeyed His messenger!
<span id="v67"><sup><small>67</small></sup></span>  And they say: Our Lord! Lo! we obeyed our princes and great men, and they misled us from the Way.
<span id="v68"><sup><small>68</small></sup></span>  Our Lord! Oh, give them double torment and curse them with a mighty curse.
<span id="v69"><sup><small>69</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Be not as those who slandered Moses, but Allah proved his innocence of that which they alleged, and he was well esteemed in Allah's sight.
<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Guard your duty to Allah, and speak words straight to the point;
<span id="v71"><sup><small>71</small></sup></span>  He will adjust your works for you and will forgive you your sins. Whosoever obeyeth Allah and His messenger, he verily hath gained a signal victory.
<span id="v72"><sup><small>72</small></sup></span>  Lo! We offered the trust unto the heavens and the earth and the hills, but they shrank from bearing it and were afraid of it. And man assumed it. Lo! he hath proved a tyrant and a fool.
<span id="v73"><sup><small>73</small></sup></span>  So Allah punisheth hypocritical men and hypocritical women, and idolatrous men and idolatrous women. But Allah pardoneth believing men and believing women, and Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/32">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">32. as-Sajdah: The Adoration</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/34">
          <span class="pr-2">34. Saba': Sheba</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>