---
title: "Qur'an — 40.  al-Mu'min: The Forgiving One"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/39">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">39. az-Zumar: The Companies</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/41">
          <span class="pr-2">41. Ha Mim Sajdah: Revelations Well Expounded</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Ha. Mim.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  The revelation of the Scripture is from Allah, the Mighty, the Knower,
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  The Forgiver of sin, the Accepter of repentance, the Stern in punishment, the Bountiful. There is no God save Him. Unto Him is the journeying.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  None argue concerning the revelations of Allah save those who disbelieve, so let not their turn of fortune in the land deceive thee (O Muhammad).
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  The folk of Noah and the factions after them denied (their messengers) before these, and every nation purposed to seize their messenger and argued falsely, (thinking) thereby to refute the Truth. Then I seized them, and how (awful) was My punishment.
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  Thus was the word of thy Lord concerning those who disbelieve fulfilled: That they are owners of the Fire.
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  Those who bear the Throne, and all who are round about it, hymn the praises of their Lord and believe in Him and ask forgiveness for those who believe (saying): Our Lord! Thou comprehendest all things in mercy and knowledge, therefor forgive those who repent and follow Thy way. Ward off from them the punishment of hell.
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  Our Lord! And make them enter the Gardens of Eden which thou hast promised them, with such of their fathers and their wives and their descendants as do right. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Mighty, the Wise.
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And ward off from them ill-deeds; and he from whom Thou wardest off ill- deeds that day, him verily hast Thou taken into mercy. That is the supreme triumph.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  Lo! (on that day) those who disbelieve are informed by proclamation: Verily Allah's abhorrence is more terrible than your abhorrence one of another, when ye were called unto the faith but did refuse.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  They say: Our Lord! Twice hast Thou made us die, and twice hast Thou made us live. Now we confess our sins. Is there any way to go out ?
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  (It is said unto them): This is (your plight) because, when Allah only was invoked, ye disbelieved, but when some partner was ascribed to Him ye were believing. But the command belongeth only to Allah, the Sublime, the Majestic.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  He it is Who showeth you His portents, and sendeth down for you provision from the sky. None payeth heed save him who turneth (unto Him) repentant.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  Therefor (O believers) pray unto Allah, making religion pure for Him (only), however much the disbelievers be averse -
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  The Exalter of Ranks, the Lord of the Throne. He causeth the Spirit of His command upon whom He will of His slaves, that He may warn of the Day of Meeting,
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  The day when they come forth, nothing of them being hidden from Allah. Whose is the Sovereignty this day ? It is Allah's, the One, the Almighty.
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  This day is each soul requited that which it hath earned; no wrong (is done) this day. Lo! Allah is swift at reckoning.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  Warn them (O Muhammad) of the Day of the approaching (doom), when the hearts will be choking the throats, (when) there will be no friend for the wrong-doers, nor any intercessor who will be heard.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  He knoweth the traitor of the eyes, and that which the bosoms hide.
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  Allah judgeth with truth, while those to whom they cry instead of Him judge not at all. Lo! Allah, He is the Hearer, the Seer.
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  Have they not travelled in the land to see the nature of the consequence for those who disbelieved before them ? They were mightier than these in power and (in the) traces (which they left behind them) in the earth. Yet Allah seized them for their sins, and they had no protector from Allah.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  That was because their messengers kept bringing them clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty) but they disbelieved; so Allah seized them. Lo! He is Strong, severe in punishment.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations and a clear warrant
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  Unto Pharaoh and Haman and Korah, but they said: A lying sorcerer!
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  And when he brought them the Truth from Our presence, they said: Slay the sons of those who believe with him, and spare their women. But the plot of disbelievers is in naught but error.
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  And Pharaoh said: Suffer me to kill Moses, and let him cry unto his Lord. Lo! I fear that he will alter your religion or that he will cause confusion in the land.
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  Moses said: Lo! I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every scorner who believeth not in a Day of Reckoning.
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  And a believing man of Pharaoh's family, who hid his faith, said: Would ye kill a man because he saith: My Lord is Allah, and hath brought you clear proofs from your Lord ? If he is lying, then his lie is upon him; and if he is truthful, then some of that wherewith he threateneth you will strike you. Lo! Allah guideth not one who is a prodigal, a liar.
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  O my people! Yours is the kingdom to-day, ye being uppermost in the land. But who would save us from the wrath of Allah should it reach us ? Pharaoh said: I do but show you what I think, and I do but guide you to wise policy.
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  And he who believed said: O my people! Lo! I fear for you a fate like that of the factions (of old);
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span>  A plight like that of Noah's folk, and A'ad and Thamud, and those after them, and Allah willeth no injustice for (His) slaves.
<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span>  And, O my people! Lo! I fear for you a Day of Summoning,
<span id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span>  A day when ye will turn to flee, having no preserver from Allah: and he whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no guide.
<span id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span>  And verily Joseph brought you of old clear proofs, yet ye ceased not to be in doubt concerning what he brought you till, when he died, ye said: Allah will not send any messenger after him. Thus Allah deceiveth him who is a prodigal, a doubter.
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span>  Those who wrangle concerning the revelations of Allah without any warrant that hath come unto them, it is greatly hateful in the sight of Allah and in the sight of those who believe. Thus doth Allah print on every arrogant, disdainful heart.
<span id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span>  And Pharaoh said: O Haman! Build for me a tower that haply I may reach the roads,
<span id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup></span>  The roads of the heavens, and may look upon the God of Moses, though verily I think him a liar. Thus was the evil that he did made fairseeming unto Pharaoh, and he was debarred from the (right) way. The plot of Pharaoh ended but in ruin.
<span id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup></span>  And he who believed said: O my people! Follow me. I will show you the way of right conduct.
<span id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span>  O my people! Lo! this life of the world is but a passing comfort, and lo! the Hereafter, that is the enduring home.
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span>  Whoso doeth an ill-deed, he will be repaid the like thereof, while whoso doeth right, whether male or female, and is a believer, (all) such will enter the Garden, where they will be nourished without stint.
<span id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup></span>  And, O my people! What aileth me that I call you unto deliverance when ye call me unto the Fire ?
<span id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup></span>  Ye call me to disbelieve in Allah and ascribe unto Him as partners that whereof I have no knowledge, while I call you unto the Mighty, the Forgiver.
<span id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup></span>  Assuredly that whereunto ye call me hath no claim in the world or in the Hereafter, and our return will be unto Allah, and the prodigals will be owners of the Fire.
<span id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup></span>  And ye will remember what I say unto you. I confide my cause unto Allah. Lo! Allah is Seer of (His) slaves.
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span>  So Allah warded off from him the evils which they plotted, while a dreadful doom encompassed Pharaoh's folk,
<span id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup></span>  The Fire; they are exposed to it morning and evening; and on the day when the Hour upriseth (it is said): Cause Pharaoh's folk to enter the most awful doom.
<span id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup></span>  And when they wrangle in the Fire, the weak say unto those who were proud: Lo! we were a following unto you; will ye therefor rid us of a portion of the Fire ?
<span id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup></span>  Those who were proud say: Lo! we are all (together) herein. Lo! Allah hath judged between (His) slaves.
<span id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup></span>  And those in the Fire say unto the guards of hell: Entreat your Lord that He relieve us of a day of the torment.
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span>  They say: Came not your messengers unto you with clear proofs ? They say: Yea, verily. They say: Then do ye pray, although the prayer of disbelievers is in vain.
<span id="v51"><sup><small>51</small></sup></span>  Lo! We verily do help Our messengers, and those who believe, in the life of the world and on the day when the witnesses arise,
<span id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup></span>  The day when their excuse availeth not the evil-doers, and theirs is the curse, and theirs the ill abode.
<span id="v53"><sup><small>53</small></sup></span>  And We verily gave Moses the guidance, and We caused the Children of Israel to inherit the Scripture,
<span id="v54"><sup><small>54</small></sup></span>  A guide and a reminder for men of understanding.
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span>  Then have patience (O Muhammad). Lo! the promise of Allah is true. And ask forgiveness of thy sin, and hymn the praise of thy Lord at fall of night and in the early hours.
<span id="v56"><sup><small>56</small></sup></span>  Lo! those who wrangle concerning the revelations of Allah without a warrant having come unto them, there is naught else in their breasts save pride which they will never attain. So take thou refuge in Allah. Lo! He, only He, is the Hearer, the Seer.
<span id="v57"><sup><small>57</small></sup></span>  Assuredly the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of mankind; but most of mankind know not.
<span id="v58"><sup><small>58</small></sup></span>  And the blind man and the seer are not equal, neither are those who believe and do good works (equal with) the evil-doer. Little do ye reflect!
<span id="v59"><sup><small>59</small></sup></span>  Lo! the Hour is surely coming, there is no doubt thereof; yet most of mankind believe not.
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span>  And your Lord hath said: Pray unto Me and I will hear your prayer. Lo! those who scorn My service, they will enter hell, disgraced.
<span id="v61"><sup><small>61</small></sup></span>  Allah it is Who hath appointed for you night that ye may rest therein, and day for seeing. Lo! Allah is a Lord of bounty for mankind, yet most of mankind give not thanks.
<span id="v62"><sup><small>62</small></sup></span>  Such is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things, There is no God save Him. How then are ye perverted ?
<span id="v63"><sup><small>63</small></sup></span>  Thus are they perverted who deny the revelations of Allah.
<span id="v64"><sup><small>64</small></sup></span>  Allah it is Who appointed for you the earth for a dwelling-place and the sky for a canopy, and fashioned you and perfected your shapes, and hath provided you with good things. Such is Allah, your Lord. Then blessed be Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!
<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span>  He is the Living One. There is no God save Him. So pray unto Him, making religion pure for Him (only). Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!
<span id="v66"><sup><small>66</small></sup></span>  Say (O Muhammad): I am forbidden to worship those unto whom ye cry beside Allah since there have come unto me clear proofs from my Lord, and I am commanded to surrender to the Lord of the Worlds.
<span id="v67"><sup><small>67</small></sup></span>  He it is Who created you from dust, then from a drop (of seed) then from a clot, then bringeth you forth as a child, then (ordaineth) that ye attain full strength and afterward that ye become old men - though some among you die before - and that ye reach an appointed term, that haply ye may understand.
<span id="v68"><sup><small>68</small></sup></span>  He it is Who quickeneth and giveth death. When He ordaineth a thing, He saith unto it only: Be! and it is.
<span id="v69"><sup><small>69</small></sup></span>  Hast thou not seen those who wrangle concerning the revelations of Allah, how they are turned away ? -
<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span>  Those who deny the Scripture and that wherewith We send Our messengers. But they will come to know,
<span id="v71"><sup><small>71</small></sup></span>  When carcans are about their necks and chains. They are dragged
<span id="v72"><sup><small>72</small></sup></span>  Through boiling waters; then they are thrust into the Fire.
<span id="v73"><sup><small>73</small></sup></span>  Then it is said unto them: Where are (all) that ye used to make partners (in the Sovereignty)
<span id="v74"><sup><small>74</small></sup></span>  Beside Allah ? They say: They have failed us; but we used not to pray to anything before. Thus doth Allah send astray the disbelievers (in His guidance).
<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span>  (And it is said unto them): This is because ye exulted in the earth without right, and because ye were petulant.
<span id="v76"><sup><small>76</small></sup></span>  Enter ye the gates of hell, to dwell therein. Evil is the habitation of the scornful.
<span id="v77"><sup><small>77</small></sup></span>  Then have patience (O Muhammad). Lo! the promise of Allah is true. And whether we let thee see a part of that which We promise them, or (whether) We cause thee to die, still unto Us they will be brought back.
<span id="v78"><sup><small>78</small></sup></span>  Verily We sent messengers before thee, among them those of whom We have told thee, and some of whom We have not told thee; and it was not given to any messenger that he should bring a portent save by Allah's leave, but when Allah's commandment cometh (the cause) is judged aright, and the followers of vanity will then be lost.
<span id="v79"><sup><small>79</small></sup></span>  Allah it is Who hath appointed for you cattle, that ye may ride on some of them, and eat of some -
<span id="v80"><sup><small>80</small></sup></span>  (Many) benefits ye have from them - and that ye may satisfy by their means a need that is in your breasts, and may be borne upon them as upon the ship.
<span id="v81"><sup><small>81</small></sup></span>  And He showeth you His tokens. Which, then, of the tokens of Allah do ye deny ?
<span id="v82"><sup><small>82</small></sup></span>  Have they not travelled in the land to see the nature of the consequence for those before them ? They were more numerous than these, and mightier in power and (in the) traces (which they left behind them) in the earth. But all that they used to earn availed them not.
<span id="v83"><sup><small>83</small></sup></span>  And when their messengers brought them clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty) they exulted in the knowledge they (themselves) possessed. And that which they were wont to mock befell them.
<span id="v84"><sup><small>84</small></sup></span>  Then, when they saw Our doom, they said: We believe in Allah only and reject (all) that we used to associate (with Him).
<span id="v85"><sup><small>85</small></sup></span>  But their faith could not avail them when they saw Our doom. This is Allah's law which hath ever taken course for His bondmen. And then the disbelievers will be ruined.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/39">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">39. az-Zumar: The Companies</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/41">
          <span class="pr-2">41. Ha Mim Sajdah: Revelations Well Expounded</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>