---
title: "Qur'an — 43.  az-Zukhruf: The Embellishment"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/42">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">42\. ash-Shura: The Counsel</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/44">
          <span class="pr-2">44\. ad-Dukhan: The Evident Smoke</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Ha. Mim.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  By the Scripture which maketh plain,
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Lo! We have appointed it a Lecture, in Arabic that haply ye may understand.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And Lo! in the Source of Decrees, which We possess, it is indeed sublime, decisive.
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Shall We utterly ignore you because ye are a wanton folk ?
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  How many a prophet did We send among the men of old!
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  And never came there unto them a prophet but they used to mock him.
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  Then We destroyed men mightier than these in prowess; and the example of the men of old hath gone (before them).
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  And if thou (Muhammad) ask them: Who created the heavens and the earth, they will surely answer: The Mighty, the Knower created them;
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  Who made the earth a resting-place for you, and placed roads for you therein, that haply ye may find your way;
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  And Who sendeth down water from the sky in (due) measure, and We revive a dead land therewith. Even so will ye be brought forth;
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  He Who created all the pairs, and appointed for you ships and cattle whereupon ye ride.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  That ye may mount upon their backs, and may remember your Lord's favour when ye mount thereon, and may say: Glorified be He Who hath subdued these unto us, and we were not capable (of subduing them);
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  And lo! unto our Lord we surely are returning.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  And they allot to Him a portion of His bondmen! Lo! man is verily a mere ingrate.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  Or chooseth He daughters of all that He hath created, and honoureth He you with sons ?
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  And if one of them hath tidings of that which he likeneth to the Beneficent One, his countenance becometh black and he is full of inward rage.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  (Liken they then to Allah) that which is bred up in outward show, and in dispute cannot make itself plain ?
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  And they make the angels, who are the slaves of the Beneficent, females. Did they witness their creation ? Their testimony will be recorded and they will be questioned.
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  And they say: If the Beneficent One had (so) willed, we should not have worshipped them. They have no knowledge whatsoever of that. They do but guess.
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  Or have We given them any scripture before (this Qur'an) so that they are holding fast thereto ?
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  Nay, for they say only: Lo! we found our fathers following a religion, and we are guided by their footprints.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  And even so We sent not a warner before thee (Muhammad) into any township but its luxurious ones said: Lo! we found our fathers following a religion, and we are following their footprints.
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  (And the warner) said: What! Even though I bring you better guidance than that ye found your fathers following ? They answered: Lo! in what ye bring we are disbelievers.
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  So We requited them. Then see the nature of the consequence for the rejecters!
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  And when Abraham said unto his father and his folk: Lo! I am innocent of what ye worship
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  Save Him Who did create me, for He will surely guide me.
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  And he made it a word enduring among his seed, that haply they might return.
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  Nay, but I let these and their fathers enjoy life (only) till there should come unto them the Truth and a messenger making plain.
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  And now that the Truth hath come unto them they say: This is mere magic, and lo! we are disbelievers therein.
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span>  And they say: If only this Qur'an had been revealed to some great man of the two towns ?
<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span>  Is it they who apportion thy Lord's mercy ? We have apportioned among them their livelihood in the life of the world, and raised some of them above others in rank that some of them may take labour from others; and the mercy of thy Lord is better than (the wealth) that they amass.
<span id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span>  And were it not that mankind would have become one community, We might well have appointed, for those who disbelieve in the Beneficent, roofs of silver for their houses and stairs (of silver) whereby to mount,
<span id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span>  And for their houses doors (of silver) and couches of silver whereon to recline,
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span>  And ornaments of gold. Yet all that would have been but a provision of the life of the world. And the Hereafter with your Lord would have been for those who keep from evil.
<span id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span>  And he whose sight is dim to the remembrance of the Beneficent, We assign unto him a devil who becometh his comrade;
<span id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup></span>  And lo! they surely turn them from the way of Allah, and yet they deem that they are rightly guided;
<span id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup></span>  Till, when he cometh unto Us, he saith (unto his comrade): Ah, would that between me and thee there were the distance of the two horizons - an evil comrade!
<span id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span>  And it profiteth you not this day, because ye did wrong, that ye will be sharers in the doom.
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span>  Canst thou (Muhammad) make the deaf to hear, or canst thou guide the blind or him who is in error manifest ?
<span id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup></span>  And if We take thee away, We surely shall take vengeance on them,
<span id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup></span>  Or (if) We show thee that wherewith We threaten them; for lo! We have complete command of them.
<span id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup></span>  So hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee. Lo! thou art on a right path.
<span id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup></span>  And lo! it is in truth a Reminder for thee and for thy folk; and ye will be questioned.
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span>  And ask those of Our messengers whom We sent before thee: Did We ever appoint gods to be worshipped beside the Beneficent ?
<span id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup></span>  And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations unto Pharaoh and his chiefs, and he said: I am a messenger of the Lord of the Worlds.
<span id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup></span>  But when he brought them Our tokens, behold! they laughed at them.
<span id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup></span>  And every token that We showed them was greater than its sister (token), and We grasped them with the torment, that haply they might turn again.
<span id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup></span>  And they said: O wizard! Entreat thy Lord for us by the pact that He hath made with thee. Lo! we verily will walk aright.
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span>  But when We eased them of the torment, behold! they broke their word.
<span id="v51"><sup><small>51</small></sup></span>  And Pharaoh caused a proclamation to be made among his people saying: O my people! Is not mine the sovereignty of Egypt and these rivers flowing under me ? Can ye not then discern ?
<span id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup></span>  I am surely better than this fellow, who is despicable and can hardly make (his meaning) plain!
<span id="v53"><sup><small>53</small></sup></span>  Why, then, have armlets of gold not been set upon him, or angels sent along with him ?
<span id="v54"><sup><small>54</small></sup></span>  Thus he persuaded his people to make light (of Moses), and they obeyed him. Lo! they were a wanton folk.
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span>  So, when they angered Us, We punished them and drowned them every one.
<span id="v56"><sup><small>56</small></sup></span>  And We made them a thing past, and an example for those after (them).
<span id="v57"><sup><small>57</small></sup></span>  And when the son of Mary is quoted as an example, behold! the folk laugh out,
<span id="v58"><sup><small>58</small></sup></span>  And say: Are our gods better, or is he ? They raise not the objection save for argument. Nay! but they are a contentious folk.
<span id="v59"><sup><small>59</small></sup></span>  He is nothing but a slave on whom We bestowed favour, and We made him a pattern for the Children of Israel.
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span>  And had We willed We could have set among you angels to be viceroys in the earth.
<span id="v61"><sup><small>61</small></sup></span>  And lo! verily there is knowledge of the Hour. So doubt ye not concerning it, but follow Me. This is the right path.
<span id="v62"><sup><small>62</small></sup></span>  And let not Satan turn you aside. Lo! he is an open enemy for you.
<span id="v63"><sup><small>63</small></sup></span>  When Jesus came with clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty), he said: I have come unto you with wisdom, and to make plain some of that concerning which ye differ. So keep your duty to Allah, and obey me.
<span id="v64"><sup><small>64</small></sup></span>  Lo! Allah, He is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him. This is a right path.
<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span>  But the factions among them differed. Then woe unto those who do wrong from the doom of a painful day.
<span id="v66"><sup><small>66</small></sup></span>  Await they aught save the Hour, that it shall come upon them suddenly, when they know not ?
<span id="v67"><sup><small>67</small></sup></span>  Friends on that day will be foes one to another, save those who kept their duty (to Allah).
<span id="v68"><sup><small>68</small></sup></span>  O My slaves! For you there is no fear this day, nor is it ye who grieve;
<span id="v69"><sup><small>69</small></sup></span>  (Ye) who believed Our revelations and were self-surrendered,
<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span>  Enter the Garden, ye and your wives, to be made glad.
<span id="v71"><sup><small>71</small></sup></span>  Therein are brought round for them trays of gold and goblets, and therein is all that souls desire and eyes find sweet. And ye are immortal therein.
<span id="v72"><sup><small>72</small></sup></span>  This is the Garden which ye are made to inherit because of what ye used to do.
<span id="v73"><sup><small>73</small></sup></span>  Therein for you is fruit in plenty whence to eat.
<span id="v74"><sup><small>74</small></sup></span>  Lo! the guilty are immortal in hell's torment.
<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span>  It is not relaxed for them, and they despair therein.
<span id="v76"><sup><small>76</small></sup></span>  We wronged them not, but they it was who did the wrong.
<span id="v77"><sup><small>77</small></sup></span>  And they cry: O master! Let thy Lord make an end of us. He saith: Lo! here ye must remain.
<span id="v78"><sup><small>78</small></sup></span>  We verily brought the Truth unto you, but ye were, most of you, averse to the Truth.
<span id="v79"><sup><small>79</small></sup></span>  Or do they determine any thing (against the Prophet) ? Lo! We (also) are determining.
<span id="v80"><sup><small>80</small></sup></span>  Or deem they that We cannot hear their secret thoughts and private confidences ? Nay, but Our envoys, present with them, do record.
<span id="v81"><sup><small>81</small></sup></span>  Say (O Muhammad): If the Beneficent One hath a son, then, I shall be first among the worshippers. (But there is no son).
<span id="v82"><sup><small>82</small></sup></span>  Glorified be the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, from that which they ascribe (unto Him)!
<span id="v83"><sup><small>83</small></sup></span>  So let them flounder (in their talk) and play until they meet the Day which they are promised.
<span id="v84"><sup><small>84</small></sup></span>  And He it is Who in the heaven is God, and in the earth God. He is the Wise, the Knower.
<span id="v85"><sup><small>85</small></sup></span>  And blessed be He unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, and with Whom is knowledge of the Hour, and unto Whom ye will be returned.
<span id="v86"><sup><small>86</small></sup></span>  And those unto whom they cry instead of Him possess no power of intercession, saving him who beareth witness unto the Truth knowingly.
<span id="v87"><sup><small>87</small></sup></span>  And if thou ask them who created them, they will surely say: Allah. How then are they turned away ?
<span id="v88"><sup><small>88</small></sup></span>  And he saith: O my Lord! Lo! these are a folk who believe not.
<span id="v89"><sup><small>89</small></sup></span>  Then bear with them (O Muhammad) and say: Peace. But they will come to know.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/42">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">42\. ash-Shura: The Counsel</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/44">
          <span class="pr-2">44\. ad-Dukhan: The Evident Smoke</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>