---
title: "Qur'an — 57.  al-Hadid: The Iron"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/56">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">56\. al-Waqi\`ah: That Which is Coming</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/58">
          <span class="pr-2">58\. al-Mujadilah: She Who Pleaded</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifieth Allah; and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  His is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth; He quickeneth and He giveth death; and He is Able to do all things.
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  He is the First and the Last, and the Outward and the Inward; and He is Knower of all things.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days; then He mounted the Throne. He knoweth all that entereth the earth and all that emergeth therefrom and all that cometh down from the sky and all that ascendeth therein; and He is with you wheresoever ye may be. And Allah is Seer of what ye do.
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  His is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, and unto Allah (all) things are brought back.
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  He causeth the night to pass into the day, and He causeth the day to pass into the night, and He is knower of all that is in the breasts.
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  Believe in Allah and His messenger, and spend of that whereof He hath made you trustees; and such of you as believe and spend (aright), theirs will be a great reward.
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  What aileth you that ye believe not in Allah, when the messenger calleth you to believe in your Lord, and He hath already made a covenant with you, if ye are believers ?
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  He it is Who sendeth down clear revelations unto His slave, that He may bring you forth from darkness unto light; and lo! for you, Allah is Full of Pity, Merciful.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And what aileth you that ye spend not in the way of Allah when unto Allah belongeth the inheritance of the heavens and the earth ? Those who spent and fought before the victory are not upon a level (with the rest of you). Such are greater in rank than those who spent and fought afterwards. Unto each hath Allah promised good. And Allah is Informed of what ye do.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  Who is he that will lend unto Allah a goodly loan, that He may double it for him and his may be a rich reward ?
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  On the day when thou (Muhammad) wilt see the believers, men and women, their light shining forth before them and on their right hands, (and wilt hear it said unto them): Glad news for you this day: Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein ye are immortal. That is the supreme triumph.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  On the day when the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women will say unto those who believe: Look on us that we may borrow from your light! it will be said: Go back and seek for light! Then there will separate them a wall wherein is a gate, the inner side whereof containeth mercy, while the outer side thereof is toward the doom.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  They will cry unto them (saying): Were we not with you ? They will say: Yea, verily; but ye tempted one another, and hesitated, and doubted, and vain desires beguiled you till the ordinance of Allah came to pass; and the deceiver deceived you concerning Allah;
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  So this day no ransom can be taken from you nor from those who disbelieved. Your home is the Fire; that is your patron, and a hapless journey's end.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  Is not the time ripe for the hearts of those who believe to submit to Allah's reminder and to the truth which is revealed, that they become not as those who received the scripture of old but the term was prolonged for them and so their hearts were hardened, and many of them are evil-livers.
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  Know that Allah quickeneth the earth after its death. We have made clear Our revelations for you, that haply ye may understand.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  Lo! those who give alms, both men and women, and lend unto Allah a goodly loan, it will be doubled for them, and theirs will be a rich reward.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  And those who believe in Allah and His messengers, they are the loyal, and the martyrs are with their Lord; they have their reward and their light; while as for those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations, they are owners of hell-fire.
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  Know that the life of the world is only play, and idle talk, and pageantry, and boasting among you, and rivalry in respect of wealth and children; as the likeness of vegetation after rain, whereof the growth is pleasing to the husbandman, but afterward it drieth up and thou seest it turning yellow, then it becometh straw. And in the Hereafter there is grievous punishment, and (also) forgiveness from Allah and His good pleasure, whereas the life of the world is but matter of illusion.
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  Race one with another for forgiveness from your Lord and a Garden whereof the breadth is as the breadth of the heavens and the earth, which is in store for those who believe in Allah and His messengers. Such is the bounty of Allah, which He bestoweth upon whom He will, and Allah is of Infinite Bounty.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  Naught of disaster befalleth in the earth or in yourselves but it is in a Book before we bring it into being - Lo! that is easy for Allah -
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  That ye grieve not for the sake of that which hath escaped you, nor yet exult because of that which hath been given. Allah loveth not all prideful boasters,
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  Who hoard and who enjoin upon the people avarice. And whosoever turneth away, still Allah is the Absolute, the Owner of Praise.
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  We verily sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and revealed with them the Scripture and the Balance, that mankind may observe right measure; and He revealed iron, wherein is mighty power and (many) uses for mankind, and that Allah may know him who helpeth Him and His messengers, though unseen. Lo! Allah is Strong, Almighty.
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  And We verily sent Noah and Abraham and placed the prophethood and the scripture among their seed, and among them there is he who goeth right, but many of them are evil-livers.
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  Then We caused Our messengers to follow in their footsteps; and We caused Jesus, son of Mary, to follow, and gave him the Gospel, and placed compassion and mercy in the hearts of those who followed him. But monasticism they invented - We ordained it not for them - only seeking Allah's pleasure, and they observed it not with right observance. So We give those of them who believe their reward, but many of them are evil-livers.
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Be mindful of your duty to Allah and put faith in His messenger. He will give you twofold of His mercy and will appoint for you a light wherein ye shall walk, and will forgive you. Allah is Forgiving, Merciful;
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  That the People of the Scripture may know that they control naught of the bounty of Allah, but that the bounty is in Allah's hand to give to whom He will. And Allah is of Infinite Bounty.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/56">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">56\. al-Waqi\`ah: That Which is Coming</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/58">
          <span class="pr-2">58\. al-Mujadilah: She Who Pleaded</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>