---
title: "Qur'an — 59.  al-Hashr: The Exile"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/58">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">58. al-Mujadilah: She Who Pleaded</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/60">
          <span class="pr-2">60. al-Mumtahanah: She Who is Tested</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  All that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth glorifieth Allah, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  He it is Who hath caused those of the People of the Scripture who disbelieved to go forth from their homes unto the first exile. Ye deemed not that they would go forth, while they deemed that their strongholds would protect them from Allah. But Allah reached them from a place whereof they recked not, and cast terror in their hearts so that they ruined their houses with their own hands and the hands of the believers. So learn a lesson, O ye who have eyes!
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And if Allah had not decreed migration for them, He verily would have punished them in the world, and theirs in the Hereafter is the punishment of the Fire.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  That is because they were opposed to Allah and His messenger; and whoso is opposed to Allah, (for him) verily Allah is stern in reprisal.
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Whatsoever palm-trees ye cut down or left standing on their roots, it was by Allah's leave, in order that He might confound the evil-livers.
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And that which Allah gave as spoil unto His messenger from them, ye urged not any horse or riding-camel for the sake thereof, but Allah giveth His messenger lordship over whom He will. Allah is Able to do all things.
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  That which Allah giveth as spoil unto His messenger from the people of the townships, it is for Allah and His messenger and for the near of kin and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, that it become not a commodity between the rich among you. And whatsoever the messenger giveth you, take it. And whatsoever he forbiddeth, abstain (from it). And keep your duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is stern in reprisal.
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And (it is) for the poor fugitives who have been driven out from their homes and their belongings, who seek bounty from Allah and help Allah and His messenger. They are the loyal.
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  Those who entered the city and the faith before them love those who flee unto them for refuge, and find in their breasts no need for that which hath been given them, but prefer (the fugitives) above themselves though poverty become their lot. And whoso is saved from his own avarice - such are they who are successful.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And those who came (into the faith) after them say: Our Lord! Forgive us and our brethren who were before us in the faith, and place not in our hearts any rancour toward those who believe. Our Lord! Thou art Full of Pity, Merciful.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  Hast thou not observed those who are hypocrites, (how) they tell their brethren who disbelieve among the People of the Scripture: If ye are driven out, we surely will go out with you, and we will never obey anyone against you, and if ye are attacked we verily will help you. And Allah beareth witness that they verily are liars.
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  (For) indeed if they are driven out they go not out with them, and indeed if they are attacked they help them not, and indeed if they had helped them they would have turned and fled, and then they would not have been victorious.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  Ye are more awful as a fear in their bosoms than Allah. That is because they are a folk who understand not.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  They will not fight against you in a body save in fortified villages or from behind walls. Their adversity among themselves is very great. Ye think of them as a whole whereas their hearts are divers. That is because they are a folk who have no sense.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  On the likeness of those (who suffered) a short time before them, they taste the ill-effects of their own conduct, and theirs is painful punishment.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  (And the hypocrites are) on the likeness of the devil when he telleth man to disbelieve, then, when he disbelieveth saith: Lo! I am quit of thee. Lo! I fear Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  And the consequence for both will be that they are in the Fire, therein abiding. Such is the reward of evil-doers.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Observe your duty to Allah. And let every soul look to that which it sendeth on before for the morrow. And observe your duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is Informed of what ye do.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  And be not ye as those who forgot Allah, therefor He caused them to forget their souls. Such are the evil-doers.
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  Not equal are the owners of the Fire and the owners of the Garden. The owners of the Garden, they are the victorious.
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  If We had caused this Qur'an to descend upon a mountain, thou (O Muhammad) verily hadst seen it humbled, rent asunder by the fear of Allah. Such similitudes coin We for mankind that haply they may reflect.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  He is Allah, than Whom there is no other God, the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible. He is the Beneficent, Merciful.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  He is Allah, than Whom there is no other God, the Sovereign Lord, the Holy One, Peace, the Keeper of Faith, the Guardian, the Majestic, the Compeller, the Superb. Glorified be Allah from all that they ascribe as partner (unto Him).
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  He is Allah, the Creator, the Shaper out of naught, the Fashioner. His are the most beautiful names. All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifieth Him, and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/58">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">58. al-Mujadilah: She Who Pleaded</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/60">
          <span class="pr-2">60. al-Mumtahanah: She Who is Tested</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>