---
title: "Qur'an — 6.  al-An`am: The Cattle"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">5\. al-Ma'idah: The Food</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/7">
          <span class="pr-2">7\. al-A\`raf: The Elevated Places</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Praise be to Allah, Who hath created the heavens and the earth, and hath appointed darkness and light. Yet those who disbelieve ascribe rivals unto their Lord.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  He it is Who hath created you from clay, and hath decreed a term for you. A term is fixed with Him. Yet still ye doubt!
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  He is Allah in the heavens and in the earth. He knoweth both your secret and your utterance, and He knoweth what ye earn.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Never came there unto them a revelation of the revelations of Allah but they did turn away from it.
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And they denied the truth when it came unto them. But there will come unto them the tidings of that which they used to deride.
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  See they not how many a generation We destroyed before them, whom We had established in the earth more firmly than We have established you, and We shed on them abundant showers from the sky, and made the rivers flow beneath them. Yet we destroyed them for their sins, and created after them another generation.
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  Had we sent down unto thee (Muhammad) (actual) writing upon parchment, so that they could feel it with their hands, those who disbelieve would have said: This is naught else than mere magic.
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  They say: Why hath not an angel been sent down unto him ? If We sent down an angel, then the matter would be judged; no further time would be allowed them (for reflection).
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  Had we appointed him (Our messenger) an angel, We assuredly had made him (as) a man (that he might speak to men); and (thus) obscured for them (the truth) they (now) obscure.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  Messengers (of Allah) have been derided before thee, but that whereat they scoffed surrounded such of them as did deride.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  Say (unto the disbelievers): Travel in the land, and see the nature of the consequence for the rejecters!
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  Say: Unto whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth ? Say: Unto Allah. He hath prescribed for Himself mercy, that He may bring you all together to the Day of Resurrection whereof there is no doubt. Those who ruin their souls will not believe.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  Unto Him belongeth whatsoever resteth in the night and the day. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  Say: Shall I choose for a protecting friend other than Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, Who feedeth and is never fed ? Say: I am ordered to be the first to surrender (unto Him). And be not thou (O Muhammad) of the idolaters.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  Say: I fear, if I rebel against my Lord, the retribution of an Awful Day.
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  He from whom (such retribution) is averted on that day, (Allah) hath in truth had mercy on him. That will be the signal triumph.
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  If Allah touch thee with affliction, there is none that can relieve therefrom save Him, and if He touch thee with good fortune (there is none that can impair it); for He is Able to do all things.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  He is the Omnipotent over His slaves, and He is the Wise, the Knower.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  Say (O Muhammad): What thing is of most weight in testimony ? Say: Allah is Witness between me and you. And this Qur'an hath been inspired in me, that I may warn therewith you and whomsoever it may reach. Do ye in sooth bear witness that there are gods beside Allah ? Say: I bear no such witness. Say: He is only One God. Lo! I am innocent of that which ye associate (with Him).
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  Those unto whom We gave the Scripture recognise (this revelation) as they recognise their sons. Those who ruin their own souls will not believe.
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  Who doth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie against Allah or denieth His revelations ? Lo! the wrongdoers will not be successful.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  And on the day We gather them together We shall say unto those who ascribed partners (unto Allah): Where are (now) those partners of your make-believe ?
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  Then will they have no contention save that they will say: By Allah, our Lord, we never were idolaters.
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  See how they lie against themselves, and (how) the thing which they devised hath failed them!
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  Of them are some who listen unto thee, but We have placed upon their hearts veils, lest they should understand, and in their ears a deafness. If they saw every token they would not believe therein; to the point that, when they come unto thee to argue with thee, the disbelievers say: This is naught else than fables of the men of old.
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  And they forbid (men) from it and avoid it, and they ruin none save themselves, though they perceive not.
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  If thou couldst see when they are set before the Fire and say: Oh, would that we might return! Then would we not deny the revelations of our Lord but we would be of the believers!
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  Nay, but that hath become clear unto them which before they used to hide. And if they were sent back they would return unto that which they are forbidden. Lo! they are liars.
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  And they say: There is naught save our life of the world, and we shall not be raised (again).
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  If thou couldst see when they are set before their Lord! He will say: Is not this real ? They will say: Yea, verily, by our Lord! He will say: Taste now the retribution for that ye used to disbelieve.
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span>  They indeed are losers who deny their meeting with Allah until, when the Hour cometh on them suddenly, they cry: Alas for us, that we neglected it! They bear upon their backs their burdens. Ah, evil is that which they bear!
<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span>  Naught is the life of the world save a pastime and a spot. Better far is the abode of the Hereafter for those who keep their duty (to Allah). Have ye then no sense ?
<span id="v33"><sup><small>33</small></sup></span>  We know well how their talk grieveth thee, though in truth they deny not thee (Muhammad) but evil-doers flout the revelations of Allah.
<span id="v34"><sup><small>34</small></sup></span>  Messengers indeed have been denied before thee, and they were patient under the denial and the persecution till Our succour reached them. There is none to alter the decisions of Allah. Already there hath reached thee (somewhat) of the tidings of the messengers (We sent before).
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span>  And if their aversion is grievous unto thee, then, if thou canst, seek a way down into the earth or a ladder unto the sky that thou mayst bring unto them a portent (to convince them all)! - If Allah willed, He could have brought them all together to the guidance - So be not thou among the foolish ones.
<span id="v36"><sup><small>36</small></sup></span>  Only those can accept who hear. As for the dead, Allah will raise them up; then unto Him they will be returned.
<span id="v37"><sup><small>37</small></sup></span>  They say: Why hath no portent been sent down upon him from his Lord ? Say: Lo! Allah is Able to send down a portent. But most of them know not.
<span id="v38"><sup><small>38</small></sup></span>  There is not an animal in the earth, nor a flying creature flying on two wings, but they are peoples like unto you. We have neglected nothing in the Book (of Our decrees). Then unto their Lord they will be gathered.
<span id="v39"><sup><small>39</small></sup></span>  Those who deny Our revelations are deaf and dumb in darkness. Whom Allah will sendeth astray, and whom He will He placeth on a straight path.
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span>  Say: Can ye see yourselves, if the punishment of Allah come upon you or the Hour come upon you, (calling upon other than Allah) ? Do ye then call (for help) to any other than Allah ? (Answer that) if ye are truthful.
<span id="v41"><sup><small>41</small></sup></span>  Nay, but unto Him ye call, and He removeth that because of which ye call unto Him, if He will, and ye forget whatever partners ye ascribed unto Him.
<span id="v42"><sup><small>42</small></sup></span>  We have sent already unto peoples that were before thee, and We visited them with tribulation and adversity, in order that they might grow humble.
<span id="v43"><sup><small>43</small></sup></span>  If only, when Our disaster came on them, they had been humble! But their hearts were hardened and the devil made all that they used to do seem fair unto them!
<span id="v44"><sup><small>44</small></sup></span>  Then, when they forgot that whereof they had been reminded, We opened unto them the gates of all things till, even as they were rejoicing in that which they were given, We seized them unawares, and lo! they were dumbfounded.
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span>  So of the people who did wrong the last remnant was cut off. Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds!
<span id="v46"><sup><small>46</small></sup></span>  Say: Have ye imagined, if Allah should take away your hearing and your sight and seal your hearts, Who is the God Who could restore it to you save Allah ? See how We display the revelations unto them! Yet still they turn away.
<span id="v47"><sup><small>47</small></sup></span>  Say: Can ye see yourselves, if the punishment of Allah come upon you unawares or openly ? Would any perish save wrongdoing folk ?
<span id="v48"><sup><small>48</small></sup></span>  We send not the messengers save as bearers of good news and warners. Whoso believeth and doeth right, there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve.
<span id="v49"><sup><small>49</small></sup></span>  But as for those who deny Our revelations, torment will afflict them for that they used to disobey.
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span>  Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): I say not unto you (that) I possess the treasures of Allah, nor that I have knowledge of the Unseen; and I say not unto you: Lo! I am an angel. I follow only that which is inspired in me. Say: Are the blind man and the seer equal ? Will ye not then take thought ?
<span id="v51"><sup><small>51</small></sup></span>  Warn hereby those who fear (because they know) that they will be gathered unto their Lord, for whom there is no protecting ally nor intercessor beside Him, that they may ward off (evil).
<span id="v52"><sup><small>52</small></sup></span>  Repel not those who call upon their Lord at morn and evening, seeking His Countenance. Thou art not accountable for them in aught, nor are they accountable for thee in aught, that thou shouldst repel them and be of the wrong-doers.
<span id="v53"><sup><small>53</small></sup></span>  And even so do We try some of them by others, that they say: Are these they whom Allah favoureth among us ? Is not Allah best Aware of the thanksgivers ?
<span id="v54"><sup><small>54</small></sup></span>  And when those who believe in Our revelations come unto thee, say: Peace be unto you! Your Lord hath prescribed for Himself mercy, that whoso of you doeth evil through ignorance and repenteth afterward thereof and doeth right, (for him) lo! He is Forgiving, Merciful.
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span>  Thus do We expound the revelations that the way of the unrighteous may be manifest.
<span id="v56"><sup><small>56</small></sup></span>  Say: I am forbidden to worship those on whom ye call instead of Allah. Say: I will not follow your desires, for then should I go astray and I should not be of the rightly guided.
<span id="v57"><sup><small>57</small></sup></span>  Say: I am (relying) on clear proof from my Lord, while ye deny Him. I have not that for which ye are impatient. The decision is for Allah only. He telleth the truth and He is the Best of Deciders.
<span id="v58"><sup><small>58</small></sup></span>  Say: If I had that for which ye are impatient, then would the case (ere this) have been decided between me and you. Allah is Best Aware of the wrong-doers.
<span id="v59"><sup><small>59</small></sup></span>  And with Him are the keys of the Invisible. None but He knoweth them. And He knoweth what is in the land and the sea. Not a leaf falleth but He knoweth it, not a grain amid the darkness of the earth, naught of wet or dry but (it is noted) in a clear record.
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span>  He it is Who gathereth you at night and knoweth that which ye commit by day. Then He raiseth you again to life therein, that the term appointed (for you) may be accomplished. And afterward unto Him is your return. Then He will proclaim unto you what ye used to do.
<span id="v61"><sup><small>61</small></sup></span>  He is the Omnipotent over His slaves. He sendeth guardians over you until, when death cometh unto one of you, Our messengers receive him, and they neglect not.
<span id="v62"><sup><small>62</small></sup></span>  Then are they restored unto Allah, their Lord, the Just. Surely His is the judgment. And He is the most swift of reckoners.
<span id="v63"><sup><small>63</small></sup></span>  Say: Who delivereth you from the darkness of the land and the sea ? Ye call upon Him humbly and in secret, (saying): If we are delivered from this (fear) we truly will be of the thankful.
<span id="v64"><sup><small>64</small></sup></span>  Say: Allah delivereth you from this and from all affliction. Yet ye attribute partners unto Him.
<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span>  Say: He is able to send punishment upon you from above you or from beneath your feet, or to bewilder you with dissension and make you taste the tyranny one of another. See how We display the revelations so that they may understand.
<span id="v66"><sup><small>66</small></sup></span>  Thy people (O Muhammad) have denied it, though it is the Truth. Say: I am not put in charge of you.
<span id="v67"><sup><small>67</small></sup></span>  For every announcement there is a term, and ye will come to know.
<span id="v68"><sup><small>68</small></sup></span>  And when thou seest those who meddle with Our revelations, withdraw from them until they meddle with another topic. And if the devil cause thee to forget, sit not, after the remembrance, with the congregation of wrong-doers.
<span id="v69"><sup><small>69</small></sup></span>  Those who ward off (evil) are not accountable for them in aught, but the Reminder (must be given them) that haply they (too) may ward off (evil).
<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span>  And forsake those who take their religion for a pastime and a jest, and whom the life of the world beguileth. Remind (mankind) hereby lest a soul be destroyed by what it earneth. It hath beside Allah no protecting ally nor intercessor, and though it offer every compensation it will not be accepted from it. Those are they who perish by their own deserts. For them is drink of boiling water and a painful doom, because they disbelieved.
<span id="v71"><sup><small>71</small></sup></span>  Say: Shall we cry, instead of unto Allah, unto that which neither profiteth us nor hurteth us, and shall we turn back after Allah hath guided us, like one bewildered whom the devils have infatuated in the earth, who hath companions who invite him to the guidance (saying): Come unto us ? Say: Lo! the guidance of Allah is Guidance, and we are ordered to surrender to the Lord of the Worlds,
<span id="v72"><sup><small>72</small></sup></span>  And to establish worship and be dutiful to Him, and He it is unto Whom ye will be gathered.
<span id="v73"><sup><small>73</small></sup></span>  He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in truth. In the day when He saith: Be! it is. His Word is the Truth, and His will be the Sovereignty on the day when the trumpet is blown. Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, He is the Wise, the Aware.
<span id="v74"><sup><small>74</small></sup></span>  (Remember) when Abraham said unto his father Azar: Takest thou idols for gods ? Lo! I see thee and thy folk in error manifest.
<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span>  Thus did We show Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth that he might be of those possessing certainty:
<span id="v76"><sup><small>76</small></sup></span>  When the night grew dark upon him he beheld a star. He said: This is my Lord. But when it set, he said: I love not things that set.
<span id="v77"><sup><small>77</small></sup></span>  And when he saw the moon uprising, he exclaimed: This is my Lord. But when it set, he said: Unless my Lord guide me, I surely shall become one of the folk who are astray.
<span id="v78"><sup><small>78</small></sup></span>  And when he saw the sun uprising, he cried: This is my Lord! This is greater! And when it set he exclaimed: O my people! Lo! I am free from all that ye associate (with Him).
<span id="v79"><sup><small>79</small></sup></span>  Lo! I have turned my face toward Him Who created the heavens and the earth, as one by nature upright, and I am not of the idolaters.
<span id="v80"><sup><small>80</small></sup></span>  His people argued with him. He said: Dispute ye with me concerning Allah when He hath guided me ? I fear not at all that which ye set up beside Him unless my Lord willeth aught. My Lord includeth all things in His knowledge. Will ye not then remember ?
<span id="v81"><sup><small>81</small></sup></span>  How should I fear that which ye set up beside Him, when ye fear not to set up beside Allah that for which He hath revealed unto you no warrant ? Which of the two factions hath more right to safety ? (Answer me that) if ye have knowledge.
<span id="v82"><sup><small>82</small></sup></span>  Those who believe and obscure not their belief by wrongdoing, theirs is safety; and they are rightly guided.
<span id="v83"><sup><small>83</small></sup></span>  That is Our argument. We gave it unto Abraham against his folk. We raise unto degrees of wisdom whom We will. Lo! thy Lord is Wise, Aware.
<span id="v84"><sup><small>84</small></sup></span>  And We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob; each of them We guided; and Noah did We guide aforetime; and of his seed (We guided) David and Solomon and Job and Joseph and Moses and Aaron. Thus do We reward the good.
<span id="v85"><sup><small>85</small></sup></span>  And Zachariah and John and Jesus and Elias. Each one (of them) was of the righteous.
<span id="v86"><sup><small>86</small></sup></span>  And Ishmael and Elisha and Jonah and Lot. Each one (of them) did We prefer above (Our) creatures,
<span id="v87"><sup><small>87</small></sup></span>  With some of their forefathers and their offspring and their brethren; and We chose them and guided them unto a straight path.
<span id="v88"><sup><small>88</small></sup></span>  Such is the guidance of Allah wherewith He guideth whom He will of His bondmen. But if they had set up (for worship) aught beside Him, (all) that they did would have been vain.
<span id="v89"><sup><small>89</small></sup></span>  Those are they unto whom We gave the Scripture and command and prophethood. But if these disbelieve therein, then indeed We shall entrust it to a people who will not be disbelievers therein.
<span id="v90"><sup><small>90</small></sup></span>  Those are they whom Allah guideth, so follow their guidance. Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I ask of you no fee for it. Lo! it is naught but a Reminder to (His) creatures.
<span id="v91"><sup><small>91</small></sup></span>  And they measure not the power of Allah its true measure when they say: Allah hath naught revealed unto a human being. Say (unto the Jews who speak thus): Who revealed the Book which Moses brought, a light and guidance for mankind, which ye have put on parchments which ye show, but ye hide much (thereof), and (by which) ye were taught that which ye knew not yourselves nor (did) your fathers (know it) ? Say: Allah. Then leave them to their play of cavilling.
<span id="v92"><sup><small>92</small></sup></span>  And this is a blessed Scripture which We have revealed, confirming that which (was revealed) before it, that thou mayst warn the Mother of Villages and those around her. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe herein, and they are careful of their worship.
<span id="v93"><sup><small>93</small></sup></span>  Who is guilty of more wrong than he who forgeth a lie against Allah, or saith: I am inspired, when he is not inspired in aught; and who saith: I will reveal the like of that which Allah hath revealed ? If thou couldst see, when the wrong-doers reach the pangs of death and the angels stretch their hands out (saying): Deliver up your souls. This day ye are awarded doom of degradation for that ye spake concerning Allah other than the truth, and used to scorn His portents.
<span id="v94"><sup><small>94</small></sup></span>  Now have ye come unto Us solitary as We did create you at the first, and ye have left behind you all that We bestowed upon you, and We behold not with you those your intercessors, of whom ye claimed that they possessed a share in you. Now is the bond between you severed, and that which ye presumed hath failed you.
<span id="v95"><sup><small>95</small></sup></span>  Lo! Allah (it is) Who splitteth the grain of corn and the date-stone (for sprouting). He bringeth forth the living from the dead, and is the bringer-forth of the dead from the living. Such is Allah. How then are ye perverted ?
<span id="v96"><sup><small>96</small></sup></span>  He is the Cleaver of the Daybreak, and He hath appointed the night for stillness, and the sun and the moon for reckoning. That is the measuring of the Mighty, the Wise.
<span id="v97"><sup><small>97</small></sup></span>  And He it is Who hath set for you the stars that ye may guide your course by them amid the darkness of the land and the sea. We have detailed Our revelations for a people who have knowledge.
<span id="v98"><sup><small>98</small></sup></span>  And He it is Who hath produced you from a single being, and (hath given you) a habitation and a repository. We have detailed Our revelations for a people who have understanding.
<span id="v99"><sup><small>99</small></sup></span>  He it is Who sendeth down water from the sky, and therewith We bring forth buds of every kind; We bring forth the green blade from which We bring forth the thick-clustered grain; and from the date-palm, from the pollen thereof, spring pendant bunches; and (We bring forth) gardens of grapes, and the olive and the pomegranate, alike and unlike. Look upon the fruit thereof, when they bear fruit, and upon its ripening. Lo! herein verily are portents for a people who believe.
<span id="v100"><sup><small>100</small></sup></span>  Yet they ascribe as partners unto Him the jinn, although He did create them, and impute falsely, without knowledge, sons and daughters unto Him. Glorified be He and High Exalted above (all) that they ascribe (unto Him).
<span id="v101"><sup><small>101</small></sup></span>  The Originator of the heavens and the earth! How can He have a child, when there is for Him no consort, when He created all things and is Aware of all things ?
<span id="v102"><sup><small>102</small></sup></span>  Such is Allah, your Lord. There is no God save Him, the Creator of all things, so worship Him. And He taketh care of all things.
<span id="v103"><sup><small>103</small></sup></span>  Vision comprehendeth Him not, but He comprehendeth (all) vision. He is the Subtile, the Aware.
<span id="v104"><sup><small>104</small></sup></span>  Proofs have come unto you from your Lord, so whoso seeth, it is for his own good, and whoso is blind is blind to his own hurt. And I am not a keeper over you.
<span id="v105"><sup><small>105</small></sup></span>  Thus do We display Our revelations that they may say (unto thee, Muhammad): “Thou hast studied,” and that We may make (it) clear for people who have knowledge.
<span id="v106"><sup><small>106</small></sup></span>  Follow that which is inspired in thee from thy Lord; there is no God save Him; and turn away from the idolaters.
<span id="v107"><sup><small>107</small></sup></span>  Had Allah willed, they had not been idolatrous. We have not set thee as a keeper over them, nor art thou responsible for them.
<span id="v108"><sup><small>108</small></sup></span>  Revile not those unto whom they pray beside Allah lest they wrongfully revile Allah through ignorance. Thus unto every nation have We made their deed seem fair. Then unto their Lord is their return, and He will tell them what they used to do.
<span id="v109"><sup><small>109</small></sup></span>  And they swear a solemn oath by Allah that if there come unto them a portent they will believe therein. Say; Portents are with Allah and (so is) that which telleth you that if such came unto them they would not believe.
<span id="v110"><sup><small>110</small></sup></span>  We confound their hearts and their eyes. As they believed not therein at the first, We let them wander blindly on in their contumacy.
<span id="v111"><sup><small>111</small></sup></span>  And though We should send down the angels unto them, and the dead should speak unto them, and We should gather against them all things in array, they would not believe unless Allah so willed. Howbeit, most of them are ignorant.
<span id="v112"><sup><small>112</small></sup></span>  Thus have We appointed unto every prophet an adversary - devils of humankind and jinn who inspire in one another plausible discourse through guile. If thy Lord willed, they would not do so; so leave them alone with their devising;
<span id="v113"><sup><small>113</small></sup></span>  That the hearts of those who believe not in the Hereafter may incline thereto, and that they may take pleasure therein, and that they may earn what they are earning.
<span id="v114"><sup><small>114</small></sup></span>  Shall I seek other than Allah for judge, when He it is Who hath revealed unto you (this) Scripture, fully explained ? Those unto whom We gave the Scripture (aforetime) know that it is revealed from thy Lord in truth. So be not thou (O Muhammad) of the waverers.
<span id="v115"><sup><small>115</small></sup></span>  Perfected is the Word of thy Lord in truth and justice. There is naught that can change His words. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
<span id="v116"><sup><small>116</small></sup></span>  If thou obeyedst most of those on earth they would mislead thee far from Allah's way. They follow naught but an opinion, and they do but guess.
<span id="v117"><sup><small>117</small></sup></span>  Lo! thy Lord, He knoweth best who erreth from His way; and He knoweth best (who are) the rightly guided.
<span id="v118"><sup><small>118</small></sup></span>  Eat of that over which the name of Allah hath been mentioned, if ye are believers in His revelations.
<span id="v119"><sup><small>119</small></sup></span>  How should ye not eat of that over which the name of Allah hath been mentioned, when He hath explained unto you that which is forbidden unto you unless ye are compelled thereto. But lo! many are led astray by their own lusts through ignorance. Lo! thy Lord, He is Best Aware of the transgressors.
<span id="v120"><sup><small>120</small></sup></span>  Forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof. Lo! those who garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned.
<span id="v121"><sup><small>121</small></sup></span>  And eat not of that whereon Allah's name hath not been mentioned, for lo! it is abomination. Lo! the devils do inspire their minions to dispute with you. But if ye obey them, ye will be in truth idolaters.
<span id="v122"><sup><small>122</small></sup></span>  Is he who was dead and We have raised him unto life, and set for him a light wherein he walketh among men, as him whose similitude is in utter darkness whence he cannot emerge ? Thus is their conduct made fairseeming for the disbelievers.
<span id="v123"><sup><small>123</small></sup></span>  And thus have We made in every city great ones of its wicked ones, that they should plot therein. They do but plot against themselves, though they perceive not.
<span id="v124"><sup><small>124</small></sup></span>  And when a token cometh unto them, they say: We will not believe till we are given that which Allah's messengers are given. Allah knoweth best with whom to place His message. Humiliation from Allah and heavy punishment will smite the guilty for their scheming.
<span id="v125"><sup><small>125</small></sup></span>  And whomsoever it is Allah's will to guide, He expandeth his bosom unto the Surrender, and whomsoever it is His Will to send astray, He maketh his bosom close and narrow as if he were engaged in sheer ascent. Thus Allah layeth ignominy upon those who believe not.
<span id="v126"><sup><small>126</small></sup></span>  This is the path of thy Lord, a straight path. We have detailed Our revelations for a people who take heed.
<span id="v127"><sup><small>127</small></sup></span>  For them is the abode of peace with their Lord. He will be their Protecting Friend because of what they used to do.
<span id="v128"><sup><small>128</small></sup></span>  In the day when He will gather them together (He will say): O ye assembly of the jinn! Many of humankind did ye seduce. And their adherents among humankind will say: Our Lord! We enjoyed one another, but now we have arrived at the appointed term which Thou appointedst for us. He will say: Fire is your home. Abide therein for ever, save him whom Allah willeth (to deliver). Lo! thy Lord is Wise, Aware.
<span id="v129"><sup><small>129</small></sup></span>  Thus We let some of the wrong-doers have power over others because of what they are wont to earn.
<span id="v130"><sup><small>130</small></sup></span>  O ye assembly of the jinn and humankind! Came there not unto you messengers of your own who recounted unto you My tokens and warned you of the meeting of this your Day ? They will say: We testify against ourselves. And the life of the world beguiled them. And they testify against themselves that they were disbelievers.
<span id="v131"><sup><small>131</small></sup></span>  This is because thy Lord destroyeth not the townships arbitrarily while their people are unconscious (of the wrong they do).
<span id="v132"><sup><small>132</small></sup></span>  For all there will be ranks from what they did. Thy Lord is not unaware of what they do.
<span id="v133"><sup><small>133</small></sup></span>  Thy Lord is the Absolute, the Lord of Mercy. If He will, He can remove you and can cause what He will to follow after you, even as He raised you from the seed of other folk.
<span id="v134"><sup><small>134</small></sup></span>  Lo! that which ye are promised will surely come to pass, and ye cannot escape.
<span id="v135"><sup><small>135</small></sup></span>  Say (O Muhammad): O my people! Work according to your power. Lo! I too am working. Thus ye will come to know for which of us will be the happy sequel. Lo! the wrong-doers will not be successful.
<span id="v136"><sup><small>136</small></sup></span>  They assign unto Allah, of the crops and cattle which He created, a portion, and they say: “This is Allah's” - in their make-believe - “and this is for (His) partners in regard to us.” Thus that which (they assign) unto His partners in them reacheth not Allah and that which (they assign) unto Allah goeth to their (so-called) partners. Evil is their ordinance.
<span id="v137"><sup><small>137</small></sup></span>  Thus have their (so-called) partners (of Allah) made the killing of their children to seem fair unto many of the idolaters, that they may ruin them and make their faith obscure for them. Had Allah willed (it otherwise), they had not done so. So leave them alone with their devices.
<span id="v138"><sup><small>138</small></sup></span>  And they say: Such cattle and crops are forbidden. No-one is to eat of them save whom we will - in their make-believe - cattle whose backs are forbidden, cattle over which they mention not the name of Allah. (All that is) a lie against Him. He will repay them for that which they invent.
<span id="v139"><sup><small>139</small></sup></span>  And they say: That which is in the bellies of such cattle is reserved for our males and is forbidden to our wives; but if it be born dead, then they (all) may be partakers thereof. He will reward them for their attribution (of such ordinances unto Him). Lo, He is Wise, Aware.
<span id="v140"><sup><small>140</small></sup></span>  They are losers who besottedly have slain their children without knowledge, and have forbidden that which Allah bestowed upon them, inventing a lie against Allah. They indeed have gone astray and are not guided.
<span id="v141"><sup><small>141</small></sup></span>  He it is Who produceth gardens trellised and untrellised, and the date-palm, and crops of divers flavour, and the olive and the pomegranate, like and unlike. Eat ye of the fruit thereof when it fruiteth, and pay the due thereof upon the harvest day, and be not prodigal. Lo! Allah loveth not the prodigals.
<span id="v142"><sup><small>142</small></sup></span>  And of the cattle (He produceth) some for burdens, some for food. Eat of that which Allah hath bestowed upon you, and follow not the footsteps of the devil, for lo! he is an open foe to you.
<span id="v143"><sup><small>143</small></sup></span>  Eight pairs: Of the sheep twain, and of the goats twain. Say: Hath He forbidden the two males or the two females, or that which the wombs of the two females contain ? Expound to me (the case) with knowledge, if ye are truthful.
<span id="v144"><sup><small>144</small></sup></span>  And of the camels twain and of the oxen twain. Say: Hath He forbidden the two males or the two females, or that which the wombs of the two females contain; or were ye by to witness when Allah commanded you (all) this ? Then who doth greater wrong than he who deviseth a lie concerning Allah, that he may lead mankind astray without knowledge. Lo! Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk.
<span id="v145"><sup><small>145</small></sup></span>  Say: I find not in that which is revealed unto me aught prohibited to an eater that he eat thereof, except it be carrion, or blood poured forth, or swineflesh - for that verily is foul - or the abomination which was immolated to the name of other than Allah. But whoso is compelled (thereto), neither craving nor transgressing, (for him) lo! thy Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.
<span id="v146"><sup><small>146</small></sup></span>  Unto those who are Jews We forbade every animal with claws. And of the oxen and the sheep forbade We unto them the fat thereof save that upon the backs or the entrails, or that which is mixed with the bone. That we awarded them for their rebellion. And lo! we verily are truthful.
<span id="v147"><sup><small>147</small></sup></span>  So if they give the lie to thee (Muhammad), say: Your Lord is a Lord of All- Embracing Mercy, and His wrath will never be withdrawn from guilty folk.
<span id="v148"><sup><small>148</small></sup></span>  They who are idolaters will say: Had Allah willed, we had not ascribed (unto Him) partners neither had our fathers, nor had we forbidden aught. Thus did those who were before them give the lie (to Allah's messengers) till they tasted of the fear of Us. Say: Have ye any knowledge that ye can adduce for Us ? Lo! ye follow naught but an opinion, Lo! ye do but guess.
<span id="v149"><sup><small>149</small></sup></span>  Say - For Allah's is the final argument - Had He willed He could indeed have guided all of you.
<span id="v150"><sup><small>150</small></sup></span>  Say: Come, bring your witnesses who can bear witness that Allah forbade (all) this. And if they bear witness, do not thou bear witness with them. Follow thou not the whims of those who deny Our revelations, those who believe not in the Hereafter and deem (others) equal with their Lord.
<span id="v151"><sup><small>151</small></sup></span>  Say: Come, I will recite unto you that which your Lord hath made a sacred duty for you: That ye ascribe no thing as partner unto Him and that ye do good to parents, and that ye slay not your children because of penury - We provide for you and for them - and that ye draw not nigh to lewd things whether open or concealed. And that ye slay not the life which Allah hath made sacred, save in the course of justice. This He hath command you, in order that ye may discern.
<span id="v152"><sup><small>152</small></sup></span>  And approach not the wealth of the orphan save with that which is better, till he reach maturity. Give full measure and full weight, in justice. We task not any soul beyond its scope. And if ye give your word, do justice thereunto, even though it be (against) a kinsman; and fulfil the covenant of Allah. This He commandeth you that haply ye may remember.
<span id="v153"><sup><small>153</small></sup></span>  And (He commandeth you, saying): This is My straight path, so follow it. Follow not other ways, lest ye be parted from His way. This hath He ordained for you, that ye may ward off (evil).
<span id="v154"><sup><small>154</small></sup></span>  Again, We gave the Scripture unto Moses, complete for him who would do good, an explanation of all things, a guidance and a mercy, that they might believe in the meeting with their Lord.
<span id="v155"><sup><small>155</small></sup></span>  And this is a blessed Scripture which We have revealed. So follow it and ward off (evil), that ye may find mercy.
<span id="v156"><sup><small>156</small></sup></span>  Lest ye should say: The Scripture was revealed only to two sects before us, and we in sooth were unaware of what they read;
<span id="v157"><sup><small>157</small></sup></span>  Or lest ye should say: If the Scripture had been revealed unto us, we surely had been better guided than are they. Now hath there come unto you a clear proof from your Lord, a guidance and mercy; and who doeth greater wrong than he who denieth the revelations of Allah, and turneth away from them ? We award unto those who turn away from Our revelations an evil doom because of their aversion.
<span id="v158"><sup><small>158</small></sup></span>  Wait they, indeed, for nothing less than that the angels should come unto them, or thy Lord should come, or there should come one of the portents from thy Lord ? In the day when one of the portents from thy Lord cometh, its belief availeth naught a soul which theretofore believed not, nor in its belief earned good (by works). Say: Wait ye! Lo! We (too) are waiting.
<span id="v159"><sup><small>159</small></sup></span>  Lo! As for those who sunder their religion and become schismatics, no concern at all hast thou with them. Their case will go to Allah, Who then will tell them what they used to do.
<span id="v160"><sup><small>160</small></sup></span>  Whoso bringeth a good deed will receive tenfold the like thereof, while whoso bringeth an ill-deed will be awarded but the like thereof; and they will not be wronged.
<span id="v161"><sup><small>161</small></sup></span>  Say: Lo! As for me, my Lord hath guided me unto a straight path, a right religion, the community of Abraham, the upright, who was no idolater.
<span id="v162"><sup><small>162</small></sup></span>  Say: Lo! my worship and my sacrifice and my living and my dying are for Allah, Lord of the Worlds.
<span id="v163"><sup><small>163</small></sup></span>  He hath no partner. This am I commanded, and I am first of those who surrender (unto Him).
<span id="v164"><sup><small>164</small></sup></span>  Say: Shall I seek another than Allah for Lord, when He is Lord of all things ? Each soul earneth only on its own account, nor doth any laden bear another's load. Then unto your Lord is your return and He will tell you that wherein ye differed.
<span id="v165"><sup><small>165</small></sup></span>  He it is Who hath placed you as viceroys of the earth and hath exalted some of you in rank above others, that He may try you by (the test of) that which He hath given you. Lo! Thy Lord is swift in prosecution, and Lo! He verily is Forgiving, Merciful.

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">5\. al-Ma'idah: The Food</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran/7">
          <span class="pr-2">7\. al-A\`raf: The Elevated Places</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>