---
title: "Qur'an — 63.  al-Munafiqun: The Hypocrites"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---



<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  When the hypocrites come unto thee (O Muhammad), they say: We bear witness that thou art indeed Allah's messenger. And Allah knoweth that thou art indeed His messenger, and Allah beareth witness that the hypocrites indeed are speaking falsely.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  They make their faith a pretext so that they may turn (men) from the way of Allah. Verily evil is that which they are wont to do,
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  That is because they believed, then disbelieved, therefore their hearts are sealed so that they understand not.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And when thou seest them their figures please thee; and if they speak thou givest ear unto their speech. (They are) as though they were blocks of wood in striped cloaks. They deem every shout to be against them. They are the enemy, so beware of them. Allah confound them! How they are perverted!
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And when it is said unto them: Come! The messenger of Allah will ask forgiveness for you! they avert their faces and thou seest them turning away, disdainful.
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  Whether thou ask forgiveness for them or ask not forgiveness for them is all one for them; Allah will not forgive them. Lo! Allah guideth not the evil-living folk.
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  They it is who say: Spend not on behalf of those (who dwell) with Allah's messenger that they may disperse (and go away from you); when Allah's are the treasures of the heavens and the earth; but the hypocrites comprehend not.
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  They say: Surely, if we return to Al-Madinah the mightier will soon drive out the weaker; when might belongeth to Allah and to His messenger and to the believers; but the hypocrites know not.
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  O ye who believe! Let not your wealth nor your children distract you from remembrance of Allah. Those who do so, they are the losers.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And spend of that wherewith We have provided you before death cometh unto one of you and he saith: My Lord! If only thou wouldst reprieve me for a little while, then I would give alms and be among the righteous.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  But Allah reprieveth no soul when its term cometh, and Allah is Informed of what ye do.