---
title: "Qur'an — 67.  al-Mulk: The Kingdom"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---



<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Blessed is He in Whose hand is the Sovereignty, and, He is Able to do all things.
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Who hath created life and death that He may try you which of you is best in conduct; and He is the Mighty, the Forgiving,
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Who hath created seven heavens in harmony. Thou (Muhammad) canst see no fault in the Beneficent One's creation; then look again: Canst thou see any rifts ?
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Then look again and yet again, thy sight will return unto thee weakened and made dim.
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  And verily We have beautified the world's heaven with lamps, and We have made them missiles for the devils, and for them We have prepared the doom of flame.
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  And for those who disbelieve in their Lord there is the doom of hell, a hapless journey's end!
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  When they are flung therein they hear its roaring as it boileth up,
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  As it would burst with rage. Whenever a (fresh) host is flung therein the wardens thereof ask them: Came there unto you no warner ?
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  They say: Yea, verily, a warner came unto us; but we denied and said: Allah hath naught revealed; ye are in naught but a great error.
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  And they say: Had we been wont to listen or have sense, we had not been among the dwellers in the flames.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  So they acknowledge their sins; but far removed (from mercy) are the dwellers in the flames.
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  Lo! those who fear their Lord in secret, theirs will be forgiveness and a great reward.
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  And keep your opinion secret or proclaim it, lo! He is Knower of all that is in the breasts (of men).
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  Should He not know what He created ? And He is the Subtile, the Aware.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  He it is Who hath made the earth subservient unto you, so Walk in the paths thereof and eat of His providence. And unto Him will be the resurrection (of the dead).
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  Have ye taken security from Him Who is in the heaven that He will not cause the earth to swallow you when lo! it is convulsed ?
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  Or have ye taken security from Him Who is in the heaven that He will not let loose on you a hurricane ? But ye shall know the manner of My warning.
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  And verily those before them denied, then (see) the manner of My wrath (with them)!
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  Have they not seen the birds above them spreading out their wings and closing them ? Naught upholdeth them save the Beneficent. Lo! He is Seer of all things.
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  Or who is he that will be an army unto you to help you instead of the Beneficent ? The disbelievers are in naught but illusion.
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  Or who is he that will provide for you if He should withhold His providence ? Nay, but they are set in pride and frowardness.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  Is he who goeth groping on his face more rightly guided, or he who walketh upright on a straight road ?
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  Say (unto them, O Muhammad): He it is who gave you being, and hath assigned unto you ears and eyes and hearts. Small thanks give ye!
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  Say: He it is Who multiplieth you in the earth, and unto Whom ye will be gathered.
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  And they say: When (will) this promise (be fulfilled), if ye are truthful ?
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  Say: The knowledge is with Allah only, and I am but a plain warner;
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  But when they see it nigh, the faces of those who disbelieve will be awry, and it will be said (unto them): This is that for which ye used to call.
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  Say (O Muhammad): Have ye thought: Whether Allah causeth me (Muhammad) and those with me to perish or hath mercy on us, still, who will protect the disbelievers from a painful doom ?
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  Say: He is the Beneficent. In Him we believe and in Him we put our trust. And ye will soon know who it is that is in error manifest.
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  Say: Have ye thought: If (all) your water were to disappear into the earth, who then could bring you gushing water ?