---
title: "Qur'an — 76.  ad-Dahr: The Man"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
tags: book, Islam
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-01-10T13:55:38.362Z
---



<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Hath there come upon man (ever) any period of time in which he was a thing unremembered ?
<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Lo! We create man from a drop of thickened fluid to test him; so We make him hearing, knowing.
<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Lo! We have shown him the way, whether he be grateful or disbelieving.
<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  Lo! We have prepared for disbelievers manacles and carcans and a raging fire.
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  Lo! the righteous shall drink of a cup whereof the mixture is of Kafur,
<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span>  A spring wherefrom the slaves of Allah drink, making it gush forth abundantly,
<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span>  (Because) they perform the vow and fear a day whereof the evil is wide- spreading,
<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span>  And feed with food the needy wretch, the orphan and the prisoner, for love of Him,
<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span>  (Saying): We feed you, for the sake of Allah only. We wish for no reward nor thanks from you;
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span>  Lo! we fear from our Lord a day of frowning and of fate.
<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span>  Therefor Allah hath warded off from them the evil of that day, and hath made them find brightness and joy;
<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span>  And hath awarded them for all that they endured, a Garden and silk attire;
<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span>  Reclining therein upon couches, they will find there neither (heat of) a sun nor bitter cold.
<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span>  The shade thereof is close upon them and the clustered fruits thereof bow down.
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span>  Goblets of silver are brought round for them, and beakers (as) of glass
<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span>  (Bright as) glass but (made) of silver, which they (themselves) have measured to the measure (of their deeds).
<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span>  There are they watered with a cup whereof the mixture is of Zanjabil,
<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span>  (The water of) a spring therein, named Salsabil.
<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span>  There wait on them immortal youths, whom, when thou seest, thou wouldst take for scattered pearls.
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span>  When thou seest, thou wilt see there bliss and high estate.
<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span>  Their raiment will be fine green silk and gold embroidery. Bracelets of silver will they wear. Their Lord will slake their thirst with a pure drink.
<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span>  (And it will be said unto them): Lo! this is a reward for you. Your endeavour (upon earth) hath found acceptance.
<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span>  Lo! We, even We, have revealed unto thee the Qur'an, a revelation;
<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span>  So submit patiently to thy Lord's command, and obey not of them any guilty one or disbeliever.
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span>  Remember the name of thy Lord at morn and evening.
<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span>  And worship Him (a portion) of the night. And glorify Him through the livelong night.
<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span>  Lo! these love fleeting life, and put behind them (the remembrance of) a grievous day.
<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span>  We, even We, created them, and strengthened their frame. And when We will, We can replace them, bringing others like them in their stead.
<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span>  Lo! this is an Admonishment, that whosoever will may choose a way unto his Lord.
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span>  Yet ye will not, unless Allah willeth. Lo! Allah is Knower, Wise.
<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span>  He maketh whom He will to enter His mercy, and for evil-doers hath prepared a painful doom.