---
title: "The Individual's Relation To The Thought Adjuster"
description: 
published: true
date: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Fellowship, The Urantian, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1981 Robert Schuer<br>© 1981 The Urantia Book Fellowship (formerly Urantia Brotherhood)</p>

I see before me today a rather representative group of Andon and Fonta's descendants. You have come from practically every state of these United States and from several foreign countries. Each one of you is indwelt by a Thought Adjuster and each one of you has the gift of Jesus' Spirit of Truth. Each one of you is engaged in the tremendous adventure of knowing and doing the Father's will. Each one of you has traversed part of the course or life plan prepared for you by your Adjuster and continually illuminated by him for you. With your consent and by your decisions he is gradually unraveling it before your eyes of faith. Already, by loving service, you are adjusting the ancestral tendencies of living to the demands of the spiritual urges initiated by the divine presence of the Mystery Monitor.

Because you have learned to yield spiritual allegiance to but one master and are making a devoted effort to realize eternal destiny — you have found that you can enjoy a light-hearted and joyous life and an honorable and successful career on earth. You have to thank your Adjuster for this because besides improving, modifying, adjusting, and coordinating your thinking processes he has been building up a spiritual counterpart of yourself, a morontia transcript of your true advancing self — your soul. Because of your decisions, determinations, and steadfast faith he has been piloting you through this mortal life toward the shores of eternal survival. The courtship which you are now engaged in has, like almost all courtships, had its ups and downs, not because of Him but because of your own intellectual and emotional difficulties. But you are persevering in the courtship. He is assisting you in ceasing to resist and if you prove faithful to the trust reposed in you by the Divine Spirit who seeks your mind and soul in eternal union, there will eventually ensue that morontia oneness, that supernal harmony, that divine attunement, that celestial fusion, that never-ending blending of identity, that oneness of being which is so perfect and final that even the most experienced personalities can never segregate or recognize as separate entities the fusion partners — mortal man and divine Adjuster.

The new being that ensues is of the eternal past as well as for the eternal future. And it will require an eternity of the future for your Adjuster ever completely to endow the personality partnership with the meanings and values which the divine Monitor carries forward from the eternity of the past. What a romance! What a life! What an adventure! The life that you are now living on earth is almost as if you had already died, attained an audience with the Father on Paradise, and had volunteered to return to the earth for a few days, a few months, or for a few years to spread the good news and to help out.

How did you arrive at this happy estate? What has happened during the past one million years and your own lifetime to bring this about? What are you? Who are you? Where do you go from here?

About one million years ago a relationship between an individual on this planet and a Thought Adjuster became possible. Because at that time, human, self-conscious mind suddenly appeared for the first time on Urantia. It appeared in twins born to primate parents. After deciding at about nine years of age to live with and for each other they finally decided to flee from their inferior animal associates and to journey northward. This human mind functioning was the result of the seven adjutant mind spirits assigned to Urantia culminating now with contact upon their minds by the spirit of worship and the spirit of wisdom. And so the first message from Salvington over the newly established mind circuit of the planet that the first decision of mind — the human type of mind — had been noted on Urantia. Thus was the stage set with the opportunity for the first possible relationship between a human individual on this planet and a Thought Adjuster. We do not know exactly when Thought Adjusters came to the twins but it was undoubtedly at the time of one of their momentous decisions either to live together and to take care of each other or to flee northward from their animal associates. The Life Carrier resident on Urantia says that their vague feeling of being something more than animals was due to the possession of personality and was augmented by the indwelling presence of the Thought Adjusters.

## Dual mind, one will

Your relationship with your Thought Adjuster has to do with your mind and your free will. Since the object of your mind is truth and God is the essence of truth a relationship between your mind and the Thought Adjuster is easily and naturally developed once he comes to you. The Adjuster is not trying to control your thinking, as such, but to spiritualize it, to eternalize it. Adjusters are not devoted directly to influencing human thought; that is your exclusive personality prerogative. The Adjusters are dedicated to improving, modifying, adjusting, and coordinating your thinking processes. Crudely put, the Adjuster's action for the mind might be compared to the action of the little black box for the computer — it is programed by man to improve, modify, adjust, and coordinate the computer's functions. Beyond that the example falls completely short because the Adjuster is a particle of God the Father and is God's will. Mind is not only the arena in which the Adjuster operates but is also the very partner of the Adjuster in the formation of the soul. The two realities which impinge upon and are centered in the human mind circuits are as a mortal self evolved from the original plans of the Life Carriers, and as an immortal entity from the high spheres of Divinington, an indwelling gift from God. You, as a personal creature, have mind and will. The Adjuster, as a prepersonal creature, has premind and prewill. If you so fully conform to the Adjuster's mind that you see eye to eye, then your minds become one, and you receive the reinforcement of the Adjuster's mind. Subsequently, if your will orders and enforces the execution of the decisions of this new or combined mind, the Adjuster's prepersonal will attains to personality expression through your decision, and as far as that particular project is concerned, you and the Adjuster are one. Your mind has attained to divinity attunement, and the Adjuster's will has achieved personality expression. To the extent that this identity is realized, you are mentally approaching the morontia order of existence. Morontia mind is a term signifying the substance and sum total of the co-operating minds of diversely material and spiritual natures. Morontia intellect, therefore, connotes a dual mind in the local universe dominated by one will. And with mortals, this is a will, human in origin, which is becoming divine through man's identification of the human mind with the mindedness of God.

The Thought Adjuster, being the closest approach of God to the human person, becomes intimately associated with both man's mind and man's will. The will, once deliberately activated by man, might be likened to a system of electrically operated doors or sliding panels which give the Thought Adjuster easy access to all areas and compartments of your mind. Can you imagine the Adjuster's delight when you finally open all the compartments of your mind to him? Can you imagine his joy when he is finally able to change, adjust, and control the contents of all the compartments for the good of the whole and for the highest welfare of the individual? Now the submarine that we call the human person is not only directed toward God, but also, the harmony and unison between all of its parts becomes a rhythm and a pulse marvelous to feel and to behold. Gone are wasted and counterproductive vibrations, Gone are sounds to discord and strain. Gone are hesitations in the person. With the recognition of God in the universe and in the individual person, _loving service_ becomes the joyful fulfillment and the necessity of one's life. The love affair between man and God has really begun because man is at last beginning to reciprocate God's love. Man's devotion becomes unselfish because his self is submerged in God. Man's _loyalty_ becomes courageous because now he fears nothing and sweeps over the crags and precipices on eagle wings. Man's fairness becomes sincere without the clutter or cover of other motivations. Man's _honesty_ becomes enlightened, illuminating, and far-seeing in the brilliance of God's light. Man's hope becomes undying and even begins to thrive on the uncertainties and depressions that used to cause it to falter. Man's _trust_ becomes confiding and communication with God, a joy. Man's _ministry_ becomes merciful as compassion is added to love of one's fellows. Man's _goodness_ becomes unfailing as his true love life gains momentum. Gone are the hesitations of a poorly coordinated personality. Man's _tolerance_ becomes forgiving as he sees and understands the Adjuster-founded motivations of each individual and appreciates the individual's struggle from imperfection to perfection in a confused and troubled world. Man's _peace_ becomes enduring and covers and comforts him like a glorious mantle from God. Man becomes conscious of a profound sense of _spiritual joy_, _security_, and _confidence_ which no amount of pain or tension can lessen or eradicate, In fact the joy, security, and confidence begins to sweep pain and tension away as light does darkness coming into a room through a suddenly-opened door. The honeymoon has begun! Man and God are united! An eternal relationship is in the making! The joy of exploratory knowing has begun! Man and the Adjuster rest in the knowledge that their journey together will last long enough for them to become completely attuned and acquainted with each other. What a love story! What a life! What an adventure!

At the present time each one of you is known on the local universe capital by your Adjuster's number. In the future, when you are fused with your Adjuster, your guardian seraphim will give you a new name. Until you receive that name you must continue to desire to be Godlike and to be willing to do and be any and all things which are essential to the final attainment of that overwhelming desire. Your motives, decisions, faithful determinations, and supreme desires constitute real and effective cooperation with your Adjuster. These may be unconscious, but you can consciously augment Adjuster contact by:

1. Choosing to respond to divine leading: sincerely basing the human life on the highest consciousness of truth, beauty and goodness, and then coordinating these qualities of divinity through wisdom, faith, and love.
2. Loving God and desiring to be like him — genuine recognition of the divine fatherhood and loving worship of the divine parent.
3. Loving man and sincerely desiring to serve him wholehearted recognition of the brotherhood of man coupled with an intelligent and wise affection for each of your fellow mortals.
4. Joyful acceptance of cosmic citizenship — honest recognition of your progressive obligations to the Supreme Being, awareness of the interdependence of evolutionary man and evolving Deity. This is the birth of cosmic morality and the dawning realization of universal duty.

Finally, before leaving. I have to tell you in the words of _The URANTIA Book_ that it is sometimes possible to have the mind illuminated, to hear the divine voice that continually speaks within you, so that you may become partially conscious of the wisdom, truth, goodness, and beauty of the potential personality constantly indwelling you — the Divine Thought Adjuster.

— _Robert Schuer_
_New Lexington, Ohio_