---
title: "Workbook I — Foreword and Part I — Paper 11. The Eternal Isle of Paradise"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: theology, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1959 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Appendices"><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Appendix to Papers 1 to 10</span></a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I#index"><span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span></a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/12"><span class="pr-2">Paper 12. The Universe of Universes</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span></a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

## INTRODUCTION

### I. UB 11:0.1 — “Paradise is the...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s30_15"></a>[UB 11:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p0_1) — “Paradise is the...”

**COMMENT**

1. Paradise is the center of the master universe and the home of Deity.
2. Paradise is the largest organized body of reality in existence.
3. Paradise is material as well as spiritual. Spirit things and beings are **real**.

### II. UB 11:0.2 — “The material beauty...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s40_15"></a>[UB 11:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p0_2) — “The material beauty...”

**COMMENT**

1. Paradise beauty consists in its physical, intellectual, and spiritual endowments.
2. The glory and splendor of Paradise are beyond mortal comprehension.
3. Paradise is from eternity — there are no records of a beginning.

## DISCUSSION OF THE WORD “PARADISE” IN THE BIBLE

The term Paradise is found only three times in the Bible, being used once each by Jesus, Paul, and John.
- **[Luke 23:43](/en/Bible/Luke/23#v43)**. “And he said to him, ‘Truly, I say to you, today you will be with me in Paradise.’” **Note**: Here is a question of punctuation—comma before or after “today.” No punctuation in the original tongues. On<a id="s51_244"></a>[UB 187:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/187#p4_1) of the Urantia Book, Jesus says: “Verily, verily, I say to you today, you shall sometime be with me in Paradise.”
- **[2 Cor 12:3](/en/Bible/2_Corinthians/12#v3)**. “And I know that this man was caught up into Paradise— whether in the body or out of the body I do not know, God knows.”
- **[Rev 2:7](/en/Bible/Revelation/2#v7)**. “To him who conquers I will grant to eat of the tree of life, which is in the paradise of God.”

## 1. THE DIVINE RESIDENCE

### I. UB 11:1.1 — “Paradise serves many purposes...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s59_15"></a>[UB 11:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p1_1) — “Paradise serves many purposes...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Universal Father resides at the center of this well-nigh circular, but not spherical Isle.
2. The Father is surrounded by the presence of the Son and they both are invested by the glory of the Infinite Spirit.

### II. UB 11:1.2 — “Spirit is ever conscious...” “God dwells...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s68_15"></a>[UB 11:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p1_2) — “Spirit is ever conscious...” “God dwells...”

**COMMENT**

The Father is cosmically focalized, spiritually personalized, and geographically resident at this center of the cosmos.

### III. UB 11:1.3 — “We all know...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s76_15"></a>[UB 11:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p1_3) — “We all know...”

**COMMENT**

1. Celestial beings can find God’s residence just as we can find geographic locations on our planet.
2. So, if properly equipped, we can go through universe upon universe until we attain Paradise.
3. Not having visited Paradise has nothing to do with the reality of God and his universe.

### IV. UB 11:1.4 — “The Father is always...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s86_15"></a>[UB 11:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p1_4) — “The Father is always...”

**COMMENT**

1. The stability of the master universe depends upon God’s presence at the center of all things.
2. All four gravity circuits lead us directly to God on Paradise.
3. From God’s presence on Paradise, there flow life, energy, and personality to the universe of universes.

## 2. NATURE OF THE ETERNAL ISLE

### I. UB 11:2.1 — “Since you are...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s98_15"></a>[UB 11:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_1) — “Since you are...”

**COMMENT**

The discernible cosmos has a capital commensurate with the dignity and infinitude of its universal Ruler.

### II. UB 11:2.2 — “In form...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s106_15"></a>[UB 11:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_2) — “In form...”

**COMMENT**

Paradise is ellipsoid, essentially flat, and is longer from north to south than from east to west.

### III. UB 11:2.3 — “These differences in dimensions...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s114_15"></a>[UB 11:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_3) — “These differences in dimensions...”

**COMMENT**

Differential dimensions and pressure variations establish universe directions.

### IV. UB 11:2.4 — “The central Isle...” and “We speak of...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s122_15"></a>[UB 11:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_4) — “The central Isle...” and “We speak of...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Deities dominate upper Paradise—the personal plane.
2. The Unqualified Absolute dominates nether Paradise—the impersonal plane.
3. Peripheral Paradise provides for activities which are not strictly personal or nonpersonal.

### V. UB 11:2.9 — “The eternal Isle...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s132_15"></a>[UB 11:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_9) — “The eternal Isle...”

**COMMENT**

1. Paradise is composed of **absolutum**—stationary systems of reality.
2. Paradise material is neither dead nor alive. This material is not found elsewhere in all the cosmos.

### VI. UB 11:2.10 — “It appears to us...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s141_15"></a>[UB 11:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_10) — “It appears to us...”

**COMMENT**

The First Source and Center has concentrated all absolute potential for the cosmos in Paradise.

### VII. UB 11:2.11 — “Roughly, space seemingly originates...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s149_15"></a>[UB 11:2.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_11) — “Roughly, space seemingly originates...”

**COMMENT**

1. Space seems to originate just below nether Paradise; time just above upper Paradise.
2. While time is nonexistent on Paradise, they do have a nontime sequence of events.
3. Motion is volitional, not inherent, on Paradise. Distance is relative.
4. Paradise is nonspatial.

## 3. UPPER PARADISE

### I. UB 11:3.1 — “On upper Paradise...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s162_15"></a>[UB 11:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p3_1) — “On upper Paradise...”

**COMMENT**

1. Upper Paradise has three grand zones:
	- A. Deity presence.
	- B. Most Holy Sphere.
	- C. Holy Area.
2. Everything pertaining to the Most Holy Sphere is purely spiritual—nothing else could there exist.

### II. UB 11:3.2 — “While there are...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s174_15"></a>[UB 11:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p3_2) — “While there are...”

**COMMENT**

In the Holy Area and on the periphery there are abundant reminders of material existence.

### III. UB 11:3.3 — “The Holy Area...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s182_15"></a>[UB 11:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p3_3) — “The Holy Area...”

**COMMENT**

1. The seven residential zones of the Holy Area are often called “the Father’s Paradise mansions.”
2. Havona natives dwelling on Paradise live in the first sons.
3. The seven divisions of the second zone are occupied by the ascenders from the seven superuniverses.

### IV. UB 11:3.4 — “Each of the seven sectors...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s192_15"></a>[UB 11:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p3_4) — “Each of the seven sectors...”

**COMMENT**

1. Each residential unit is suitable for one billion working groups.
2. These units are organized as follows:
	- 1,000 units are a division.
	- 100,000 divisions are a congregation.
	- 10,000,000 congregations are an assembly.
	- 1,000,000,000 assemblies are a grand unit.
	- A.d this continues on through to the seventh grand unit.
	- 7 grand units make a master unit.
	- 7 master units make a superior unit.
	- And thus by sevens the series extends through the superior, super-superior, celestial, supercelestial, on to the supreme units.
3. And all of these residential units occupy less than one per cent of the Holy Land.

## 4. PERIPHERAL PARADISE

### I. UB 11:4.1 — “The central Isle...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s212_15"></a>[UB 11:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p4_1) — “The central Isle...”

**COMMENT**

The landing and dispatching fields of Paradise are on the periphery.

### II. UB 11:4.2 — “The Seven Master Spirits...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s220_15"></a>[UB 11:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p4_2) — “The Seven Master Spirits...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Seven Master Spirits:
	- A. Have personal headquarters on the seven worlds of the Spirit.
	- B. Maintain force-focal headquarters on the Paradise periphery.
2. From these Paradise centers, force goes to the seven superuniverses.

### III. UB 11:4.3 — “Here on peripheral Paradise...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s231_15"></a>[UB 11:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p4_3) — “Here on peripheral Paradise...”

**COMMENT**

1. The historic exhibits of the Creator Sons are on the periphery, with space reserved for seven trillion.
2. Since only four per cent of this space is assigned, there must be reservations for the domains of outer space.

### IV. UB 11:4.4 — “That portion of Paradise...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s240_15"></a>[UB 11:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p4_4) — “That portion of Paradise...”

**COMMENT**

Less than four per cent of Paradise area which has been assigned for existing universes is now occupied. The area assigned is one million times what is needed.

### V. UB 11:4.5 — “But a further attempt...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s248_15"></a>[UB 11:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p4_5) — “But a further attempt...”

**COMMENT**

We will not appreciate Paradise until we get there. “Eye has not seen nor ear heard,” etc. This is **[1 Cor 2:9](/en/Bible/1_Corinthians/2#v9)**. “‘What no eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart of man conceived, what God has prepared for those who love him.’”

## 5. NETHER PARADISE

### I. UB 11:5.1 and following — “Concerning nether Paradise...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s258_15"></a>[UB 11:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_1) and following — “Concerning nether Paradise...”

**COMMENT**

1. Personalities and spirit beings have nothing to do with nether Paradise.
2. Cosmic-force circuits originate on nether Paradise.
3. Underneath the Deities is the Zone of Infinity.
4. The outer margins have to do with space potency and force-energy. The force-charge of space is here focused.
5. The three zones have differential functions.

### II. UB 11:5.5 — “The inner zone...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s270_15"></a>[UB 11:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_5) — “The inner zone...”

**COMMENT**

1. The inner zone is like a gigantic force-heart whose pulsations send energy to the borders of physical space.
2. Force seems to flow in at the south and out at the north.
3. These forces, while not responsive to physical gravity, always respond to Paradise gravity.

### III. UB 11:5.6 — “The mid-zone...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s280_15"></a>[UB 11:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_6) — “The mid-zone...”

**COMMENT**

1. The mid-zone appears to be static, but experiences three sorts of pulsation.
2. This zone may be concerned with the control of the mid-space zones of relative quiet between universe divisions.
3. This mid-area is also related to the nonpervaded-space mechanism.

### IV. UB 11:5.7 — “The outer zone...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s290_15"></a>[UB 11:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_7) — “The outer zone...”

**COMMENT**

1. The space potential of the outer zone sends energy to the very borders of all outer space.
2. This may be the focal center of the space presence of the Unqualified Absolute.

### V. UB 11:5.8 — “All forms of force...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s299_15"></a>[UB 11:5.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_8) — “All forms of force...”

**COMMENT**

1. In this zone of the Unqualified Absolute, energy is either coming in or going out—never both at the same time.
2. The zone pulsations are agelong—one billion years outgoing—one billion years incoming.
3. These space-force manifestations extend throughout all pervadable space.

### VI. UB 11:5.9 — “All physical force...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s309_15"></a>[UB 11:5.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p5_9) — “All physical force...”

**COMMENT**

1. All force-energy proceeds from nether Paradise and eventually returns thereto.
2. But all of present universe reality did not come, as such, from nether Paradise.
3. Space is the womb of several forms of matter and prematter.
4. Space does not originate on nether Paradise.
5. Space is not force, energy, or power.
6. These zone pulsations do not account for space respiration, but they are synchronized with it.

## 6. SPACE RESPIRATION

### I. UB 11:6.1 — “We do not know...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s324_15"></a>[UB 11:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p6_1) — “We do not know...”

**COMMENT**

The vertical reservoirs of unpervaded space are similar to an hourglass.

### II. UB 11:6.2 — “As the universes...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s332_15"></a>[UB 11:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p6_2) — “As the universes...”

**COMMENT**

1. Pervaded space and unpervaded space behave reciprocally.
2. There is a confluence of the two phases of space under nether Paradise.
3. In this transmuting channel, the two forms of space are adapted for the space respiration cycles.

### III. UB 11:6.3 — “ ‘Unpervaded’ space means...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s342_15"></a>[UB 11:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p6_3) — “ ‘Unpervaded’ space means...”

**COMMENT**

1. “Unpervaded” space means unpervaded by those forces and presences found in pervaded space.
2. Unpervaded space reservoirs seem to counterbalance pervaded space.
3. It is not known whether there is a future function of these unpervaded space reservoirs.

### IV. UB 11:6.4 — “The cycles of...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s352_15"></a>[UB 11:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p6_4) — “The cycles of...”

**COMMENT**

1. The cosmos expands and contracts in billion year cycles.
2. Just now pervaded space is at the mid-point of expansion.
3. The unpervaded space reservoirs are at the mid-point of contraction.

### V. UB 11:6.5 — “For a billion years...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s362_15"></a>[UB 11:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p6_5) — “For a billion years...”

**COMMENT**

The complete space respiration cycle requires a little more than two billion years for completion.

## 7. SPACE FUNCTIONS OF PARADISE

### I. UB 11:7.1 — “Space does not exist...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s372_15"></a>[UB 11:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_1) — “Space does not exist...”

**COMMENT**

Space does not touch Paradise—only the midspace zones do.

### II. UB 11:7.2 — “Paradise is the...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s380_15"></a>[UB 11:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_2) — “Paradise is the...”

**COMMENT**

Paradise is the center of the quiescent midspace zones—they appear to be an extension of Paradise.

### III. UB 11:7.3 — “The vertical cross section...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s388_15"></a>[UB 11:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_3) — “The vertical cross section...”

**COMMENT**

1. A vertical cross section of total space resembles a maltese cross.
2. These quiescent midspace zones between pervaded and unpervaded space:
	- A. Grow larger at greater distances from Paradise.
	- B. Eventually encompass the borders of all space.
	- C. Incapsulate the unpervaded space reservoirs and all pervaded space.

### IV. UB 11:7.4 — “Space is neither...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s400_15"></a>[UB 11:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_4) — “Space is neither...”

**COMMENT**

1. Space is:
	- A. A bestowal of Paradise.
	- B. Pervaded by the ancestral space potency of the Unqualified Absolute.
2. Space is not:
	- A. A subabsolute condition within the Unqualified Absolute.
	- B. The presence of the Unqualified Absolute.
	- C. A function of the Ultimate.
3. Space extends from near Paradise periphery to beyond the borders of the master universe.

### V. UB 11:7.5 — “If you imagine...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s415_15"></a>[UB 11:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_5) — “If you imagine...”

**COMMENT**

An outline of pervaded space.

### VI. UB 11:7.6 — “There is an upper...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s423_15"></a>[UB 11:7.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_6) — “There is an upper...”

**COMMENT**

1. There is an upper and lower limit to pervaded space.
2. As we go out from Paradise, pervaded space thickens—even faster than does the plane of the universes.

### VII. UB 11:7.7 — “The relatively quiet zone...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s432_15"></a>[UB 11:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_7) — “The relatively quiet zone...”

**COMMENT**

1. These space quiet zones separate the seven superuniverses from the vast galaxies in the first outer space level racing around Paradise.
2. The first outer space level is bounded above and below by quiescent midspace zones and on the inner and outer margins by relatively quiet zones.

### VIII. UB 11:7.8 — “A space level thus functions...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s441_15"></a>[UB 11:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_8) — “A space level thus functions...”

**COMMENT**

A description of a space level.

### IX. UB 11:7.9 — “This alternate zoning...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s449_15"></a>[UB 11:7.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p7_9) — “This alternate zoning...”

**COMMENT**

1. The alternate zoning of the master universe, together with alternate clockwise and counterclockwise flow of the galaxies, contributes to control and stabilization.
2. These arrangements exert antigravity influence and prevent dangerous velocities.

## 8. PARADISE GRAVITY

### I. UB 11:8.1 — “The inescapable pull...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s460_15"></a>[UB 11:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_1) — “The inescapable pull...”

**COMMENT**

1. Paradise gravity effectively grips all the worlds of all the universes.
2. Gravity is the omnipotent strand on which are strung the gleaming stars, blazing suns, and whirling spheres.
3. This is the physical adornment of the God in whom all things consist. (This is a combination of Eph 1:23 and Col 1:17.)
	**[Eph 1:23](/en/Bible/Ephesians/1#v23)**. “The fulness of him who fills all in all.”
	**[Col 1:17](/en/Bible/Colossians/1#v17)**. “And in him all things hold together.”

### II. UB 11:8.2 — “The center and focal point...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s472_15"></a>[UB 11:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_2) — “The center and focal point...”

**COMMENT**

1. The center of absolute gravity is Paradise, complemented by the dark gravity bodies.
2. All emanations of nether Paradise respond to Paradise gravity as they follow the space circuits of the master universe.
3. Every known form of cosmic reality has:
	- A. The bend of the ages.
	- B. The trend of the circle.
	- C. The swing of the great ellipse.

### III. UB 11:8.3 — “Space is nonresponsive...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s485_15"></a>[UB 11:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_3) — “Space is nonresponsive...”

**COMMENT**

1. Space is nonresponsive to gravity, but it acts as an equilibrant.
2. Space can neutralize linear gravity, but it cannot delay it.
3. Absolute gravity is Paradise gravity. Local (linear) gravity pertains to the electrical stage of matter.

### IV. UB 11:8.4 and following — “The numerous forms...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s495_15"></a>[UB 11:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_4) and following — “The numerous forms...”

**COMMENT**

1. Cosmic forces disclose three stages of response to Paradise gravity:
	- A. **Segregata**—space potency turning into pre-energy.
	- B. **Ultimata**—appearance of negative and positive qualities in energy systems.
	- C. **Triata** (3-fold organization in Havona) and **Gravita** (2-fold organization in superuniverses) — the stage where response to linear gravity appears.
2. The Havona dark gravity bodies exercise both linear and absolute gravity.

### V. UB 11:8.8 — “Space potency is not...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s507_15"></a>[UB 11:8.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_8) — “Space potency is not...”

**COMMENT**

1. Space potency is not subject to any form of gravitation.
2. But space potency is ancestral to all forms of nonspiritual reality.
3. Space potency is not ancestral to space.
4. Space potency includes those absolute potentials which emanate from Paradise and constitute the space presence of the Unqualified Absolute.

### VI. UB 11:8.9 — “Paradise is the...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s518_15"></a>[UB 11:8.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_9) — “Paradise is the...”

**COMMENT**

1. Paradise is the source of all energy-matter in the cosmos.
2. The Unqualified Absolute is the revealer, regulator, and repository of all that which has Paradise as its source.
3. The Unqualified Absolute’s presence explains the potential infinity of Paradise gravity extension.
4. This explains why gravity acts in the plane perpendicular to the mass.

## 9. THE UNIQUENESS OF PARADISE

### I. UB 11:9.1 — “Paradise is unique...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s531_15"></a>[UB 11:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p9_1) — “Paradise is unique...”

**COMMENT**

Paradise is the origin and goal of all spirit personalities.

### II. UB 11:9.2 — “Paradise is the geographic center...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s539_15"></a>[UB 11:9.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p9_2) — “Paradise is the geographic center...”

**COMMENT**

Paradise is the geographic center of infinity.

### III. UB 11:9.3 — “In the eternity...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s547_15"></a>[UB 11:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p9_3) — “In the eternity...”

**COMMENT**

1. Paradise seems to have been the inevitable repercussion of the Father’s will which eternalized the Original Son.
2. The Father thus created two kinds of reality—the personal and the nonpersonal.
3. Spiritual and nonspiritual tension gave origin to the Conjoint Actor and the central universe.

### IV. UB 11:9.4 — “When reality is...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s557_15"></a>[UB 11:9.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p9_4) — “When reality is...”

**COMMENT**

1. That which is nonpersonal is not Deity.
2. Paradise is not Deity—it is not conscious.

### V. UB 11:9.5 — “Paradise is not ancestral...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s566_15"></a>[UB 11:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p9_5) — “Paradise is not ancestral...”

**COMMENT**

1. Paradise is not a creator. Personality and mind-spirit realities are transmissible, but patterns are not.
2. Paradise is the absolute of pattern. Patterns can be reproduced.

### VI. UB 11:9.6 — “God’s residence is central...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s575_15"></a>[UB 11:9.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p9_6) — “God’s residence is central...”

**COMMENT**

God’s residence is the pattern for all universe headquarters.

### VII. UB 11:9.7 — “Paradise is the universal...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s583_15"></a>[UB 11:9.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p9_7) — “Paradise is the universal...”

**COMMENT**

1. Paradise is the headquarters of personality and source of all energy.
2. All that is, has been, or ever will be has origin in Paradise.
3. Paradise is the source of all energy and all personality.

### VIII. UB 11:9.8 — “After all, to mortals...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s593_15"></a>[UB 11:9.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p9_8) — “After all, to mortals...”

**COMMENT**

1. Paradise is the destiny of all mortal ascenders.
2. Every God-knowing mortal is on the perfection trail to Paradise.
3. Attainment of Paradise is a transformation bordering on the limits of supremacy.

## DISCUSSION OF PARADISE

1. Space as we understand it is nonexistent on Paradise.<a id="s603_56"></a>[UB 0:1.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p1_13)
2. Paradise is the geographic center of infinity.<a id="s604_49"></a>[UB 0:0.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p0_5)
3. Paradise:
	- A. Is the Absolute of material-gravity control.
	- B. Is motionless.
	- C. Has a universe location.
	- D. Has no position in space.<a id="s609_31"></a>[UB 0:4.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p4_12)
4. God is spirit but Paradise is not.<a id="s610_37"></a>[UB 12:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_1)
5. On Paradise there is always more worship impulse than has been provided for.<a id="s611_79"></a>[UB 27:7.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/27#p7_6)

## THE BIBLE ON HEAVEN AND HELL

### I. **HEAVEN**

1. Hebrew concept of heaven.
	- A. The earth is flat.
	- B. Heaven is above the earth.
	- C. Hell is under the earth.
2. God and the angels are in heaven. The dead are in hell—the pit.
3. Heaven rests on pillars—foundation.
	- **[2 Sam 22:8](/en/Bible/2_Samuel/22#v8)**. “Then the earth reeled and rocked; the foundations of the heavens trembled.”
	- **[Prov 8:27, 28](/en/Bible/Proverbs/8#v27)**. “When the established the heavens, I was there... when he made firm the skies above.”
	- **[Job 26:11](/en/Bible/Job/26#v11)**. “The pillars of heaven tremble.”
4. Plurality of heavens.
	- **[Deut 10:14](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/10#v14)**. “Behold, to the Lord your God belong heaven and the heaven of heavens.”
	- **[Neh 9:6](/en/Bible/Nehemiah/9#v6)**. “Thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host.”
5. The Hebrews believed in seven heavens. God’s throne was in the seventh heaven.
	- **[Ps 11:4](/en/Bible/Psalms/11#v4)**. “The Lord’s throne is in heaven.”
	- **[1 King 8:49](/en/Bible/1_Kings/8#v49)**. “Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place.”
6. Paradise was regarded as the third heaven.
	- **[2 Cor 12:2](/en/Bible/2_Corinthians/12#v2)**. “I know a man in Christ who...was caught up to the third heaven.”
7. The second heaven was the abode of evil spirits and fallen angels.
	- **[Eph 6:12](/en/Bible/Ephesians/6#v12)**. “Against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places.”
8. But heaven was not sensuous like the heaven of Islam.
	- **[Mark 12:25](/en/Bible/Mark/12#v25)**. “When they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven.”
9. God fills all heaven.
	- **[2 Chron 2:6](/en/Bible/2_Chronicles/2#v6)**. “Heaven, even highest heaven cannot contain him.”
	- **[Jer 23:24](/en/Bible/Jeremiah/23#v24)**. “Do I not fill heaven and earth? says the Lord.”
10. Heaven—the residence of Deity.
	- **[Deut 26:15](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/26#v15)**. “Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy people.”
	- **[Rev 11:19](/en/Bible/Revelation/11#v19)**. “Then God’s temple in heaven was opened.”
11. Heaven was associated with atmospheric phenomena.
	- **[Gen 1:8](/en/Bible/Genesis/1#v8)**. “And God called the firmament Heaven.”
	- **[Gen 7:11](/en/Bible/Genesis/7#v11)**. “The fountains of the great deep burst forth, and the windows of the heavens were opened.”
	- **[Exod 16:4](/en/Bible/Exodus/16#v4)**. “Then the Lord said to Moses, ‘Behold, I will rain bread from heaven.’”
	- **[2 Sam 22:14](/en/Bible/2_Samuel/22#v14)**. “The Lord thundered from heaven.”
12. War in heaven.
	- **[Rev 12:7](/en/Bible/Revelation/12#v7)**. “Now war arose in heaven.”
	- **[Isa 14:12](/en/Bible/Isaiah/14#v12)**. “How you are fallen from heaven, O Day Star, son of Dawn.”
	- **[Luke 10:18](/en/Bible/Luke/10#v18)**. “‘I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.’”
13. As related to astronomy.
	- **[Jer 33:22](/en/Bible/Jeremiah/33#v22)**. “As the host of heaven cannot be numbered.”
	- **[Ps 19:1](/en/Bible/Psalms/19#v1)**. “The heavens are telling the glory of God; and the firmament proclaims his handiwork.”
14. Guardian angels are stationed in heaven.
	- **[Matt 18:10](/en/Bible/Matthew/18#v10)**. “I tell you that in heaven their angels always behold the face of my Father.”
	- **[Gen 22:15](/en/Bible/Genesis/22#v15)**. “And the angel of the Lord called to Abraham...from heaven.”

### II. **HELL**

#### 1. **Sheol**—the pit.

HADES is the Latin word for Sheol. The Hebrew underworld of the dead.

- A. Hebrew concept of Hades.
	The Greeks thought of Hades as a place of activity. The Hebrews thought it was a place of inactivity. See **[Ps 94:17](/en/Bible/Psalms/94#v17)**. “If the Lord had not been my help, my soul would soon have dwelt in the land of silence.”
- B. Sheol had four levels.
	1. The abode of martyrs. These martyrs were sure of a resurrection.
	2. The level of the righteous. They also were sure of resurrection.
	3. Level of prosperous sinners. These had a chance of salvation.
	4. The level of poor sinners. Not much hope for them. Poverty and sickness were indications of God’s frown.
- C. Hebrews thought that the dead might possibly come back to earth.
	- **[1 Sam 2:6](/en/Bible/1_Samuel/2#v6)**. “The Lord kills and brings to life; he brings down to Sheol and raises up.”
	- Saul and the Endor medium.
	- **[1 Sam 28:11](/en/Bible/1_Samuel/28#v11)**. “Then the woman said, ‘Whom shall I bring up for you?’ He said, ‘Bring up Samuel for me.’”
- D. State in Sheol.
	- **[Job 14:21](/en/Bible/Job/14#v21)**. “His sons come to honor, and he does not know it.”
	- **[Ps 115:17](/en/Bible/Psalms/115#v17)**. “The dead do not praise the Lord, nor do any that go down into silence.”
	- **[Eccl 9:10](/en/Bible/Ecclesiastes/9#v10)**. “There is no work or thought or knowledge or wisdom in Sheol.”
- E. Fire connected with Sheol.
	- **[Deut 32:22](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/32#v22)**. “For a fire is kindled by my anger, and it burns to the depths of Sheol.”
	- **[Rev 20:14](/en/Bible/Revelation/20#v14)**. “Then Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire.”
- F. Sheol—destiny of the wicked.
	- **[Ps 9:17](/en/Bible/Psalms/9#v17)**. “The wicked shall depart to Sheol.”
	- **[Prov 7:27](/en/Bible/Proverbs/7#v27)**. “Her house is the way to Sheol.”
	- **[Matt 10:28](/en/Bible/Matthew/10#v28)**. “Rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in hell.”
	- **[Luke 12:5](/en/Bible/Luke/12#v5)**. “Fear him who...has power to cast into hell.”
- G. The PIT means hell.
	- **[Eze 31:16](/en/Bible/Ezekiel/31#v16)**. “I cast it down to Sheol with those who go down to the Pit.”
- H. Deliverance from hell.
	- **[Rev 1:18](/en/Bible/Revelation/1#v18)**. “And I have the keys of Death and Hades.”
	- **[Ps 86:13](/en/Bible/Psalms/86#v13)**. “Thou hast delivered my soul from the depths of Sheol.”
- I. The two resurrections.
	- **[John 5:29](/en/Bible/John/5#v29)**. “And come forth, those who have done good, to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment.”

#### 2. **Gehenna**

This was the Hinnom valley, where there may have been a sanctuary of MOLECH, where human sacrifices were offered. ([Jer 7:31.)](/en/Bible/Jeremiah/7#v31)

- A. It was defiled by King Josiah. ([2 Kings 23:6](/en/Bible/2_Kings/23#v6).)
- B. Gehenna is often used as a synonym for Hell.
- C. The Jews thought the souls in Gehenna might somehow be purified by fire—they held ideas somewhat like those of the Catholic concept of purgatory.
- D. This concept is also suggested by Jesus’ preaching to the spirits in prison.
	**[1 Peter 3:19](/en/Bible/1_Peter/3#v19)**. “In which he went and preached to the spirits in prison.”

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Appendices"><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Appendix to Papers 1 to 10</span></a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I#index"><span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span></a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/12"><span class="pr-2">Paper 12. The Universe of Universes</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span></a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>