---
title: "Workbook I — Foreword and Part I — Paper 12. The Universe of Universes"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: theology, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1959 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/11">Paper 11. The Eternal Isle of Paradise</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/13">Paper 13. The Sacred Spheres of Paradise</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

## INTRODUCTION

### I. UB 12:0.1 — “The immensity of...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s30_15"></a>[UB 12:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p0_1) — “The immensity of...”

**COMMENT**

The immensity of the cosmos does not prevent our learning something about it and the persons who live in it.

### II. UB 12:0.2 — “In principle...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s38_15"></a>[UB 12:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p0_2) — “In principle...”

**COMMENT**

In potential, the universe may be infinite, but in actuality it is space limited.

### III. UB 12:0.3 — “We are convinced...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s46_15"></a>[UB 12:0.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p0_3) — “We are convinced...”

**COMMENT**

1. The cosmos is unfinished—the potential of the Infinite is not wholly revealed.
2. The revelation of the eternal purpose is still in progress.

## 1. SPACE LEVELS OF THE MASTER UNIVERSE

### I. UB 12:1.1 — “The universe of universes...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s57_15"></a>[UB 12:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_1) — “The universe of universes...”

**COMMENT**

1. The cosmos has dimensions. The universe is a limited and co-ordinate whole.
2. This delimited universe is under the control of Paradise gravity.

### II. UB 12:1.2 — “The successive space levels...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s66_15"></a>[UB 12:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_2) — “The successive space levels...”

**COMMENT**

1. The outer space levels constitute the major divisions of the master universe.
2. The cosmos keeps control of its energies—they do not escape.
3. Energy whirls and swings onward in the great space circuits.

### III. UB 12:1.3 — “Proceeding outward...”

**REFERENCE:**<a id="s76_14"></a>[UB 12:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_3) — “Proceeding outward...”

**COMMENT**

Proceeding outward from Paradise, we encounter six space levels:
1. The Central Universe—Havona.
2. The Seven Superuniverses.
3. First Outer Space Level.
4. Second Outer Space Level.
5. Third Outer Space Level.
6. Fourth Outer Space Level.

### IV. UB 12:1.10 — “_Havona_, the central universe...”

**REFERENCE:**<a id="s90_14"></a>[UB 12:1.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_10) — “_Havona_, the central universe...”

**COMMENT**

A description of Havona.

### V. UB 12:1.11 — _“The Paradise-Havona System...”_

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s98_15"></a>[UB 12:1.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_11) — _“The Paradise-Havona System...”_

**COMMENT**

The seven superuniverses revolve around the Havona creation and Paradise.

### VI. UB 12:1.12 — “_The Seven Superuniverses...”_

**REFERENCE:**<a id="s106_14"></a>[UB 12:1.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_12) — “_The Seven Superuniverses...”_

**COMMENT**

1. Superuniverses do not divide a nebula or cross local universes.
2. Each superuniverse embraces about one seventh of the inhabited cosmos.
3. Nebadon is one of the newer universes in Orvonton.

### VII. UB 12:1.13 — “The Grand Universe...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s116_15"></a>[UB 12:1.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_13) — “The Grand Universe...”

**COMMENT**

1. A bird’s-eye view of the grand universe.
2. Evidences of an unfinished creation—limits of habitation.
3. Location of the local universe of Nebadon.

### VIII. UB 12:1.14 — “The Outer Space Levels...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s126_15"></a>[UB 12:1.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_4) — “The Outer Space Levels...”

**COMMENT**

1. Vast systems of force and materializing energy are organizing in outer space.
2. The quiet space zone intervening is about 400,000 light years.
3. Semiquiet space zones are free from cosmic fog.
4. The galaxies of the first outer space level appear at about 500,000 light years from the outer borders of the grand universe.
5. This outer belt of creation, the first outer space zone, encircles the whole organized and inhabited cosmos.

### IX. UB 12:1.15 — “Still greater activities...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s138_15"></a>[UB 12:1.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_15) — “Still greater activities...”

**COMMENT**

Fifty million light years beyond the first outer space level still greater cosmic activities are in progress.

### X. UB 12:1.16 — “The central universe is...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s146_15"></a>[UB 12:1.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p1_16) — “The central universe is...”

**COMMENT**

1. Havona is the creation of eternity; the superuniverses, of time; the outer space cosmos, of eventuated ultimacy.
2. There are those who believe in an ever-expanding universe of infinity.
3. The present master universe is delimited—bounded on its outer margins by open space.

## 2. THE DOMAINS OF THE UNQUALIFIED ABSOLUTE

### I. UB 12:2.1 — “When Urantia astronomers...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s158_15"></a>[UB 12:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_1) — “When Urantia astronomers...”

**COMMENT**

1. What astronomers see in outer space is the mighty outworking of the plans of the Architects of the Master Universe.
2. In general, these activities beyond the borders of the grand universe represent the domains of the Unqualified Absolute.

### II. UB 12:2.2 — “Although the unaided...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s167_15"></a>[UB 12:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_2) — “Although the unaided...”

**COMMENT**

1. The eye can see only two or three nebulae beyond Orvonton, but the telescope reveals billions of universes in formation.
2. And there are other millions of universes beyond the range of our most powerful telescopes.

### III. UB 12:2.3 — “In the not-distant future...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s176_15"></a>[UB 12:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_3) — “In the not-distant future...”

**COMMENT**

1. New telescopes will reveal 375 million new galaxies in outer space.
	**Note**: Galaxies, not nebulae or universes. Orvonton, the Milky Way, is a galaxy.
2. Many island universes thought to be in outer space belong to Orvonton.
3. The superuniverses are all enlarging. New nebulae are being organized.

### IV. UB 12:2.4 — “The Uversa star students...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s187_15"></a>[UB 12:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_4) — “The Uversa star students...”

**COMMENT**

1. The grand universe is surrounded by an ever-expanding creation of the master universe.
2. The energy and matter of these outer regions equal many times the total mass of the grand universe.
3. These outer space phenomena are the work of the Paradise force organizers.
4. The Orvonton power directors have nothing to do with these outer space realms.

### V. UB 12:2.5 — “We know very little...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s198_15"></a>[UB 12:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_5) — “We know very little...”

**COMMENT**

1. Very little is known about what is really going on in these outer realms.
2. It is thought that no beings like mortals or angels exist on the spheres of these outer regions.

### VI. UB 12:2.6 — “Throughout Orvonton...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s207_15"></a>[UB 12:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_6) — “Throughout Orvonton...”

**COMMENT**

A new order of creation is taking place in outer space. The Corps of the Finality is destined to serve on these new spheres.

## 3. UNIVERSAL GRAVITY

### I. UB 12:3.1 — “All forms of force-energy...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s217_15"></a>[UB 12:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_1) — “All forms of force-energy...”

**COMMENT**

1. All forms of reality are subject to the grasp of the universal gravity circuits.
2. The Universal Father functions over all four of the gravity circuits of the master universe:
	- A. Personality Gravity of the Father.
	- B. Spirit Gravity of the Eternal Son.
	- C. Mind Gravity of the Conjoint Actor.
	- D. Cosmic Gravity of Paradise.

### II. UB 12:3.6 — “These four circuits...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s230_15"></a>[UB 12:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_6) — “These four circuits...”

**COMMENT**

These circuits are not related to nether Paradise—they are **presence** circuits.

### III. UB 12:3.7 — “In this connection...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s238_15"></a>[UB 12:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_7) — “In this connection...”

**COMMENT**

Report concerning a study of gravity systems.

### IV. UB 12:3.8 — “1. Physical Gravity...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s246_15"></a>[UB 12:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_8) — “1. Physical Gravity...”

**COMMENT**

1. After computing the total gravity active from Paradise, it is found that the grand universe is making use of only five per cent of such gravity.
2. These calculations refer to absolute gravity.

### V. UB 12:3.9 — “2. Spiritual Gravity...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s255_15"></a>[UB 12:3.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_9) — “2. Spiritual Gravity...”

**COMMENT**

1. In the case of spirit gravity it is found that the spirit gravity of the grand universe is about the same as the estimated total for the active function of the Eternal Son.
2. This suggests that the now forming universes of outer space are nonspiritual.

### VI. UB 12:3.10 — “3. Mind Gravity...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s264_15"></a>[UB 12:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_10) — “3. Mind Gravity...”

**COMMENT**

1. It is more difficult to estimate total mind gravity, but it has been attempted.
2. It is found that about 85 per cent of mind gravity is accounted for by the grand universe.
3. This suggests that 15 per cent of mind gravity may be functioning in outer space. These intelligences are apparently nonspiritual in nature.

### VII. UB 12:3.11 — “But all these...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s274_15"></a>[UB 12:3.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_11) — “But all these...”

**COMMENT**

These deductions are estimates but they are fairly reliable.

### VIII. UB 12:3.12 — “Personality Gravity...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s282_15"></a>[UB 12:3.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p3_12) — “Personality Gravity...”

**COMMENT**

Personality gravity is noncomputable.

## 4. SPACE AND MOTION

### I. UB 12:4.1 — “All units of cosmic energy...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s292_15"></a>[UB 12:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_1) — “All units of cosmic energy...”

**COMMENT**

1. All energy units are in primary revolution while swinging around the Paradise orbit.
2. In all the cosmos, nothing is stationary except Paradise.

### II. UB 12:4.2 — “The Unqualified Absolute...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s301_15"></a>[UB 12:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_2) — “The Unqualified Absolute...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Unqualified Absolute is functionally limited to space. His relation to motion is uncertain.
2. Motion is not inherent in space—not even the motion **of** space.
3. There are three opinions regarding the origin of motion.

### III. UB 12:4.6 — “In outer space...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s311_15"></a>[UB 12:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_6) — “In outer space...”

**COMMENT**

The Unqualified Absolute must prepare space for the functioning of the force organizers.

### IV. UB 12:4.7 — “Space is...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s319_15"></a>[UB 12:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_7) — “Space is...”

**COMMENT**

Space is real, it even moves. Space motions may be classified as follows:
1. Primary motion.
2. Secondary motion.
3. Relative motions.
4. Compensatory or correlating movement.

### V. UB 12:4.12 — “The present relationship...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s331_15"></a>[UB 12:4.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_12) — “The present relationship...”

**COMMENT**

1. The idea of an “exploding” cosmos is not true. Outward expansion is uniform.
2. The entire master universe participates in this space respiration.

### VI. UB 12:4.13 — “When the universes...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s340_15"></a>[UB 12:4.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_13) — “When the universes...”

**COMMENT**

The work of cosmic respiration is **space** work—not power-energy work.

### VII. UB 12:4.14 — “Although your spectroscopic...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s348_15"></a>[UB 12:4.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_14) — “Although your spectroscopic...”

**COMMENT**

1. Spectroscopic estimations of outer space velocities are unreliable.
2. The theory of increased velocity according to distance is false. This error is due to angles of observation and other time-space distortions.

### VIII. UB 12:4.15 — “But the greatest...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s357_15"></a>[UB 12:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_15) — “But the greatest...”

**COMMENT**

The greatest distortion is due to the alternating direction of the space paths around Paradise.

### IX. UB 12:4.16 — “It is probable...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s365_15"></a>[UB 12:4.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p4_6) — “It is probable...”

**COMMENT**

These alternate directions of the space paths around Paradise are concerned in the gravity control of the cosmos.

## 5. SPACE AND TIME

### I. UB 12:5.1 — “Like space...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s375_15"></a>[UB 12:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p5_1) — “Like space...”

**COMMENT**

1. Time is a bestowal of Paradise, but not like space. Time comes from motion because mind is aware of sequentiality.
2. Motion is essential to time, but the only universal time unit is the Paradise day.

### II. UB 12:5.2 — “Space is not infinite...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s384_15"></a>[UB 12:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p5_2) — “Space is not infinite...”

**COMMENT**

Space is neither infinite nor absolute, but the absolute of time is eternity.

### III. UB 12:5.3 — “Time and space...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s392_15"></a>[UB 12:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p5_3) — “Time and space...”

**COMMENT**

Time and space are inseparable only in the finite cosmos. Nonspatial time exists only in the Paradise mind.

### IV. UB 12:5.4 — “The relatively motionless...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s400_15"></a>[UB 12:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p5_4) — “The relatively motionless...”

**COMMENT**

1. The relatively motionless midspace zones impinging on Paradise are the transition zones from tine to eternity.
2. Time-conscious beings can visit Paradise, but unconsciousness precedes Paradise citizenship.

### V. UB 12:5.5 — “Relationships to time...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s409_15"></a>[UB 12:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p5_5) — “Relationships to time...”

**COMMENT**

1. Motion is essential to space relationships, but consciousness of time can exist without motion.
2. Man’s mind is less time-bound than space-bound. Imagination is comparatively time free.

### VI. UB 12:5.6 — “There are three...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s418_15"></a>[UB 12:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p5_6) — “There are three...”

**COMMENT**

There are three levels of time recognition.

### VII. UB 12:5.10 — “Unspiritual animals know...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s426_15"></a>[UB 12:5.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p5_10) — “Unspiritual animals know...”

**COMMENT**

1. Animals know only the past; man has insight—may know the future.
2. Reality is progressive—static morality is but slightly superanimal.
3. Stoicism is not a high order of self-realization. Human ethics are dynamic.

### VIII. UB 12:5.11 — “The human personality...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s436_15"></a>[UB 12:5.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p5_11) — “The human personality...”

**COMMENT**

Personality is not merely a concomitant of time-space events; personality can cause cosmic events.

## 6. UNIVERSAL OVERCONTROL

### I. UB 12:6.1 — “The universe is nonstatic...”

**REFERENCE:**<a id="s446_14"></a>[UB 12:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p6_1) — “The universe is nonstatic...”

**COMMENT**

The universe is nonstatic—stability is proportional to divinity—it is not due to inertia, but results from:
1. Balanced energies.
2. Co-operative minds.
3. Co-ordinated morontias.
4. Spirit overcontrol.
5. Personality unification.

### II. UB 12:6.2 — “In the physical control...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s459_15"></a>[UB 12:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p6_2) — “In the physical control...”

**COMMENT**

The master universe is controlled by the Universal Father through:
1. Physical—the Isle of Paradise.
2. Spiritual—the Eternal Son.
3. Mindal—the Conjoint Actor.

### III. UB 12:6.3 — “The Third Source...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s470_15"></a>[UB 12:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p6_3) — “The Third Source...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Conjoint Actor contributes to the co-ordination of the cosmos by:
	- A. Absoluteness of cosmic mind control.
	- B. Physical- and spiritual-gravity complements.
2. Mind functions wherever the material and the spiritual become interassociated.

### IV. UB 12:6.4 — “In all your contemplation...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s481_15"></a>[UB 12:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p6_4) — “In all your contemplation...”

**COMMENT**

When physical, mindal, and spiritual energies are associated, you must reckon with:
1. Unification by personality.
2. Reactions of experiential Deity.
3. Actions of the Absolutes.

### V. UB 12:6.5 — “The universe is...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s492_15"></a>[UB 12:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p6_5) — “The universe is...”

**COMMENT**

1. The universe is predictable only in the quantitative or gravity-measurement sense.
2. Primal energies, mind meanings, and spirit values are not subject to linear gravity.
3. Qualitatively, the cosmos is only partially predictable.
4. We can never fully predict the decisions of freewill beings.

### VI. UB 12:6.6 — “All phases...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s503_15"></a>[UB 12:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p6_6) — “All phases...”

**COMMENT**

1. Even nonpersonal realities react with more or less elasticity in any given isolated situation.
2. These unpredictable reactions of energy, mind, or other phenomena are probably due to the Ultimate and the Absolutes.

### VII. UB 12:6.7 — “We do not really know...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s512_15"></a>[UB 12:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p6_7) — “We do not really know...”

**COMMENT**

Diversity of reaction in the presence of uniform causation suggests the action of the Absolutes.

### VIII. UB 12:6.8 — “Individuals have...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s520_15"></a>[UB 12:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p6_8) — “Individuals have...”

**COMMENT**

Individuals, planets, and universes have their guardians—but who looks after the master universe? Probably—
1. The Absolutes in potential.
2. The Ultimate in direction.
3. The Supreme in evolutionary co-ordination.
4. The Architects of the Master Universe in administration prior to the appearance of specific rulers.

### IX. UB 12:6.13 — “The Unqualified Absolute...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s532_15"></a>[UB 12:6.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p6_13) — “The Unqualified Absolute...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Unqualified Absolute pervades all space.
2. The Universal Absolute functions wherever the other two Absolutes perform.
3. The Ultimate has a space presence co-existent with the master universe.
4. The Ultimate is progressively integrating the potentials of the three Absolutes.

## 7. THE PART AND THE WHOLE

### I. UB 12:7.1 — “There is operative...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s545_15"></a>[UB 12:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_1) — “There is operative...”

**COMMENT**

1. There is operative throughout the cosmos an impersonal law which is equivalent to providence.
2. God shows mercy to the individual; he is impartial toward the total.
3. The will of God may not prevail in the part, but it always does in the whole.

### II. UB 12:7.2 — “In all his dealings...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s555_15"></a>[UB 12:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_2) — “In all his dealings...”

**COMMENT**

1. Owing to a finite viewpoint, God’s acts may appear to be arbitrary.
2. The laws of God are the habits of God—good habits.
3. Nature is not always an act of Deity. Other factors are present.

### III. UB 12:7.3 — “It is repugnant...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s565_15"></a>[UB 12:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_3) — “It is repugnant...”

**COMMENT**

1. No personal act of Deity is ever inferior.
2. If God so wills, he can act in a different manner at any time.
3. This would be the action of a higher law, not the reversal of a lower law.

### IV. UB 12:7.4 — “God is not...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s575_15"></a>[UB 12:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_4) — “God is not...”

**COMMENT**

1. God is not a habit-bound slave to his own laws.
2. All the acts of God are volitional, notwithstanding their apparent sameness.
3. But this perfection of performance is not true of all his subordinates.

### V. UB 12:7.5 — “Because God is changeless...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s585_15"></a>[UB 12:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_5) — “Because God is changeless...”

**COMMENT**

Because God is changeless, we can depend upon his management of the cosmos.

### VI. UB 12:7.6 — “And all this steadfastness...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s593_15"></a>[UB 12:7.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_6) — “And all this steadfastness...”

**COMMENT**

1. God’s acts are volitional. He is not a slave to perfection and infinity.
2. God is not:
	- A. A self-acting, automatic force.
	- B. A slavish law-bound power.
	- C. A mathematical equation.
	- D. A chemical formula.
3. God is a freewill and primal personality.

### VII. UB 12:7.7 — “The will of God...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s607_15"></a>[UB 12:7.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_7) — “The will of God...”

**COMMENT**

1. Increasingly, in the lives of spirit-led beings, the will of God prevails.
2. Still more in the morontia life does the divine way shine forth.

### VIII. UB 12:7.8 — “The Fatherhood of God...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s616_15"></a>[UB 12:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_8) — “The Fatherhood of God...”

**COMMENT**

God loves **each** person—and all persons—the paradox of the part and the whole.

### IX. UB 12:7.9 — “The love of the Father...”

**REFERENCE:**<a id="s624_14"></a>[UB 12:7.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_9) — “The love of the Father...”

**COMMENT**

1. Each person is unique—without duplicate and irreplaceable.
2. The divine love glorifies each child in the Father’s personality circuit
3. God’s love reveals the high regard of the Father for all his creatures —from the highest to the lowest.

### X. UB 12:7.10 — “This very love of God...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s634_15"></a>[UB 12:7.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_10) — “This very love of God...”

**COMMENT**

1. God loves all his creatures—and this reveals the **all** relationship as well as the **each** relationship.
2. Brotherhood has to do with the whole in contradistinction to the qualities of the part.

### XI. UB 12:7.11 — “Brotherhood constitutes...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s643_15"></a>[UB 12:7.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_11) — “Brotherhood constitutes...”

**COMMENT**

1. We cannot escape the benefits or the penalties of brotherhood — relationship to other persons.
2. The part profits or suffers with the whole. They exist and progress together.
3. The part can be retarded by the inertia of the whole or carried forward by the momentum of the cosmic brotherhood.

### XII. UB 12:7.12 — “It is a mystery...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s653_15"></a>[UB 12:7.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_12) — “It is a mystery...”

**COMMENT**

1. The mystery of God’s residence on Paradise and presence in the creatures of a far-flung cosmos should not lessen our faith.
2. God lives with us notwithstanding:
	- A. The magnitude of his infinity.
	- B. The immensity of his eternity.
	- C. The grandeur of his matchless character.
3. The last part of the last sentence is a paraphrase of **[Acts 17:28](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/17#v28)**. “‘In him we live and move and have our being.’”

### XIII. UB 12:7.13 — “Even though the...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s666_15"></a>[UB 12:7.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_13) — “Even though the...”

**COMMENT**

1. Though God functions through many high beings, his Father fragments commune with human souls.
2. While the Father abides on Paradise, his divine presence dwells in the minds of men.

### XIV. UB 12:7.14 — “Even though the...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s675_15"></a>[UB 12:7.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_14) — “Even though the...”

**COMMENT**

While the Son and the Spirit minister to us, God has given a part of himself to live within us.

## 8. MATTER, MIND, AND SPIRIT

### I. UB 12:8.1 — “‘God is spirit...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s685_15"></a>[UB 12:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_1) — “‘God is spirit...”

**COMMENT**

1. “God is spirit,” but Paradise is not. **[John 4:24](/en/Bible/John/4#v24)**. “God is spirit.”
2. Spirit beings do not live in empty space. They live and work on material worlds.

### II. UB 12:8.2 — “The bestowal of...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s694_15"></a>[UB 12:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_2) — “The bestowal of...”

**COMMENT**

Paradise bestows and controls the force-charge of pervaded space.

### III. UB 12:8.3 — “Whatever the transformations...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s702_15"></a>[UB 12:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_3) — “Whatever the transformations...”

**COMMENT**

1. No matter what the changes, force goes out from Paradise and swings on forever around the eternal space paths.
2. Energy always obeys the law. Only in creature volition is there deviation from the divine plans.
3. Energy is the proof of the stability and eternity of Paradise.

### IV. UB 12:8.4 — “The bestowal of spirit...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s712_15"></a>[UB 12:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_4) — “The bestowal of spirit...”

**COMMENT**

1. The spiritual gravity of the Eternal Son is just as real as the physical gravity of Paradise.
2. But these matters of spirit are discerned only by the spiritual insight of the soul.

### V. UB 12:8.5 — “As the mind...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s721_15"></a>[UB 12:8.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_5) — “As the mind...”

**COMMENT**

1. As mortal mind becomes more spiritual it is less subject to material gravity.
2. As physical gravity measures quantitative energy, spirit gravity measures qualitative energies of divinity.

### VI. UB 12:8.6 — “What Paradise is...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s730_15"></a>[UB 12:8.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_6) — “What Paradise is...”

**COMMENT**

What Paradise is to the cosmos, and what the Eternal Son is to the spirit creation, the Conjoint Actor is to the realm of mind.

### VII. UB 12:8.7 — “The Conjoint Actor...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s738_15"></a>[UB 12:8.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_7) — “The Conjoint Actor...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Conjoint Actor reacts to both material and spiritual realities.
2. In this mind ministry the Conjoint Actor becomes:
	- A. Partner of the spiritual mind.
	- B. Essence of the morontia mind.
	- C. Substance of the material mind.

### VIII. UB 12:8.8 — “Mind is the...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s750_15"></a>[UB 12:8.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_1) — “Mind is the...”

**COMMENT**

1. Mind is the technique for making spirit realities experiential.
2. Co-ordination of things, ideas, and values is supermaterial.

### IX. UB 12:8.9 — “Though it is hardly...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s759_15"></a>[UB 12:8.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_9) — “Though it is hardly...”

**COMMENT**

Mortal mind can understand much of three levels of finite reality—matter, mind, and spirit.

### X. UB 12:8.13 — “The goal of existence...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s767_15"></a>[UB 12:8.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_13) — “The goal of existence...”

**COMMENT**

1. The goal of existence is spirit. Mind intervenes between the material and the spiritual.
2. Total Deity is not mind—but mind-spirit unified by personality.

### XI. UB 12:8.14 — “On Paradise...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s776_15"></a>[UB 12:8.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_14) — “On Paradise...”

**COMMENT**

1. On Paradise all three energies—material, mindal, and spiritual—are co-ordinate.
2. In the cosmos energy-matter is dominant, except in personality, were spirit, through mind, strives for the mastery.
3. Spirit is the fundamental of personality—transcending both mind and matter.

### XII. UB 12:8.15 — “In cosmic evolution...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s786_15"></a>[UB 12:8.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_15) — “In cosmic evolution...”

**COMMENT**

1. In the cosmos matter becomes a philosophic shadow cast by mind in the presence of spirit reality.
2. Mind, matter, and spirit are real, but not of equal value in personality.
3. Consciousness of divinity is a progressive spiritual experience.

### XIII. UB 12:8.16 — “The brighter the shining...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s796_15"></a>[UB 12:8.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_16) — “The brighter the shining...”

**COMMENT**

1. The brighter the spirit shining (the Father in the universe, the fragment in the creature), the greater the shadow cast by mind.
2. In time the body is real, but in death only the mind and spirit survive.
3. A cosmic reality can be nonexistent in personality experience.

## 9. PERSONAL REALITIES

### I. UB 12:9.1 — “Spirit is the basic...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s808_15"></a>[UB 12:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p9_1) — “Spirit is the basic...”

**COMMENT**

1. Spirit is the basic reality of all personality experience and progress.
2. Man’s destiny consists in the creation and attainment of spirit goals.

### II. UB 12:9.2 — “Love is the secret...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s817_15"></a>[UB 12:9.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p9_2) — “Love is the secret...”

**COMMENT**

1. Love is the secret of beneficial association between personalities. But you must really **know** such persons.
2. A telephone number does not identify the subscriber.

### III. UB 12:9.3 — “Mathematics, material science...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s826_15"></a>[UB 12:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p9_3) — “Mathematics, material science...”

**COMMENT**

1. Mathematics is indispensable to an understanding of the cosmos, but it is not a part of spiritual realities.
2. As regards both energy and life, the sum of two things is often more than their additive result.
3. That hydrogen and oxygen could make water could not be predicted by combined physics, chemistry, and philosophy.
4. Such things should prevent a mechanistic cosmology.

### IV. UB 12:9.4 — “Technical analysis...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s837_15"></a>[UB 12:9.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p9_4) — “Technical analysis...”

**COMMENT**
Analysis of a thing does not reveal what it can do. Water puts out fire, but oxygen is a supporter of combustion.

### V. UB 12:9.5 — “Your religion is...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s844_15"></a>[UB 12:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p9_5) — “Your religion is...”

**COMMENT**

1. Religion is enhanced by escape from the bondage of fear. Philosophy is trying to escape tradition.
2. Science is concerned with:
	- A. Contest of truth and error.
	- B. Deliverance from abstraction.
	- C. Deliverance from slavery of mathematics.
	- D. Deliverance from blindness of materialism.

### VI. UB 12:9.6 — “Mortal man has...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s857_15"></a>[UB 12:9.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p9_6) — “Mortal man has...”

**COMMENT**

1. Man’s mind is an energy system surrounding a spirit nucleus, and this is the potential of eternal personality.
2. Serious trouble or real death can come only when self fully displaces the spirit nucleus, thus destroying the cosmic scheme of personality identity.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/11">Paper 11. The Eternal Isle of Paradise</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/13">Paper 13. The Sacred Spheres of Paradise</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>