---
title: "Workbook I — Foreword and Part I — Paper 20. The Paradise Sons of God"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: theology, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1959 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/19">Paper 19. The Co-Ordinate Trinity-Origin Beings</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/21">Paper 21. The Paradise Creator Sons</a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## INTRODUCTION

### I. UB 20:0.1 — “As they function...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s30_15"></a>[UB 20:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p0_1) — “As they function...”

**COMMENT**

Functionally the Sons of God are divided into three groups—Descending, Ascending, and Trinitized.

## 1. THE DESCENDING SONS OF GOD

### I. UB 20:1.1 — “The remaining four...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s40_15"></a>[UB 20:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p1_5) — “The remaining four...”

**COMMENT**

1. These Sons are dedicated to helping evolutionary creatures ascend to Paradise to find the Father.
2. The first three groups are Paradise Sons, the last four are local universe Sons.

### II. UB 20:1.11 — “The Paradise Sons...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s49_15"></a>[UB 20:1.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p1_11) — “The Paradise Sons...”

**COMMENT**

The Paradise Sons are of threefold origin:
1. Creator Sons—produced by the Universal Father and the EternalSon.
2. Magisterial Sons—produced by the Eternal Son and the Infinite Spirit.
3. Trinity Teacher Sons—produced by the Father, Son, and Spirit.

### III. UB 20:1.13 — “The Creator Sons...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s60_15"></a>[UB 20:1.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p1_13) — “The Creator Sons...”

**COMMENT**

1. Creator Sons possess a spiritual endowment which they can bestow upon their creatures.
2. This is the Spirit of Truth which Michael bestowed upon Urantia mortals.
3. Creator Sons draw all spiritual values to themselves—like the Eternal Son.

## 2. THE MAGISTERIAL SONS

### I. UB 20:2.1 — “Every time an original...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s72_15"></a>[UB 20:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p2_1) — “Every time an original...”

**COMMENT**

1. Magisterial Sons are created by:
	- A. Original and absolute concept of being on the part of the Eternal Son, and
	- B. New and divine ideal of service on the part of the Infinite Spirit.
2. These Sons are closely related to all creative activities of the Michaels.
3. These Avonals are planetary ministers and magistrates.

### II. UB 20:2.3 — “Avonals are the...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s84_15"></a>[UB 20:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p2_3) — “Avonals are the...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Avonals are the Paradise Sons of planetary service and bestowal.
2. They are often incarnated and sometimes born of evolutionary mothers.

### III. UB 20:2.9 — “In all their work...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s93_15"></a>[UB 20:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p2_9) — “In all their work...”

**COMMENT**

1. Avonals are always backed up by the authority of the Creator Son of the universe where they are working.
2. The bestowal of an Avonal Son is just as effective as that of a Creator Son.

## 3. JUDICIAL ACTIONS

### I. UB 20:3.2 — “When they sit...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s104_15"></a>[UB 20:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p3_2) — “When they sit...”

**COMMENT**

1. Avonals may decree the destinies of an age.
2. But all sentences are executed by the authorities of the superuniverse.

## 4. MAGISTERIAL MISSIONS

### I. UB 20:4.1 — “Prior to the...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s115_15"></a>[UB 20:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p4_1) — “Prior to the...”

**COMMENT**

1. A Magisterial Son usually precedes the bestowal Son on a planet.
2. A Magisterial Son on an initial visitation appears as a full-grown male.
3. During the incarnation the Magisterial Son is fully co-operative with all functioning spiritual forces.

### II. UB 20:4.4 — “Urantia has never...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s125_15"></a>[UB 20:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p4_4) — “Urantia has never...”

**COMMENT**

If Urantia had followed the general plan, a Magisterial Son would have appeared sometime between Adam and the bestowal of Michael.

## 5. BESTOWAL OF THE PARADISE SONS OF GOD

### I. UB 20:5.1 — “The Eternal Son is...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s135_15"></a>[UB 20:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p5_1) — “The Eternal Son is...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Eternal Son is the eternal Word of God.
2. When a Son of the Eternal Son is bestowed on a world, such an incarnated Son is the “Word made flesh.”

### II. UB 20:5.3 — “Some order of...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s144_15"></a>[UB 20:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p5_3) — “Some order of...”

**COMMENT**

1. The mission of a bestowal Son is a prerequisite for the general bestowal of Thought Adjusters.
2. The Thought Adjusters are not universally bestowed until after the coming of the Spirit of Truth.

### III. UB 20:5.5 — “Understanding more about...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s153_15"></a>[UB 20:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p5_5) — “Understanding more about...”

**COMMENT**

Urantia is renowned in our local universe because it was the world on which our Creator Son executed his seventh and final bestowal.

## 6. THE MORTAL-BESTOWAL CAREERS

### I. UB 20:6.1 — “The method whereby...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s163_15"></a>[UB 20:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p6_1) — “The method whereby...”

**COMMENT**
The method of incarnation bestowal is a universe secret—known only to the bestowal Sons—and it is a waste of time to speculate.

### II. UB 20:6.2 — “On a mortal-bestowal mission...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s170_15"></a>[UB 20:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p6_2) — “On a mortal-bestowal mission...”

**COMMENT**

1. On a mortal bestowal, a Paradise Son is always born of woman.
2. They live average mortal lives except that they do not beget offspring.

### III. UB 20:6.6 — “When the bestowal Sons...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s179_15"></a>[UB 20:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p6_6) — “When the bestowal Sons...”

**COMMENT**

1. When bestowal Sons die, they always reappear on the third day.
2. It is not required that they should experience a violent death, as occurred on Urantia.
3. Urantia is known in the local universe as “the world of the cross.”

### IV. UB 20:6.7 — “When bestowal Sons are not...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s189_15"></a>[UB 20:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p6_7) — “When bestowal Sons are not...”

**COMMENT**

1. When bestowal Sons are not put to death violently, they simply “lay down their lives.”
2. But these deaths are not to satisfy the demands of the “divine wrath.”
3. The bestowal is a universe necessity—death is just a part of such a bestowal life.

### V. UB 20:6.9 — “Upon the completion...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s199_15"></a>[UB 20:6.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p6_9) — “Upon the completion...”

**COMMENT**

1. Subsequent to a final planetary bestowal, a Creator Son sends his Spirit of Truth to such a world.
2. The Spirit of Truth previously sent to all Avonal-bestowal worlds now changes to become more literally the spirit of Michael.

## 7. THE TRINITY TEACHER SONS

### I. UB 20:7.1 — “These highly personal...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s210_15"></a>[UB 20:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p7_1) — “These highly personal...”

**COMMENT**

These Paradise Daynal Sons are created by the Paradise Trinity.

### II. UB 20:7.3 — “The Daynal order...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s218_15"></a>[UB 20:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p7_3) — “The Daynal order...”

**COMMENT**

1. Daynals are not a part of universe administration. They are neither judges nor rulers.
2. They are educators devoted to:
	- A. Moral enlightenment.
	- B. Spiritual awakening.
	- C. Moral guidance.

## 8. LOCAL UNIVERSE MINISTRY OF THE DAYNALS

### I. UB 20:8.1 — “The Paradise Spiritual Sons...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s232_15"></a>[UB 20:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p8_1) — “The Paradise Spiritual Sons...”

**COMMENT**

1. These Trinity-origin Sons are almost wholly devoted to ministry to the dual-origin universes.
2. They are educational ministers to the mortal creatures and lower orders of spirit beings.

### II. UB 20:8.3 — “The Teacher Sons compose...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s241_15"></a>[UB 20:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p8_3) — “The Teacher Sons compose...”

**COMMENT**

1. They supervise the entire educational system of a local universe.
2. They examine and certify a host of universe personalities.
3. They deal with both ascending mortals and ambitious angels.

## 9. PLANETARY SERVICE OF THE DAYNALS

### I. UB 20:9.1 — “When the progress of events...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s253_15"></a>[UB 20:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p9_1) — “When the progress of events...”

**COMMENT**

1. When a world is ripe for a spiritual age, the Trinity Teacher Sons arrive.
2. Before such a time, they visit the worlds to formulate plans for the future deliverance from materialism.

### II. UB 20:9.3 — “The Teacher Sons usually...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s262_15"></a>[UB 20:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p9_3) — “The Teacher Sons usually...”

**COMMENT**

1. A corps of Teacher Sons usually remains on the planet for one thousand years.
2. The Daynals do not incarnate or become visible. They contact mortals by the ministry of associated personalities.

### III. UB 20:9.5 — “The Trinity Teacher Sons seem...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s271_15"></a>[UB 20:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p9_5) — “The Trinity Teacher Sons seem...”

**COMMENT**

The Teacher Sons are so identified with the scheme of mortal progression that it seems probable that they will remain associated in a future age.

## 10. UNITED MINISTRY OF THE PARADISE SONS

### I. UB 20:10.2 — “The Paradise Sons are...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s281_15"></a>[UB 20:10.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p10_2) — “The Paradise Sons are...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Paradise Sons portray the Paradise Deities to the domains of time and space.
2. They are devoted to helping the creatures of time attain the goals of eternity.

### II. UB 20:10.4 — “In the local universes...”

**REFERENCE**: <a id="s290_15"></a>[UB 20:10.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p10_4) — “In the local universes...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Paradise Sons collaborate to effect the revelation of the Paradise Deities:
	- A. The Creator Sons—the Father.
	- B. The Avonals—the Son.
	- C. The Daynals—the Spirit.
2. They all contribute to the actualization of the Supreme Being.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/19">Paper 19. The Co-Ordinate Trinity-Origin Beings</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/21">Paper 21. The Paradise Creator Sons</a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>