---
title: "Chapter XXI"
description: "Pahlavi Texts, Part III (SBE 24) Dînâ-î Maînôg-î Khirad, Sikand-gûmânîk Vigâr, and the Sad Dar"
published: true
date: 2025-10-6T9:44:6Z
tags: Zoroastrianism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-10-6T9:44:6Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/Pahlavi_Texts_Part_3/Dina_i_Mainog_i_Khirad_20">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter XX</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/Pahlavi_Texts_Part_3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/Pahlavi_Texts_Part_3/Dina_i_Mainog_i_Khirad_22">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter XXII</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## DÎNÂ-Î MAÎNÔG-Î KHIRA<i>D</i>. CHAPTER XXI.

1\. The sage asked the spirit of wisdom (2) thus: ‘What is the end of the world-arranging _and_ spirit-destroying man? 3. What is the end of him who is a scoffing man? 4-6. What is the end of the idle, the malicious, and the lazy man? 7. What is the end of a false-hearted _one_, (8) and the end of an arrogant _one_ [^1]?’

9\. The spirit of wisdom answered (10) thus: 'He who is a world-arranging _and_ spirit-destroying man is as injured, in the punishment of the three _nights_ [^2], as a raging fire when water comes upon it.

11 [^3]. 'Of him who is a scoffing man _there_ is no glory in body and soul; (12) _and_ every time when he opens _his_ mouth his wickedness then increases. 13. All the fiends, too, become so lodged in his body, that they leave no goodness whatever for his body; (14) and he makes mockery of the good, and glorification of the vile. 15. Also in the worldly _existence_ his body is infamous, and _in_ the spiritual _existence his_ soul is wicked. 16. And, for effecting _his_ punishment in hell, they deliver him over to <span id="p52"><sup><small>[ p. 52 ]</small></sup></span> the scoffing fiend; (17) _and_ that fiend inflicts a ridicule and a mockery upon him with every single punishment.

18\. '_As to_ him who is an idle man, yet devoid of wickedness, mostly when [^4] death comes on in the worldly _existence_, he thereupon (a<i>g</i>a<i>s</i>) begets pleasantly for the sake of another.

19\. 'The bridge [^5] which is for the soul of him who is a malicious man is more difficult than _for_ the other wicked who are in hell. 20. For this reason, because malice proceeds by lineage; (21) _and_ it is possible to manage every sin better than malice, (22) because malice will abide in a lineage. 23. There are _instances_ when it adheres [^6] until the renovation _of the universe;_ (24) for _it_ is clearly declared by the pure revelation, (25) that the origin of the estrangement (anîrânîh) of the Arûmans, _and_ even the Tûrânians, _from_ the Irânians, was owing to that malice which _was_ generated by them through the slaughter of Aîrî<i>k</i> [^7]; (26) _and it_ always adheres until the renovation. <span id="p53"><sup><small>[ p. 53 ]</small></sup></span> 27\. 'He who is a lazy man is said _to be_ the most unworthy of men. 28. Because _it_ is declared by revelation, (29) that the creator Aûha<i>r</i>ma<i>z</i><i>d</i> produced no corn for him who is a lazy man; (30) for him who is a lazy man _there_ is then no giving of anything in gifts and charity [^8]; (31) and lodging and entertainment are not to be provided for him. 32. For this reason, because that food which a lazy man eats, he cats through impropriety and injustice; (33) and, on account of his laziness and unjust eating, his body then becomes infamous and the soul wicked.

34\. 'He who is a false-hearted man is as dubious in good _things_ as in bad; (35) _he_ is dubious as to the treasure of the spiritual and worldly _existences_, and also as to the ceremonial, invocation, _and_ service of the sacred beings. 36. And, on account of these circumstances, the angels _and_ archangels shall accept little of the ceremonial _and_ invocations which he performs, (37) and give unto him little of the gain, too, which he seeks. 38. And in the mouth of the good _man he_ is always infamous, (39) and his soul becomes wicked.

40\. ‘The friends of him who is an arrogant man are few, and his enemies many. 41. And even of the gifts which he gives to any one, _and_ the ceremonial, too, which he performs for the sacred beings, they shall accept little, on account of _his_ arrogance, (42) and give little of the gain, too, which he seeks. 43. And in hell they deliver him to the fiend of arrogance, in order to inflict punishment upon _his_ soul; (44) and the fiend of arrogance inflicts punishment of various kinds upon it, _and_ is not pacified.’

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/Pahlavi_Texts_Part_3/Dina_i_Mainog_i_Khirad_20">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter XX</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/Pahlavi_Texts_Part_3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Zoroastrianism/Pahlavi_Texts_Part_3/Dina_i_Mainog_i_Khirad_22">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter XXII</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^1]: (51:1) L19 has ‘What is the end of him who is an idle man?’ in § 4, and repeats the same formula in each of the §§ 5-8.

[^2]: (51:2) Referring to the three days and nights of final punishment, reserved for those specially wicked, at the time of the resurrection (see Bd. XXX, 12-16).

[^3]: (51:3) In TD2 the remaining sections are arranged in the following order:—§§ 18, 27-33, 19-26, 34-44, 11-17.

[^4]: (52:1) L19 inserts ‘misery and.’

[^5]: (52:2) The <i>K</i>indvar bridge (see Chap. II, 115, 162), which is supposed to resemble a beam with many unequal sides, the side turned uppermost being narrower in proportion as the soul, intending to pass along it, is more wicked; so that the difficulty of the transit increases with the sin of the soul (see Dd. XXI, 3-5).

[^6]: (52:3) Or ‘continues.’

[^7]: (52:4) Pâz. <i>E</i>raz, one of the three sons of Frê<i>d</i>ûn, the Pê<i>s</i>dâ<i>d</i> sovereign, who divided his empire among them, giving the Arûman provinces to Salm, the Tûrânian to Tû<i>g</i>, and the Irânian to Aîrî<i>k</i>. The last was slain by his two brothers, and his death was subsequently avenged by his descendant Mânû<i>s</i><i>k</i>îhar (see Chap. XXVII, 41-43, Bd. XXXI, 9-12). Though these sons are not mentioned in the Avesta now extant, their history appears to have been related in the <i>K</i>i<i>d</i>rast Nask (see Sls. X, 28 n).

[^8]: (53:1) L19 has ‘he then gives nothing _as_ his living, which is through gifts and charity.’