---
title: "Urantian — News from Urantia Foundation — July 1977"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
tags: Urantia Foundation—Copyright, Dissemination, Urantia Foundation, Urantian News, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 1977 Urantia Foundation</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#issue-1-july-1977">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 1, July 1977 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## Validity and Foundation's Ownership of Copyright and Registered Marks Upheld

On March 17, 1977 in the United States District Court, Central District of California, an order and judgment was entered in the case of “URANTIA Foundation vs. William Burton King, Urantian Research, Urantian School of Research and Doris George, Barbara A. King.” This judgment granted URANTIA Foundation, the plaintiff, its motion for Summary Judgment in all respects.  The defendants were ordered to deliver up for destruction all materials which were found to infringe the copyright of “The URANTIA Book” or the registered mark “URANTIA” and they were enjoined from further infringement of the copyright in and to “The URANTIA Book” and the registered mark “URANTIA.”  This judgment was not appealed by the defendants. In the supporting document issued by the Court entitled “Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law,” the Court stated among other things that:

- “The copyright in The URANTIA Book is valid.”
- “Foundation owns the copyright in The URANTIA Book.”
- “Registration Nos. 915,734 and 948,104 issued by the United States Patent Office for the trademark and service mark ‘URANTIA’ are owned by Foundation, and are valid and subsisting.”

This is the first time the copyright to “The URANTIA Book” and the registered marks have been tested in court, and this decision is, therefore, an important precedent.

## Guidelines concerning the use of “URANTIA”

While only the licensed URANTIA organizations are entitled to use the word “URANTIA”— as a service mark and/or a trademark—it is fairly common and totally proper to make written mention of the registered mark “URANTIA” or the trade names URANTIA Foundation or URANTIA Brotherhood, for example, in mentioning the title of the Book or the names of the organizations. This is often done in newsletters, written speeches, programs, and so forth. We are distinguishing here between two kinds of use:

1. Use of the mark as an identifier (of a service or a product originating from URANTIA Foundation or one of its licensed users, such as URANTIA Brotherhood) by displaying it alone in a prominent way on the cover of a publication or the like—which is not allowed, without prior permission of the Trustees.
2. Simply referring to the registered mark “URANTIA” in an informative text of one kind or another—which is allowed.  It is also proper to use the word with an initial capital and the rest in lower case letters—namely “Urantia”—when referring to the name of the planet—so long as such usage is not likely to be confused with a registered mark usage.

It is in the best interest of URANTIA Foundation and its licensees, URANTIA Brotherhood, the various URANTIA Societies, and URANTIA Brotherhood Corporation (all of which are collectively referred to as the official URANTIA organizations) that the word be shown in correct form. We have noted that some, in preparing written materials, are unclear regarding those instances in which the word represents the name of the planet and those wherein it is the registered mark, and whether to use the upper or lower case form in these various instances. The lower case, Urantia, should be used only to refer to the planet and then in such a manner that it cannot reasonably be construed as a registered mark usage. In any other instance, the upper case, URANTIA, should be used. Perhaps the simplest rule to determine whether to write Urantia or URANTIA is that Urantia is always a “noun” referring to the planet. URANTIA is virtually always an “adjective” modifying a noun.

The following shows correct and incorrect usage:

Incorrect | Correct
--- | ---
I live on URANTIA | I live on Urantia
the geography of URANTIA | the geography of Urantia
a Urantia society | a URANTIA society
a Urantia activity* | a URANTIA activity*

(*so long as it is an activity sponsored by one of the official organizations)

The following are commonly used terms, all of which take the upper case form to denote the trademark or service mark “URANTIA,” or a trade name usage of URANTIA in conjunction with another word:

- URANTIA activities
- URANTIA Brotherhood
- URANTIA Service
- First URANTIA Society
- URANTIA publications
- “URANTIA Book” study group (not URANTIA study group)
- the URANTIA Papers
- “The URANTIA Book”
- URANTIA movement
- URANTIA Foundation
- URANTIA organizations

## Copyright Policy

At their meeting in March, the Field Representatives of URANTIA Brotherhood expressed the desire that URANTIA Foundation formulate a statement on matters regarding the copyright to “The URANTIA Book,” particularly as concerns the use of “The URANTIA Book” material by students of the Book, taking into consideration the new copyright law. The Trustees will be studying this matter and will be discussing it with our attorneys.

In the meantime, the Foundation's copyright policy as formulated by legal counsel continues to be: a person desiring to make use of any material from “The URANTIA Book” should submit a request to the Foundation in writing, giving all pertinent details concerning the amount and nature of quoting and distribution. A one-page statement, which embodies in more detail the policy the Trustees have followed for a number of years, is available on request.  Eventually the Trustees hope to issue a more detailed statement regarding various aspects of the copyright law and their guiding philosophy in approving or denying the use of material.

## Increase in price of “The URANTIA Book”

As of March 1, 1977, the retail price of “The URANTIA Book” was increased from $20 to $26. The last prior increase (to $20) was March 1, 1971, some six years ago. During that period the “U.S. Consumer Price Index, All Items,” increased from 121.3 to 174 or some 1.43 times. Likewise the index of wholesale prices jumped from 113.9 to 185.2 or 1.625 times. These kinds of inflationary increases coupled with increasing office and administrative expenses have made a price increase unavoidable, despite the numerous and increasingly generous contributions from readers of “The URANTIA Book.”

On the positive side, however, weekly wages (all manufacturing) increased from their 1971 level 142.04 to 211.07 in 1976 (October) for a 1.49 increase, indicating that the buying power of wage earners was rising faster than the cost of living. The price increase of “The URANTIA Book” at only 1.3 times compares favorably with all indices.

In any event, we want you to know that any price increase for “The URANTIA Book” is carefully considered and adopted only when current costs and projected needs indicate an increase is necessary. Costs will undoubtedly continue to increase as a result of inflation and office expenses, including the hiring of qualified full-time staff to replace those who over the years unselfishly served for little or no salary.

Contributions play an important role in keeping the price of the Book at a low level. Thanks to all of you who have helped keep the price of “The URANTIA Book” so unusually low for so many years.

## Internal Revenue Service Completes Audit

We are pleased to report that URANTIA Foundatton and URANTIA Brotherhood continue to enjoy tax-exempt status following an audit by the Internal Revenue Service. Donations by those subject to U.S. Income Tax either URANTIA Foundation or URANTIA Brotherhood are, as before, tax deductible.

## International spread of “The URANTIA Book”

The international dissemination of “The URANTIA Book” is gradually increasing.  The Foundation has received correspondence from people interested in the Book in several new countries in the Mid-East and Africa. “The URANTIA Book” has been distributed to some 60 different nations as of this time, and it appears we can look forward to increasing international interest in “The URANTIA Book” and its supernal teachings.

## Corrections

We believe most all will agree that the reproduction of the text of “The URANTIA Book” has been and is of an exceptionally good quality. With each the Book, a few minor punctuation and spelling errors have been spotted and corrected, so those few errors which might exist are gradually being reduced. We wish to thank those of you who have brought these to our attention in the past and will always welcome receiving notice of any printing errors discovered in the most recently available printing of “The URANTIA Book.”

## A revelation of truth

We are in association with a revelation of truth which is a part of the natural evolution of religion on this world, therefore we must learn to possess our souls in patience. When the chaos of the present confusion has passed, men will be ready and willing to seek truth and righteousness. And we believe it was for this better order of affairs on earth that the Book has been made ready.

> “Be not discouraged; human evolution is still in progress, and the revelation of God to the world, in and through Jesus, shall not fail.” (The URANTIA Book - <a id="a107_160"></a>[UB 196:3.33](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p3_33))

## References

- Urantia Foundation's Urantian News: https://www.urantia.org/news/1977-07

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#issue-1-july-1977">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 1, July 1977 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
