---
title: "Urantian — News from Urantia Foundation — July 1978"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
tags: Urantia Foundation—Copyright, Urantia Foundation, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 1978 Urantia Foundation</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#issue-1-july-1978">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 1, July 1978 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## Book sales

The daily activities associated with the dissemination and preservation of the URANTIA teachings continue apace, and the staff at “533” is kept very busy. Much of the work is based on the volume of sales of “The URANTIA Book” which so far this year has been somewhat greater than anticipated. It is now expected that the fifth printing will be sold out in August. Its exhaustion will signal a total of some 85,000 copies of the English edition abroad in the world.

Technological changes and improvements in the printing industry occur regularly, and the Trustees are frequently faced with new decisions bearing on the physical quality of “The URANTIA Book.” Endeavoring to maintain the same physical appearance and quality, as well as keep pace with the industry, provides a continuing challenge. The sixth printing of “The URANTIA Book” is now on the press and is scheduled by the printer for completion in late August. The press used for the first five printings has been scrapped. This time, “The URANTIA Book” is being run on a much newer and much larger high- speed press, While this will not affect the physical specifications for the Book, it should result in a slight improvement in overall printing quality.  In addition, the Foundation has completed efforts to upgrade worn type on the plate-making materials which should also enhance the printing quality of the text.

## Copyright

The effort to maintain the legal protection afforded by the copyright to “The URANTIA Book” and the registered marks is a regular part of the headquarters workload. The Foundation succeeded this winter in having a book-length plagiarization of “The URANTIA Book” removed from the market. Other infringements on a smaller scale frequently demand the Trustees' attention.

## Licensing Agreements

The protection of the registered marks, “URANTIA” and the Concentric-Circles Symbol, has been greatly augmented by the signing of the revised Licensing Agreements by the URANTIA Societies this spring. These agreements will have a strengthening influence on the maintenance of the registered marks. Perhaps the importance of careful maintenance is underscored by the fact that the Foundation quite recently found it necessary to file suit against a firm using the word “URANTIA” in conjunction with its business as a massage parlor. A judgement and injunction have been obtained prohibiting further improper use of the mark “URANTIA.” Such matters continue to absorb much of our time and resources. Nevertheless, it is gratifying to observe, almost a full generation since the publication of “The URANTIA Book,” that the word “URANTIA” has retained its identity and special meaning.

## Scott Forsythe, Lea Ann Fishburn

Two new employees are joining the staff of URANTIA Foundation effective approximately August 1, 1978. 

Mr. Scott Forsythe, who is known to many readers of “The URANTIA Book,” is joining URANTIA Foundation as an Administrative Assistant. Scott is presently a General Councilor of URANTIA Brotherhood and has been President of First URANTIA Society of Los Angeles for four years. Scott and his wife Carol will find a warm welcome here in Chicago. We are hoping they will be able to bootleg some of that California sunshine for use here in January.

Mrs. Lea Ann Fishburn, a fourth generation reader of “The URANTIA Book,” will take over the Receptionist-typing responsibilities of Miss Kay Michaels who may now give full time to her secretarial responsibilities. Lea Ann, a native of Chicago, and no stranger to our office, will do work for both the Brotherhood and the Foundation. Although Lea Ann cannot bring California sunshine with her, her cheery disposition and happy smile will be an excellent substitute.

We look forward to seeing many of you at the 1978 General Conference of URANTIA Brotherhood, now just a short time away. Best wishes to all of you for a pleasant summer.


## References

- Urantia Foundation's Urantian News: https://www.urantia.org/news/1978-07

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#issue-1-july-1978">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 1, July 1978 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
