---
title: "Urantian — News from Urantia Foundation — December 1978"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
tags: Dissemination, Urantia Foundation, Urantian News, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1978 Urantia Foundation</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#issue-2-december-1978">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 2, December 1978 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## Distribution

Books from the Sixth Printing are now being delivered, all of the Fifth Printing having been exhausted in September. The Sixth Printing, as some of the others before it, consists of 25,000 copies which are shipped to this office in lots of 1,000 as needed. It is a thrill to see the list of printings growing. Our sales this past month exceeded 1100. The job of mailing and keeping records keeps our Shipping Department mighty busy.

## First Pacific Conference - Hawaii

Our President, Thomas A. Kendall, and his wife, Carolyn, attended the First Pacific Conference in Hawaii during late September. They enjoyed this trip very much. Tom reports some 90 people attended the conference, mostly from the State of Hawaii, but with a number of mainlanders also. They were accompanied on this trip by Meredith Sprunger, President of URANTIA Brotherhood, and his wife, Irene. Tom reports that we have some wonderfully supportive people in Hawaii. They are warm, loving and dedicated to the study of _The URANTIA Book_. The Hawaiians were very pleased to have people from headquarters attend their conference.

## Staff - Scott Forsythe, June Moritz

We are happy to advise you that **Scott Forsythe**, ex-President of First URANTIA Society of Los Angeles, joined our staff on August 21, 1978, as Administrative Assistant. His wife, Carol, has been fortunate in obtaining an excellent position with the telephone company in Evanston, Illinois. We are very happy to have these two delightful people in our midst.

Scott will be assuming a number of administrative duties, some of which were formerly the responsibility of **Mark W. Kulieke**, Assistant Secretary of URANTIA Foundation. Mark has taken a position with a Chicago area publisher and is looking forward to expanding and developing his talents in the publishing field. While working with us, Mark contributed substantially to the actualization of the Foundation's aims and purpose. His presence and quality work will be missed by all of us who have worked with him.

To replace **Lea Ann Fishburn**, our receptionist-typist, we have been fortunate in obtaining the services of **Mrs. June Moritz**. June is a splendid addition to our staff.

## Excerpts From Readers’ Letters

We have been receiving some very heart-warming letters from readers of The Book. We take pleasure in sharing excerpts from a few of then with you;

> “I have just finished reading _The URANTIA Book_ for the first time and I am reading it again. I thank you with all my heart. I was on a pretty rocky road before I picked it up a year ago, now my life has changed unbelievably. I had several spiritual experiences when I was younger, but in all I read I could never find a true explanation. Every word in every sentence in _The URANTIA Book_ rings true in my heart.”

---

> "Several of my friends and fellow URANTIA Book readers have encouraged me to write this letter in praise and support of the quality of publication of _The URANTIA Book_.

> As a secretary, I have been involved in quite a number of publication efforts: theses; annual reports to funding agencies; and papers submitted to technical/professional journals. I well appreciate the time and labor required to produce superior copy quality. In fact, the first thing that attracted me to _The URANTIA Book_ was the quality of paper, print, and binding—all for only $26.00! I remember thinking that I just had to own the BOOK, no matter what the contents, because it was so beautiful, little realizing at the time how much of an impact the contents were to make on me!"

---

> "This is a belated letter of thanks to all who have worked for the care of _The URANTIA Book_ over the years. I was introduced to the book in 1974 while attending a seminary. At the time, it was difficult for me to overcome the prejudices of doctrinal thinking, so, even though I had purchased a copy, I put it out of my mind at that time.

> After three years in seminary, I began to realize that my personal experience of God clashed with certain ideas that I was being taught. I decided to leave. After months of spiritual confusion, imagine my joy when I once again came across _The URANTIA Book_ “buried” underneath volumes of forgotten theology books. As soon as I re-read various papers - especially #196 - “The Faith of Jesus” - I knew that the answers to my difficulties had been in my possession all along."

---

> "I would greatly appreciate if you could send me any available information about _The URANTIA Book_ and the URANTIA Foundation. I came across _The URANTIA Book_ about 10 months ago and have been enthralled by it since I read the first page, and just can't seem to stop getting complete enjoyment from reading and experiencing its great truths.

> _The URANTIA Book_ has helped to make a much needed change for the better within myself. I only hope that I might help my fellow man to work towards a better self and be more like our Father, God."

---

> "You'd be delighted to learn that I have received a copy of _The URANTIA Book_. Thanks ever so much for all that you have done to get the book to me. I really appreciate you. I agree with the individual who told me that he believes 'that many years of stimulating reading lie before me in this magnificent volume,'

> I have started reading _The URANTIA Book_ and the part which interests me is the part on Jesus' life and teachings."

---

> “There is in the mind of God a plan which embraces every creature of all his vast domains, and this plan is an eternal purpose of boundless opportunity, unlimited progress, and endless life. And the infinite treasures of such a matchless career are yours for the striving!” (<a id="a79_277"></a>[UB 32:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p5_7))

We wish you all a joyful holiday and a productive New Year in the dissemination of the magnificent message which has been given us.


## References

- [Urantia Foundation's Urantian News](https://www.urantia.org/news/1978-12)

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#issue-2-december-1978">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 2, December 1978 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
