---
title: "Urantian — News from Urantia Foundation — July 1979"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
tags: Urantia Foundation, Urantian News, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 1979 Urantia Foundation</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#issue-1-july-1979">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 1, July 1979 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## The rate of sales

The volume of mail—both national and international—telephone inquiries and visitors here at “533” continues at a healthy pace. Admittedly during our just past winter, with snow banks at a minimum of several feet in height, visitors were few and far between; but with the return of warm weather they have been coming with increasing frequency.

The rate of sales of “The URANTIA Book” also continues at a healthy pace. Well over 90,000 copies of the Book have now been sold and distributed. The current volume of sales is averaging approximately 840 books a month. Of course, in some months, the volumes are higher and sometimes lower.

Interestingly, we are increasingly being told by people who contact us that they are discovering “The URANTIA Book” in public and school libraries. It appears that the long term effort by URANTIA Brotherhood, several of the URANTIA Societies and individual readers of placing copies of the Book in libraries is beginning to pay positive dividends.

## Michael Painter, Mary Burton

It is a pleasure for us to advise you that Michael Painter has joined our staff as an administrative assistant. Mike assumed his position on June 13th.  Mike, his wife, Sandi and two boys, Justin, 4 1/2, and Jason, 2 1/2, are currently moving from Indianapolis to a new home in Oak Park, a Chicago suburb. We are very happy to have Mike and his wonderful family join us here.

Mike has been very active for a number of years among readers of “The URANTIA Book” in the Indianapolis area. He has hosted a study group in his home for over six years. Recently, he was among those responsible for organizing and directing the 1979 Midwest Regional Conference held in June at Marian College in Indianapolis.

Recently, Mrs. June Moritz, who came to work for us as a receptionist/typist, has been transferred over to URANTIA Brotherhood to work as a clerk-typist. To take over June's position, we have been fortunate to obtain the services of Miss Mary Burton (no, not Chuck Burton's wife, just someone who shares the same name). Mary is an excellent addition to our staff.

## Excerpts from Letters

Once again, we are happy to share with you excerpts among the many letters we have recently received from readers of The URANTIA Book :

> “I hardly know where to begin. I felt I must write to you to   tell you that ‘The URANTIA Book’ has forever fully changed my life. I began reading it a month ago after waiting well of a month to get it through an inter-library loan. I finished it the day before yesterday and waited a full day before writing so that I could think over the contents of this letter.”

---

> “I have recently had the good fortune to be introduced to . . . \[‘The URANTIA Book’\] through a young friend. I have been disabled for nine years. How exciting life has become with this enlightenment. Never before have I had instruction so challenging and written with such elegant syntax!”

---

> “It is a book we found in the library and it has altered the course of our lives and our thinking. Thank you for this wonderful book.”

---

> “I‘ve just had an opportunity to glance through your extraordinary literature, ’The URANTIA Book,' and I must admit . . . \[I was\] amazed and spellbound at its enlightening contents. Its revelations of the Universe and the Universal God, leaves this book in a class of its own, far above the common everyday literature. I was very disappointed when I had to return it to its owner for I had begun to get involved by its hypnotic and magnetic suggestions.”

---

> “I have recently discovered ‘The URANTIA Book’ and have never felt so happy in my entire life. I have gone through many types of religious beliefs, but they all seemed inadequate. Only now, do I feel I have something that really makes sense to me.”

---

> “My pursuit of the truth has led me to the most important manuscript in the hands of modern man. . .‘The URANTIA Book.’ After hearing of its existence, but only bits and pieces of information to go on, I ended my one year search for the book (for review in person) at a theological book store in Seattle.”

---

> “About a year and a half ago, after many years of searching, I found and bought ‘The URANTIA Book.’ I am 1086 pages into the book now. I don't say that I comprehend all of it—there will need to be much more study on my part; but I find myself reading it and saying—'Yes! this is it!' As I reached the sections on the evolution of religions and the various concepts of God, I felt a great weight leave my mind. I've rebelled inwardly at so many things that were taught me—but everyone had so much ‘authority’ that I decided I must be way off base to question so much. I despaired of ever finding satisfying answers. Finding ‘The URANTIA Book’ and studying it is one of the great joys of my life.”

---

> “I am a twenty four old country music singer who went to the University of Georgia for five years, and never in my experience have I ever read, or heard tell of, anything as interesting and uplifting as ‘The URANTIA Book.’ It is by far a masterpiece that is destined to have far reaching effects on the lives of many.”

## Time is on our side

In closing, one can observe that during these formative years while “The URANTIA Book” is largely unknown to the general public, much valuable experience is being earned which should render able assistance in meeting the challenge of growth with stability once the Book's existence—if not its purpose and true contents—becomes known throughout the world. Ideally the Book will quietly spread to all peoples of our planet without raising antagonisms or creating resistance to its saving message by undue and untimely publicity or notoriety, and in this way eventually the message of “The URANTIA Book” will be seen in its true form as a fulfillment of the past, as a comfort for the present, and as a promise for the future. By using this approach, at some time in the days ahead, the general public will come to the realization that “The URANTIA Book” is already in their midst (as if it had been there all the time) with a loyal and supportive readership that can courageously and selflessly champion its message of the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man throughout the world.

All this will take time, for “The URANTIA Book” itself points out:

> “. . . No great social or economic change should be attempted suddenly. Time is essential to all types of human adjustment—physical, social, or economic. Only moral and spiritual adjustments can be made on the spur of the moment, and even these require the passing of time for the full outworking of their material and social repercussions . . .” (“The URANTIA Book,” <a id="a87_370"></a>[UB 81:6.40](/en/The_Urantia_Book/81#p6_40))

Time is on our side so long as we use it effectively by responding to events to the extent their evolutionary development will reasonably support our involvement. But we must be careful to do no more. We, like Jesus, must not over-feed our associates.

## References

- [Urantia Foundation's Urantian News](https://www.urantia.org/news/1979-07)

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#issue-1-july-1979">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 1, July 1979 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
