---
title: "Urantian — News from Urantia Foundation — December 1983"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
tags: The Urantia Book—Spanish, The Urantia Book—Finnish, Urantia Foundation, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 1983 Urantia Foundation</p>


## Reader Responses on Advertising and Publicity

In the last issue of this newsletter (July 1983), we presented an article which shared our thinking as to the wisdom of avoiding the use of publicity and advertising in the dissemination of _The Urantia Book_ while encouraging the person-to-person approach. Within a few months of the appearance of the article, Urantia Brotherhood and Urantia Foundation distributed to the entire mailing list a joint policy statement which also discussed the matter of advertising and publicity.

In the past, letters from readers offering opinions about the content of newsletter articles or statements concerning policy matters have tended to be few in number and often presented alternative views to the policy positions presented. However, in this instance, both the article and the joint policy statement have together elicited, to date, some twenty-eight letters of response. So far, all the letters have been favorable toward the no publicity/no advertising policy. The letters have come from all parts of the United States as well as several other nations, and the considerable majority were written by persons who do not hold official positions in the organizations. While we recognize such limited data is not sufficient for purposes of statistical analysis, we do believe the comparative number of responses and the unanimous agreement suggest a broad base of support for the policy of not advertising or publicizing _The Urantia Book_.

We would, of course, like to share all the comments we received concerning the article and the policy statement, but there is not sufficient space. Therefore, we will present excerpts from one letter which reflects the tone, flavor and thinking of the other responses we received. The following are excerpts from the letter:

> “I am writing this letter to support and commend the. .. ‘collective wisdom’ in avoiding the use of more public and mass means of spreading the news \[of _The Urantia Book_\]. “I am moved to speak from my own personal experience of my spiritual awakening with _The Urantia Book_. It is indeed a slow, day by day growing process in attaining higher levels of spiritual enlightenment. I have experienced this “slow-but-sure” way to growth in all aspects of my life, i.e., family, my career ... neighbors and community, etc. When I first knew of the book I of course tried to convert people I thought needed it. Now I find just _living_ the example and _growing_ with it is producing a _quiet attraction_, even though I know many still aren't ready for the book itself. People are starving for the truth. I feel we are like artists doing our work of aesthetic beauty for the world to see without having to 'advertise.' How I've experienced this in my own day to day living! Let's not miscarry our mission. Every day, a little more of the book bcomes a real experience for me, but it has been slow and quiet. I can even compare my spiritual experience with the birth of my child. The first tri-mester is so very important and crucial to the child's development, even though you can't even see or tell visually yet, that you are carrying a new life. Let's keep this in mind and not abort our carefully planned spiritual rebirth. Maybe in years to come advertising, yes, but not now at our _crucial_ stages of development.”

We wish to thank all those who took time to share their thoughts on the advertising/publicity matter with us. Your comments on any matter, whether positive or negative, are always welcome.

## The Effect of Placing Books in Libraries

As you may recall, in the last issue of this newsletter, we mentioned a program conducted by the Domestic Extension Committee of Urantia Brotherhood to place copies of _The Urantia Book_ in libraries in the United States. Also, the International Fellowship Committee of the Broth erhood sponsors a similar program for placement of books in libraries around the world.

We believe these programs are vital and deserve strong support. By way of indicating the usefulness of efforts to place books in libraries, we would like to share excerpts from several letters received since the last issue of this newsletter. These letters indicate people are indeed discovering _The Urantia Book_ in libraries, not only in the United States but also in other nations as well. The following are excerpts from these letters:

> “I discovered a copy of _The Urantia Book_ on the shelves of a nearby public library. I checked the book out and learned as much as I could from it in the short time allowed. Now, of course, I want to have a copy of _The Urantia Book_ permanently so I can study. it and share it with others.”

> “I have been reading _The Urantia Book_ all summer and find it, to say the least, quite fascinating. I've been reading the library copy and would like to purchase one of my own.”

---

> “I have discovered _The Urantia Book_ in \[a\] public library and became very much interested \[in\] the information that the book contains. I would like to purchase the book for my very own library.”

---

> “I am a ... second year undergraduate student ... in philosophy and divinity \[at an African university\]. I have been reading many philosophical and religious books all of which had never given me the religious insight-I have always been seeking until I came across your book _\-- The Urantia Book—_which I found in the university library. And to my surprise \[it\] turned \[out\] to be ... the message ... modem man seeks to know ... I am very interested in having a copy of my own which will help me....”

## Spanish Translation

The Spanish Translator Selection Committee has presented its final report and recommendations to the Trustees for the Trustees' consideration and action. More detailed information will follow after evaluation of the report and further negotiations with the translators. However, the initial reaction is favorable, and this is true even though the cost of the effort is rather high and will require careful planning at the fund raising level. More definite figures will be available following the close of negotiations and the finalization of contract requirements.

In the meantime, special thanks are due Mr. Douglas Fraser of Houston, Texas, and Dr. Richard F. Prince of San Diego, Cal¥ornia, for their superb cooperation and invaluable help and service on the Selection Committee.

## Finnish Translation

We are still awaiting the reports of two professional checkers who are evaluating the suitability for publication of the Finnish translation as it now stands.

## Books Sales

While we do not have December sales figures yet, it is possible to state that combined sales for _The Urantia Book_ and the French translation, (_Le Livre d'Urantia_), will exceed 10,000 copies. So far this year, sales of _The Urantia Book_ are over 8,000 copies, while for _Le Livre d'Urantia_, sales have exceeded 2,000 copies. Sales of the French translation have somewhat declined from last year, but this was expected because the high number of sales last year reflected a pent-up demand due to the French translation not having been available for many years.

## Thanks for Your Support

As our 33rd year comes to a close, we again wish to take just a moment to express our sincere gratitude and appreciation for the spiritual, mental and material support that you have given us. As a result of your continued help the spread of the teachings of _The Urantia Book_ continues in its steady, evolutionary pace. As the new year is upon us, let us rededicate ourselves to striving to live in accordance with our highest values and allow Jesus' religious life and teachings to be our source of inspiration. The Trustees and Staff send you and your families their best wishes during this holiday season and for the coming new year.

## Quotation

> “But the great problem of religious living consists in the task of unifying the soul powers of the personality by the dominance of love. Health, mental efficiency, and happiness arise from the unification of physical systems, mind systems, and spirit systems. Of health and sanity man understands much, but of happiness he has truly realized very little. The highest happiness is indissolubly linked with spiritual progress. Spiritual growth yields lasting joy, peace which passes all understanding.” [UB 100:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/100#p4_3)

A URANTIA&reg; Publication

Published by:
URANTIA Foundation
533 Diversey Parkway
Chicago, IL U.S.A.


## References

- Urantia Foundation's Urantian News: https://www.urantia.org/news/1983-12