---
title: "Urantian — News from Urantia Foundation — December 1988"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
tags: Urantia Foundation, Urantian News, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 1988 Urantia Foundation</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#issue-2-december-1988">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 2, December 1988 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## Trustees and Staff Send Greetings

As we conclude a very active 1988 and prepare to begin a new year of service for the readers of _The URANTIA Book_, the Trustees and staff of URANTIA Foundation send you our warmest holiday greetings and our sincere thanks for your continued support and help.

This past year saw encouraging progress on a number of new and continuing projects, as well as inereased communication and coordination between URANTIA Foundation and URANTIA Brotherhood on many levels. We look forward to another year of growth and cooperation between these two sister organizations as they seek the Father's will in fulfilling their important roles in the pursuit of mutual goals: wisely disseminating the teachings of _The URANTIA Book_ to a spiritually hungry world, and preserving inviolate the text of the Revelation for future generations of truth seekers.

There are many examples of how our two organizations assume different responsibilities as they work together for the same long term goals. In addition to URANTIA Brotherhood Corporation acting as the sales agent for _The URANTIA Book_ on behalf of URANTIA Foundation, the Foundation has authorized and fInanced several ongoing projects, such as the Library Placement and Book Consignment progams, that are being administered by URANTIA Brotherhood. Other projects that are directly administered by the Foundation, such as the Spanish and Finnish translations and the upcoming Index to _The URANTIA Book_, involve tlre active participation of Brotherhood members on many levels from fund raising to checking the final results. Even carrying out the Foundation's legal responsibilities of copyright and trademark protection requires the assistance and cooperation of every Brotherhood member and reader in order to help maintain the integrity of the text and the exlusivity of the identifying symbols of its authenticity.

It is in this spirit of cooperation that URANTIA Foundation greets the challenges of the new year. We ask for your continued advlce, support, and participation in our task of sharing the teachings of _The URANTIA Book_ with all who might desire to hear them, both now and in the generations to come.

## Key Word Index to be Published

URANTIA Foundation and URANTIA Brotherhood take pleasure in announcing that a _Key Word Index of the Contents of The URANTIA Book_ will shortly be available. The _Key Word lndex_ was developed under the auspices of the Brotherhood in coordination with the Foundation. The Foundation will publish the _Key Word Index_ and the Brotherhood will distribute it.

There are two tables of contents in _The URANTIA Book_. The second of these two, found between pages xii and lxvi, is entitled, “Contents of the Book” and is highly detailed. The _Key Word Index_ is based entirely on this second table of contents and is an alphabetical sorting of the significant words in each listing found in this section of _The URANTIA Book_. The _Key Word Index_ will be approximately 60 pages in length, the same size as the pages in _The URANTIA Book_ and will have a soft cover.

It is anticipated that the _Key Word Index_ will be published in the early portion of 1989. Look for an announcement of its availability soon.

## Book Distribution

As of mid-December, distribution (a term which encompasses sales as well as gift and library placements) in 1988 of _The URANTIA Book_ reached a level of more than 9,700 copies. Slightly more than four percent of this amount represents donated books.

Amadon Corporation, an affiliate of URANTIA Foundation, reports that figures for the distribution of the French translation, _Le Livre d'Urantia_, are at a level of more than 1,300 copies by mid-December. Less than one percent of this figure consists of donated books. Thus, the total number of books distributed this year, will exceed 1 1,000 copies.

While data for December is only partially available, it is estimated that by the conclusion of this year about 175,000 copies of _The URANTIA Book_ will have been distributed throughout the world since 1955. Total distribution for the French translation, since its publication in 1961, should reach about 21,500 copies at the conclusion of this year.The combined total distribution for both versions of _The URANTIA Book_ will be almost 197,000 copies.

## Library Placement Program

As reported in our July 1988 newsletter, the Library Placement Program continues to be a successful way to make _The URANTIA Book_ and _Le Livre d'Urantia_ available consistent with URANTIA Foundation's considered policy of a measured and unostentatious dissemination of the teachings of _The URANTIA Book_. In reviewing the number of books placed since the program was accelerated, we found that during the last four years, over 3,000 copies of _The URANTIA Book_ have been placed in libraries around the world that have English books in their collections. In addition, over l00 copies of _Le Livre d'Urantia_ have been placed in libraries in Quebec Province, Canada as well as other French speaking areas.

Over the years, sevreral hundred different readers have participated in this effort by placing books in libraries. The number of books placed by individuals ranges from one copy to over one thousand. Keep in mind that we will provide the books free of charge, but we need you to contact your local libraries. If you are interested in participating, contact us and we will inform the two committees of URANTIA Brotherhood who administer the program of your interest and have them send you information. It is a valuable service that is not that difficult and personal contact enhances the possibility of the library's acceptance of _The URANTIA Book_ or _Le Livre d'Urantia_ for permanent placement on its shelves.

In addition to the efforts of individuals, mass mailings to libraries offering to donate books are also undertaken. For example, in October of this year, a mailing to over 6,000 libraries around the world was sent out. The return requests are still coming in so a final count on responses is not available at this time. While only a small percentage of libraries may respond to this request we believe it is worth the effort and hope to periodically continue these efforts.

## Translation update

The Finnish and Spanish translation efforts are continuing at a steady pace. Day by day we are getting closer to making these teachings available in more languages.

## Comments from Readers of The Urantia Book

> “I've just finished reading _The URANTIA Book_, which I got from the library. Started reading the Life of Jesus first and was so impressed with it. He comes alive and I wish I could have known Him. The book has increased my faith. I have had a deep faith in God all my life...albeit God was a stern father figure and a punishing God. In the past few years, my concept of God is changing more towards the concept _The URANTIA Book_ enplains.”

> “Thank you for _The URANTIA Book_. When I first ran across it I thought the content of the book was just ‘weird’ enough to make it interesting reading. However, I was pleasantly surprised to see that this book contained a rare wisdom which I have found in only a couple other sources...I have searched other ‘religious’ books for answers to the contradictions...without success. I might question the validity of the teaching in _The URANTIA Book_ if it didn't fill in the answers to the questions I have asked in the past. I am very impressed by the series on the teachings of Jesus. The lessons and discussions give the true insight into what Jesus taught...”

> “Some time ago, browsing in a local bookstore, Iwas moved to purchase a copy of _The URANTIA Book_. At the time, I knew nothing of the book but was actively searching for something in which I could believe. I took _The URANTIA Book_ home, flipped through it and, promising myself I would one day read it, placed it on the closet shelf where it remained until this summer. A number of quite extraordinary (and I dare say fortuitous) events prompted me to begin to study _The URANTIA Book_ several montlrs ago and I have the most overwhelming sensation of having come home, of having finally caught a glimpse of that which I have long sought. A close friend of mine attends meetings of the local URANTIA Book Study Group and has let me know that I am welcome there. For the moment, I feel I need to continue my solitary erploration of this book but I'm so glad there is a study group near me for I know the day will come when I'll very much want to be a part of it.”

> “Everytime I go into my favorite bookstore I am drawn to certain books that I know will help me better understand myself and my relationships with my fellow man and God. Last week I picked up off the shelf _The URANTIA Book_ that you publish. I have really had to think about it, but I truly feel that this is universal truth brought down to us from the hierarchies of our universe to help us grow. Their wonderful and glorious revelation has brought to me something that has stirred my heart and I am so grateful to them for that.”

> “I... had given up on Christianity because I could not deal with the conflicts I had with the concept of Jesus' death on the cross as some kind of fitting reconciliation between an offended God and fallen man. After making some affirmations about my spiritual life and lack of direction I went to look for a book in our university library of four million books. The book I went for was not on the shelf, but guess what was standing in its place...? _The URANTIA Book_ has been the greatest mind-expanding experience I have found in my study to find answers to the meaning of life.”

> “October 1988 will be memorable as the month I came upon and started reading _The URANTIA Book_. lt is a welcome breath of fresh air. There is no doubt in my mind and heart that it is a revelatory work of divine inspiration. How, I wondered, could such a book have remained unknown to me for so long? And when I mused, in answer to my own query: When the student is ready, the teacher will appear.”

## Quotation

> “Your planet is a member of an enormous cosmos; you belong to a well-nigh infinite family of worlds, but your sphere is just as precisely administered and just as lovingly fostered as if it were the only inhabited world in all existence.” <a id="a85_241"></a>[UB 15:14.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p14_9)




A URANTIA&reg; Publication

Published by:
URANTIA Foundation
533 Diversey Parkway
Chicago, IL U.S.A.

## References

- [Urantia Foundation's Urantian News](https://www.urantia.org/news/1988-12)

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#issue-2-december-1988">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Issue 2, December 1988 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
