---
title: "Urantian — News from Urantia Foundation — July 1988"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
tags: Urantia Foundation, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 1988 Urantia Foundation</p>


## Update On Book Distribution

We are happy to report that sales of the English version of _The URANTIA Book_ continue at a pace comparable with the high level of sales reached last year. In fact, 1987 was the second best year in terms of sales of the English version since its publication in 1955 and was the best year ever for total distribution (which includes sales as well as gift and library placements) with over 11,000 copies being dispensed.

Amadon Corporation, an affiliate of URANTIA Foundation, reports that sales of the French translation (titled _Le Livre d'Urantia_) for the first half of this year are also comparable with the same period oflastyear. In 1987, approximately 1500 copies of the French translation were sold. If figures for both the French translation and the Englishversion are combined, then the total number ofcopies distributed in 1987 is over 12,800 books, which is considerably beyond any previous combined count.

Also, we wish to report that URANTIA Brotherhood Corporation, sales agent, and URANTIA Foundation hosted a booth at both the London Book Fair, which was held from March 28 through 30 in London, England, and at the annual convention of the American Booksellers Association (ABA), which was held in Anaheim, California from May 28 to 31. The Foundation provided the funds for UBC to attend both activities, while UBC utilized the modular display unit which it purchased last year for such activities.

The primary objective for attending the London Book Fair was to learn more about the channels of book distribution and sales in Great Britain and the European continent. As a result of attending the Fair, contacts were made with book distributors and it is anticipated that opportunities to make the English and French versions of _The URANTIA Book_ more generally available in British and European bookstores will soon significantly expand.

As was the case last year, the primary purposes for having a booth at the ABA convention in Anaheim are to continue to increase awareness of the availability of _The URANTIA Book_ within the publishing industry, as well as to encourage the appreciation of the Foundation and Brotherhood as operating within the channels of book distribution. The booth was staffed by both Brotherhood and Foundation representatives and was located in what is known as the small press area, very near the areawhere authors autographed copies of their books. As a consequence of being near the autograph area, there was a steady stream of people going by the booth every day of the convention. More than a hundred people visited the booth, the majority being representatives of bookstores or book distributors, and additional hundreds, if not greater numbers, of people passed by and saw the booth display.

## Translation Update

The Finnish translation of _The URANTIA Book_ continues to progress. It is now in its third draft. The respective Presidents of URANTIA Brotherhood and URANTIA Foundation and the Chairman of the URANTIA Brotherhood International Fellowship Committee attended a most enjoyable conference of about one hundred Finnish readers in early June at a beautiful pbice in south central Finland. During that visit the President of URANTIA Foundation was able to discuss the translation and its projected completion date with the translation team, which operates under a direct license from URANTIA Foundation. URANTIA Foundation hopes to fund the printing costs largely from URANTIA Foundation reserves inasmuch as the Finns now for over twenty years have borne the entire cost of the translation. The successive steps towards publication are now under study by the Trustees.

With respect to the Spanish translation Andite Corporation, the affilliate of URANTIA Foundation which is pursuing the translation with the approval of and under direct license from URANTIA Foundation, reports that progress is continuing though at a slower pace than was originally anticipated. Because of this, it is difficult to estimate the time when the translation will in fact be complete. Andite Corporation has been in close touch with the translator to see what can be done to hasten the completion of the translation work in accordance with the terms of the contract.

## Library Placement Program

URANTIA Foundation expanded its involvement in the Library Placement Program by offering an almost limitless supply of _The URANTIA BOOK_ and _Le Livre d'Urantia_ to URANTIA Brotherhood for placement. In addition the Foundation has agreed to pay for mass mailings to libraries and other approved costs so that the Brotherhood is not hampered in its efforts to administer and expand the program due to budgetary restraints.

Individuals and/or groups can participate in library placement. The primary mechanism is to contact the Domestic Extension Committee of URANTIA Brotherhood if placing books in the United States or the International Fellowship Committee if placing books in other countries. Both Committees can be contacted in care of the office in Chicago.

More and more letters are received at the office describing how a new reader found the book in'a library. This program is a real opportunityfor service by helping to get more books in circulationwhere they can be “found.” If you have placed books before, check the libraries at least once a year because sometimes the book is not returned to the library. Just talk to the librarian and we will be happy to send another book. Please feel free to contact us for further information ifyou are interested in this program.

## Erroneous Library Cataloguing Update

In the last issue of this newsletter, an article appeared which reported that some libraries still incorrectly list _The URANTIA Book_ under its old Dewey Decimal classification number of 133 - Parapsychology and Occultism. The article indicated that in 1975 URANTIA Foundation persuaded the Library of Congress to change the Dewey Decimal classification number of the book to 299 - Other Religions. The article encouraged readers to verify which classification number their local libraries were using to list _The URANTIA Book,_ and if the listing was incorrect to point it out to the library or refer the matter to the Foundation for action.

We are pleased to relate that in response to the article, a reader in the Kansas City area checked on the listing of the book in a regional library system and determined that it was incorrect. The reader then provided us with the information to contact the person responsible for cataloguing books in the regional library system whom we then contacted. In response to our letter, the library system agreed to change the catalogue designation of the books to its correct listing. The consequence ofthis effort was the correct listing of _The URANTIA Book_ in the catalogues of more than 20 libraries that comprised the regional system.

We again urge all readers who share our interest in this matter to visit your local libraries to determine ifthe book is correctly listed. If the book is incorrectly listed, thenwe will be happy to workwith you and the libraryto get the catalogue designation corrected.

## Excerpts from letters

> _“The URANTIA Book_ is the most exciting book I have come across. I am barely past page 100, but I pick it up every possible chance I get. It will take me a few weeks to finish it and who knows how many readings until I can keep all the different designations and infornration clear. It appears to me that every time one reads it a new insight can be gained.”

---

> “I've just finished reading _The URANTIA Book,_ which I got from the library. I started reading the Life of Jesus first and was very impressed with it. He comes alive and I wish I could have known Him. The book has increased my faith. I have had a deep faith in God all my life (I am nearing sixty), albeit God was a stern father figure and a punishing God. In the past few years, my concept of God is changing more towards the concept _The URANTIA Book_ explains.”

---

> “I began reading _The URANTIA Book_ a few years ago. I have to get it from the library, and I can never keep it long enough to finish it. Is there anyway I couldjust purchase the book and have it in my home for my children and grandchildren to read?!!”

---

> “When I first heard of it in 1980 I did not know how to obtain one butwas told that it would come into the hands of any who truly sought it. Within three weeks a stranger came through my door bringing with her, her copy of the bookthat she thought might be of interest to me. I had it for a month. In 1986 I went to our local library and inquired about the book. The lady checked her computer and found a copy in the provincial library. Apparently it had just come in and I was the first borrower! I spoke of it to an aunt and she ordered one and gave it to me immediately as my Christmas present!”

---

> “I was given a copy of _The URANTIA Book_ about 7 years ago. I attempted to read it, but I was clearly not ready and put it aside. Through no concious effort on my part, it remained with me until 4 months ago when I began to read it in earnest. After entertaining some serious doubts at first, I am completely persuaded that it is exactly what it purports to be. It is indeed a revelation that could only be sent from the Father revealing the Truth for the first time completely as we can understand it.”

## Quotation

> “To the mistress of the Greek inn he said: “Minister your hospitality as one who entertains the children of the Most High. Elevate the drudgery of your daily toil to the high levels of a fine art through the increasing realization that you minister to God in the persons whom he indwells by his spirit which has descended to live within the hearts of men, thereby seeking to transform their minds and lead their souls to the knowledge of the Paradise Father of all these bestowed gifts of the divine spirit.”” [UB 133:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/133#p4_8)



A URANTIA&reg; Publication

Published by:
URANTIA Foundation
533 Diversey Parkway
Chicago, IL U.S.A.

## References

- Urantia Foundation's Urantian News: https://www.urantia.org/news/1988-07