---
title: "Urantian — News from Urantia Foundation — May 1996"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
tags: Urantia Foundation—Copyright, Fellowship, Urantia Foundation, Urantian News, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-8-29T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 1996 Urantia Foundation</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#volume-15-issue-1-may-1996">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Volume 15, Issue 1, May 1996 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


## 1996 IUA International Conference

Soon brochures announcing the 1996 International URANTIA Association Conference will be mailed. We offer here a preview of the conference for those who wish to make early plans for this event.

The theme this year has been chosen to complete the trilogy of conferences begun with the first IUA Conference in 1994. Entitled DEDICATION, INTEGRATION, AND TRANSFORMATION, this year's conclave will look closely at the process by which the teachings of _The URANTIA Book_ transform the lives of its students. DEDICATION occurs when an individual understands the teachings and accepts them. This acceptance produces study, often voracious, intense, and highly focused. Such study yields INTEGRATION—the incorporation of the concepts and ideas. Because these concepts are often superior to previous ones held by the student, they displace them. A new, superior way of thinking gradually grows in the intellect of the reader. Such change inevitably produces TRANSFORMATION. It is at this point that one is beginning to “live the teachings” as the teachings begin transforming the individual—from inside out-into a spiritually fragrant person.

The conference will take place on the Vanderbilt campus in Nashville, Tennessee. Check-in will begin on the evening of Thursday, August 8, and the conference will end midday Monday, August 12. Modern dormitory accommodations will be available on campus, and several motels are near the conference site. As in previous years, cafeteria-style meal service is available on the campus. There will be no on-site registration, so watch for the mailing of registration information, as this is the only way to register for the conference.

The planning committee began work on this conference only weeks after the end of the 1995 gathering. As those of you who attended the last two conferences may remember, evaluation forms were given to all attendees, and most of you returned them both years, yielding valuable information for the planning of the 1996 conference. The data from these evaluations have been your representative at the planning meetings and were referred to frequently at the meetings, thus insuring that this will be your conference. We look forward to seeing you there.

## Translator Conference

In April 1996, URANTIA Foundation will sponsor its first Translators' Conference in Paris, France. Joining the Trustees will be fifteen persons who have been authorized by the Foundation to translate _The URANTIA Book_ into their native languages. These translators from around the globe will meet to discuss and share their experiences. Together they will explore common problems associated with the translation of such a unique literary work as _The URANTIA Book_. Among the topics of discussion will be: the development of a dictionary of terms unique to The URANTIA Book; the standardization of computers, software, and formatting; the establishment of e-mail communication; the translation of the most difficult concepts in the book; the importance and dynamics of having a translation team; the importance of quality translations; and the funding of translations.

The status of the translations into the ten languages which will be represented at the conference is as follows:

1. French .... Now available.
2. Finnish .... Now available.
3. Spanish ... Now available. Revision in progress.
4. Russian ... First draft complete; editing in progress.
5. Dutch ..... First draft complete; editing in progress.
6. Korean .... First draft complete; editing in progress.
7. Swedish ... Parts I, II, and III translated.
8. Estonian ... Beginning stages.
9. German ... Beginning stages.
10. Italian ..... Beginning stages.

Within the next decade, it is expected that, in addition to the three translations now available, seven more will be published, and several more will be in progress. It is also expected that much will be learned from this first Translators' Conference, and from future conferences, about producing the highest quality translations possible, so that men and women of different tongues from around the world may benefit from the supernal teachings of _The URANTIA Book_.

> “One of the most important lessons to be learned during your mortal career is teamwork.” (The URANTIA Book, <a id="a59_110"></a>[UB 28:5.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/28#p5_14))


## Anatomy of a Translation

When the inception of a new translation is announced, there is always a great deal of excitement among readers. There is a near universal human impulse to share something of interest or beauty with someone else. Viewing a particularly beautiful sunset, for example, one is often moved to invite a companion, or even a stranger, to share the experience. Because there is so much that is both interesting and beautiful in _The URANTIA Book_, translations hold a special appeal since they represent a sharing of the book not only with another person but with an entire segment of the world. Because of this keen interest in translations, we should like to describe for you the typical progression of the process, using the Russian translation as an example.

### The Project

This project began in 1990 when a Russian living in Helsinki offered to translate the text into his native language. His proposal was discussed at some length by the Board. A translation of _The URANTIA Book_ is a project of deceptively large proportions, and it is important to answer a number of questions before proceeding. Is the target language the native language of the prospective translator? Does he understand the concepts of the book? What is his experience at translating? What is his education? Is his command of English sufficient? What do we know of his motivation? Is he in good enough health to be likely to be able to finish such a long and rigorous project? Will he be a member of a translation team, and, if so, what do we know about the other members? Does he truly realize the magnitude and possible duration of the task? Does he have the discipline to work on such a lengthy and difficult project on his own?

When the answers to these and other questions appear to be satisfactory, efforts turn toward the development of agreements concerning production rate, means of overseeing the project, reporting methods, quality review, and contractual relationship. The latter will often need considerable attention, as contractual relationships with individuals living in other countries involve international law, therefore requiring highly specialized legal expertise from all countries involved. Carrying out the responsibilities of the Declaration of Trust mandates that such measures be taken in any rendering of the text into another language to insure that all care possible has been exercised in safeguarding the text.

### The Team

If all of these hurdles are cleared, the task then becomes one of a team beginning a translation. In the case of the Russian translation, the team consists of a chief translator, a copy editor, and a final copy editor. All of these individuals are native Russians, two of whom have lived in Russia all their lives.

The chief translator (who now lives in Helsinki) is the soft-spoken and talented son of two educators, both university professors, who instilled in their son traditions of disciplined study and scholarship. His mother taught English at the university in Petrozovadsk, where his father was also on the faculty. His progress has been steady and his discipline exemplary.

The copy editor lives in Petrozovadsk, where he teaches English at the Teachers' College. This gentle and intelligent scholar shares in the intellectual heritage of the chief translator, since he is the chief translator's brother.

The final copy editor lives in Moscow. He is a physics professor, and one who has a true love of the Russian language, having recently published a book of poetry. This gentleman's training as a scientist adds greatly to the translation's accuracy of those many technical passages in the text, and his passion for the language will insure a translation which is the most pleasing to the native Russian. All the members of the team are close friends who share a deep commitment to produce a work that is as beautiful as it is accurate.

This team stays in close touch, e-mailing files back and forth, searching for improvements in accuracy, and refining and aesthetically polishing the completed translation (the first draft was completed in 1995). If a change is suggested by the final copy editor to “beautify” the text, it is returned to the other two members of the team to insure that such a change is not at the expense of accuracy of translation, which is of first priority. This shuttling of the text continues until all members are satisfied that the most accurate translation in the most elegant phrasing has been achieved.

### Supporting Activities

While the Russian translation is being edited, refined, and polished, there are in progress other activities related to the project. For example, a preliminary on-site assessment of the system of book distribution in Russia was completed, and an individual has been identified in Moscow who has agreed to represent Foundation interests there. It is anticipated that distribution practices will have to be flexible in Russia, as the economy is in such rapid flux. The volatility of the Russian marketplace makes firm decisions impossible too far in advance. Because conditions of austerity are presently widespread in Russia, particular attention is being given to making available an affordable book. It is here that contributions could have a significant impact on making the book available to a large segment of the world's population —one which seems to be spiritually searching.

The present plan is to disseminate the book in Russia in accordance with the Foundation's philosophy of person-to-person sharing, widespread bookstore and library availability (as permitted by the system), and the fostering of study groups. Drafts of the translation are even now being made available to a study group now forming in Moscow, and the long road to publication is nearing an end. Because of the extraordinary dedication, devotion, and attention to detail which has been brought to bear on this work, it is expected that this will be one of the best “first translations” which has so far been produced. As ever, suggestions and resources are welcome. Just contact Foundation headquarters.


## Copyright Update

In 1950, five years before the publication of _The URANTIA Book_, the URANTIA Foundation was created by an instrument of trust. The Declaration of Trust Creating URANTIA Foundation established that:

> "It shall be the primary duty of the Trustees to perpetually preserve inviolate the text of _The URANTIA Book_....
> 
> “It shall be the duty of the Trustees to retain absolute and unconditional control of all plates and other media for the printing and reproduction of _The URANTIA Book_ and any translation thereof....”

In order to carry out these duties, the early Trustees obtained domestic and international copyrights in _The URANTIA Book_, and they registered the Concentric-Circles Symbol as a service mark. Later, the Trustees registered the circles and the words “Urantia” and “Urantian” as trademarks and collective membership marks. Today, as was true in 1955 when The URANTIA Book was published, registered marks—be they service marks, trademarks, or collective membership marks —are the primary means of maintaining a distinct public identity. And copyright is the primary means of protecting a text.

In 1991, we informed readers of a copyright infringement case in which an individual deliberately violated the Foundation's copyright in _The URANTIA Book_. This individual admitted infringing the copyright but then countersued the Foundation, claiming that the Foundation's ownership of the copyright and its ownership of the marks were not valid. The Foundation's ownership of the registered marks has remained intact. However, in October 1995, a federal district court judge entered a judgment that the Foundation's copyright was invalid. The Foundation has appealed this decision, and three judges of a higher court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, will rule on the case sometime this year, possibly by the end of this summer. In spite of fact that the case is on appeal, there are groups publishing _The URANTIA Book_ before the appellate court has even heard the case.

### A Duplication of Efforts - A Waste of Resources

One group, “The Fellowship,” has announced that it will publish the English edition of _The URANTIA Book_ in March 1996, and an affiliate organization of The Fellowship is translating _The URANTIA Book_ into Russian and Korean. Some confused readers have called the Foundation office, inquiring as to why they are receiving fundraising letters from an organization (The Fellowship) which is duplicating the Foundation's work.

Here are the facts:

1. In May 1995, the URANTIA Foundation announced a new 6“ x 8” softcover edition of _The URANTIA Book_ for under $20.00. The first printing of this book sold out in five months, and the second printing of 30,000 books is currently available at bookstores.

    In December 1995, The Fellowship announced that in March 1996 it will publish a new 6“ x 8” softcover version of _The URANTIA Book_ for under $20.00.
2. Since 1981, the URANTIA Foundation has had a Perpetual Printing Fund to fund the printing of the English hardcover edition of _The URANTIA Book_.

    In December 1995, The Fellowship sent out a letter soliciting money for a Perpetual Printing Fund for their printing of _The URANTIA Book_.
3. In August 1995, the URANTIA Foundation announced that the first draft of the Russian translation had been completed and the first draft of the Korean translation was well underway. In late 1995, the Foundation announced plans to print the third printing of the Spanish translation.

   In late summer of 1995, one of The Fellowship's affiliate organizations announced their intention to translate _The URANTIA Book_ into Russian and reported on the progress of a Korean translation. Another of The Fellowship's affiliate organizations is planning to publish a Spanish translation.

### Why is the Fellowship Duplicating the Foundation's Efforts?

The URANTIA Foundation sold over 20,000 books in 1995, almost double the sales of any previous year. In the last three years, the Foundation has made available a Concordance, an Audio Version, and a Computer Version; has published two new translations and one revised translation; and has initiated seven new translations. When we asked several persons in positions of authority with The Fellowship why their organization was going to publish the book, they replied: The Fellowship wants its name in the front of the book in order to increase its membership.

### The Fellowship Seeks to Enter the Case as an Opponent of the Copyright

The Fellowship notified the Foundation's lawyers that The Fellowship intends to ask the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals for permission to file a brief in opposition to the URANTIA Foundation's efforts to retain ownership of the copyright.

The early custodians of _The URANTIA Book_ said there would be much competition for control of _The URANTIA Book_, and it appears they were right.

As early as 1932, the early custodians of the book initiated correspondence with the United States Copyright Office in order to obtain a copyright which would “protect \[the text\] against infringement for an indefinite period.” In 1950, the original plan for publishing, translating, and disseminating the book and its teachings was formalized with the creation of the URANTIA Foundation. This plan was activated in 1955 when the book was published. Domestic and international copyrights were obtained, and the copyright was renewed in 1983 in anticipation that it would not expire until 2030.

If the opponents of the Foundation succeed at invalidating the copyright, the original plan will have been aborted. Instead of unified growth and the building of a solid base of readers working together and fostering thousands of study groups throughout the world, we shall see divided groups of readers and a proliferation of organizations asserting themselves as the publisher of the “authentic” URANTIA Book. This divisiveness will not be attractive to new and future readers. The authors of the book tell us that “the non-Christian world will hardly capitulate to a sect-divided Christendom.” (<a id="a131_598"></a>[UB 195:10.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_11)) The parallel to the Urantia movement—and to what will happen if there is not unity within our young movement, if the copyright is lost, and if there are numerous publishers and translators of the book—should be apparent.

### An Appeal for Unity and Cooperation

The Trustees of URANTIA Foundation deeply appreciate the support which people from all over the world have given the Foundation. Regarding those individuals who, for whatever reason, choose not to join us in protecting, translating, and disseminating the fifth epochal revelation, we entreat them to do nothing to obstruct our efforts. We recognize that there are individuals who will simply not respond to anything that we might say or do. We appeal, however, to all who prefer cooperation to divisiveness, unity to disunity. We ask you for your support, and cooperation.

_“In advanced civilizations co-operation is more efficient than competition.”_ (<a id="a137_80"></a>[UB 71:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/71#p5_3))

## World Wide Web

URANTIA Foundation has opened a home page on the World Wide Web. If you have a computer, a modem, internet access, and a web browser, you can visit URANTIA Foundation's website at the following website address:

https://www.urantia.org

This multiple language website (English, Finnish, French, and Spanish), will offer communication and study opportunities with readers of _The URANTIA Book_ from around the world. Some of the features available are:

1. _The URANTIA Book_ on-line.
2. Information about _The URANTIA Book_, URANTIA Foundation, International URANTIA Association (IUA), Friends of URANTIA Foundation, and study aids.
3. On-line ordering of URANTIA Foundation's materials, including _The URANTIA Book_.
4. Archives of current and past newsletters from URANTIA Foundation.
5. IUA Conference information.

In addition to asking and receiving information, you can have your name included on the Foundation's electronic Mailing List.

## Announcements

- **FRENCH TRANSLATION** — The second printing of _Le Livre d'URANTIA (traduction revue et comgie)_ will be available in softcover in early spring 1996 for 150 French francs.
- **FINNISH TRANSLATION** — The second printing of _URANTIA-kirja_ will be available in softcover in early spring 1996 for 150 Finnish marks.
- **COMPUTER VERSION** — PC compatible Computer Versions of _The URANTIA Book_, _Le Livre d'URANTIA_, and _URANTIA-kirja_ are now available. The price is US $75.00 plus shipping and handling.
- **LEATHERBOUND EDITIONS** — URANTIA Foundation has several deluxe, leatherbound editions of _The URANTIA Book_ now available. All profits from their sale are reserved to fund translations. For more information please call or write the Foundation office.

## A Call for Service

Many readers ask the question, “What may I do to help?” There are many ways a reader can be of service to help further the fifth epochal revelation. In addition to sharing the teachings of _The URANTIA Book_, placing the book in libraries, fostering study groups, and making regular contributions to aid the work of URANTIA Foundation, readers may volunteer their services on several ongoing projects. For more information on how you can help, please contact Foundation headquarters in Chicago. 

Concerning the translation into English of the information which has become the text of _The URANTIA Book_, an Orvonton Divine Counselor tells us: 

> “[W]e recognize the impossibility of fully translating the language of the concepts of divinity and eternity into the symbols of the language of the finite concepts of the mortal mind. But we know that there dwells within the human mind a fragment of God, and that there sojourns with the human soul the Spirit of Truth; and we further know that these spirit forces conspire to enable material man to grasp the reality of spiritual values and to comprehend the philosophy of universe meanings.” <a id="a168_497"></a>[UB 0:12.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_13)

## Reader Comments About The Urantia Book

> “I am a relatively new student of _The URANTIA Book_. It was given to me by a close family friend in 1991 and its teachings immediately resonated in my being as the cosmic truth that I had been searching for most of my teenage and adult life.” ~ Medicine Hat, Alberta, CANADA

> “Already I am experiencing its profound influence in my life's experience. It is truly a unique resource of eternal proportions.” ~ Shawnee, Oklahoma, U.S.A.

> “This wonderfully enlightening revelation of both God and of life is without parallel...and has made an irreversible impact on my life.” ~ Brooksville, Florida, U.S.A.

> “Thank you for all your work in preserving the integrity of the Book of Urantia intact: it is a very special book, and emanates a special strength which makes reading it a very special experience.” ~ Toledo, SPAIN

> “We have been reading _The URANTIA Book_ since 1957....We are both over 80 years of age. The Book has been our inspiration through these years. We are happy to know so many more books are being sold and feel that we participated in a small way.” ~ Salt Lake City, Utah, U.S.A.

> “Now, I have completed the third reading and find a crystalline clarity with truth shining ever so brightly....The beauty of the construction; the lyrical presentation of infinity within the confining parameters of a language which cannot do justice to such subject matter and yet does, and very well. For 72 years I have been an avid reader. I doubt I shall read, within the time left, any other than the ‘BOOK.’ My deepest regret lies in the wasted time. I could have been engaged in the study, contemplation and meditation of Urantia.” ~ Cimarron, New Mexico, U.S.A.


## References

- [Urantia Foundation's Urantian News](https://www.urantia.org/news/1996-05)







<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_uf_urantian#volume-15-issue-1-may-1996">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Volume 15, Issue 1, May 1996 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
