---
title: "Book of the birth of Saint Mary"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

## PREFACE

[_Preface translated from “Los Evangelios Apócrifos”, Santos de Otero_]

You are giving me a task that does not involve much work for me, but which entails a serious responsibility because it requires great care to discern what is true from what is false.

In effect: you ask me to make a written account of the data that I have been able to find by chance about the birth of the holy and blessed Virgin Mary [and the rest of her life] until the day of her incomparable birth and the beginnings of the life of Christ. This is certainly not a difficult task, but it is risky, as I just said, because of the danger it entails in relation to the truth. You know well that these things, the relationship of which you ask me now that my head is gray, I read as a child in a certain little book that fell into my hands at that time. So you will realize that, after as long and busy as I have been with matters of no small magnitude, some details may easily have faded from my memory. Therefore, I believe that no one will be able to fairly blame me for the omissions, changes or additions that I incur when agreeing to your request; since, just as I admit their possibility, in the same way I flatly deny that I commit them deliberately.

Therefore, in my desire to comply with your wishes and satisfy the curiosity of the readers, I want to warn you, as well as them, that the aforementioned little book, if I remember correctly, began in the following way, at least As for the meaning:

[_Rest of the content from “Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. 8”, Edited by Alexander Roberts, James Donaldson, and A. Cleveland Coxe._]

## Chapter 1

<span id="v1_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  The blessed and glorious ever-virgin Mary, sprung from the royal stock and family of David, born in the city of Nazareth, was brought up at Jerusalem in the temple of the Lord. Her father was named Joachim, and her mother Anna. Her father's house was from Galilee and the city of Nazareth, but her mother's family from Bethlehem. 

<span id="v1_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Their life was guileless and right before the Lord, and irreproachable and pious before men. For they divided all their substance into three parts. One part they spent upon the temple and the temple servants; another they distributed to strangers and the poor; the third they reserved, for themselves and the necessities of their family. 

<span id="v1_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Thus, dear to God, kind to men, for about twenty years they lived in their own house, a chaste married life, without having any children. Nevertheless they vowed that, should the Lord happen to give them offspring, they would deliver it to the service of the Lord; on which account also they used to visit the temple of the Lord at each of the feasts during the year.

## Chapter 2

<span id="v2_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And it came to pass that the festival of the dedication was at hand; wherefore also Joachim went up to Jerusalem with some men of his own tribe. Now at that time Issachar was high priest there. And when he saw Joachim with his offering among his other fellow citizens, he despised him, and spurned his gifts, asking why he, who had no offspring, presumed to stand among those who had; saying that his gifts could not by any means be acceptable to God, since He had deemed him unworthy of off-spring: for the Scripture said, Cursed is every one who has not begot a male or a female in Israel. He said, therefore, that he ought first to be freed from this curse by the begetting of children; and then, and then only, that he should come into the presence of the Lord with his offerings. 

<span id="v2_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And Joachim, covered with shame from this reproach that was thrown in his teeth, retired to the shepherds, who were in their pastures with their flocks; nor would he return home, lest perchance he might be branded with the same reproach by those of his own tribe, who were there at the time, and had heard this from the priest.


## Chapter 3

<span id="v3_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Now, when he had been there for some time, on a certain day when he was alone, an angel of the Lord stood by him in a great light. And when he was disturbed at his appearance, the angel who had appeared to him restrained his fear, saying: Fear not, Joachim, nor be disturbed by my appearance; for I am the angel of the Lord, sent by Him to you to tell you that your prayers have been heard, and that your charitable deeds have gone up into His presence. [Acts 10:4](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/10#v4) For He has seen your shame, and has heard the reproach of unfruitfulness which has been unjustly brought against you. For God is the avenger of sin, not of nature: and, therefore, when He shuts up the womb of any one, He does so that He may miraculously open it again; so that that which is born may be acknowledged to be not of lust, but of the gift of God. 

<span id="v3_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  For was it not the case that the first mother of your nation — Sarah — was barren up to her eightieth year? And, nevertheless, in extreme old age she brought forth Isaac, to whom the promise was renewed of the blessing of all nations. Rachel also, so favoured of the Lord, and so beloved by holy Jacob, was long barren; and yet she brought forth Joseph, who was not only the lord of Egypt, but the deliverer of many nations who were ready to perish of hunger. Who among the judges was either stronger than Samson, or more holy than Samuel? And yet the mothers of both were barren. If, therefore, the reasonableness of my words does not persuade you, believe in fact that conceptions very late in life, and births in the case of women that have been barren, are usually attended with something wonderful. 

<span id="v3_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Accordingly your wife Anna will bring forth a daughter to you, and you shall call her name Mary: she shall be, as you have vowed, consecrated to the Lord from her infancy, and she shall be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from her mother's womb. She shall neither eat nor drink any unclean thing, nor shall she spend her life among the crowds of the people without, but in the temple of the Lord, that it may not be possible either to say, or so much as to suspect, any evil concerning her. Therefore, when she has grown up, just as she herself shall be miraculously born of a barren woman, so in an incomparable manner she, a virgin, shall bring forth the Son of the Most High, who shall be called Jesus, and who, according to the etymology of His name, shall be the Saviour of all nations. 

<span id="v3_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  And this shall be the sign to you of those things which I announce: When you shall come to the Golden gate in Jerusalem, you shall there meet Anna your wife, who, lately anxious from the delay of your return, will then rejoice at the sight of you. Having thus spoken, the angel departed from him.

## Chapter 4

Thereafter he appeared to Anna his wife, saying: Fear not, Anna, nor think that it is a phantom which you see. For I am that angel who has presented your prayers and alms before God; and now have I been sent to you to announce to you that you shall bring forth a daughter, who shall be called Mary, and who shall be blessed above all women. She, full of the favour of the Lord even from her birth, shall remain three years in her father's house until she be weaned. Thereafter, being delivered to the service of the Lord, she shall not depart from the temple until she reach the years of discretion. There, in fine, serving God day and night in fastings and prayers, she shall abstain from every unclean thing; she shall never know man, but alone, without example, immaculate, uncorrupted, without intercourse with man, she, a virgin, shall bring forth a son; she, His hand-maiden, shall bring forth the Lord — both in grace, and in name, and in work, the Saviour of the world. 

<span id="v4_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Wherefore arise, and go up to Jerusalem; and when you shall come to the gate which, because it is plated with gold, is called Golden, there, for a sign, you shall meet your husband, for whose safety you have been anxious. And when these things shall have so happened, know that what I announce shall without doubt be fulfilled.

## Chapter 5

<span id="v5_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Therefore, as the angel had commanded, both of them setting out from the place where they were, went up to Jerusalem; and when they had come to the place pointed out by the angel's prophecy, there they met each other. Then, rejoicing at seeing each other, and secure in the certainty of the promised offspring, they gave the thanks due to the Lord, who exalts the humble. 

<span id="v5_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And so, having worshipped the Lord, they returned home, and awaited in certainty and in gladness the divine promise. Anna therefore conceived, and brought forth a daughter; and according to the command of the angel, her parents called her name Mary.

## Chapter 6

<span id="v6_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And when the circle of three years had rolled round, and the time of her weaning was fulfilled, they brought the virgin to the temple of the Lord with offerings. Now there were round the temple, according to the fifteen Psalms of Degrees, fifteen steps going up; for, on account of the temple having been built on a mountain, the altar of burnt-offering, which stood outside, could not be reached except by steps. 

<span id="v6_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  On one of these, then, her parents placed the little girl, the Blessed Virgin Mary. And when they were putting off the clothes which they had worn on the journey, and were putting on, as was usual, others that were neater and cleaner, the virgin of the Lord went up all the steps, one after the other, without the help of any one leading her or lifting her, in such a manner that, in this respect at least, you would think that she had already attained full age. For already the Lord in the infancy of His virgin wrought a great thing, and by the indication of this miracle foreshowed how great she was to be. 

<span id="v6_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  Therefore, a sacrifice having been offered according to the custom of the law, and their vow being perfected, they left the virgin within the enclosures of the temple, there to be educated with the other virgins, and themselves returned home.

## Chapter 7

<span id="v7_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  But the virgin of the Lord advanced in age and in virtues; and though, in the words of the Psalmist, her father and mother had forsaken her, the Lord took her up. For daily was she visited by angels, daily did she enjoy a divine vision, which preserved her from all evil, and made her to abound in all good. And so she reached her fourteenth year; and not only were the wicked unable to charge her with anything worthy of reproach, but all the good, who knew her life and conversation, judged her to be worthy of admiration. 

<span id="v7_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Then the high priest publicly announced that the virgins who were publicly settled in the temple, and had reached this time of life, should return home and get married, according to the custom of the nation and the ripeness of their years. The others readily obeyed this command; but Mary alone, the virgin of the Lord, answered that she could not do this, saying both that her parents had devoted her to the service of the Lord, and that, moreover, she herself had made to the Lord a vow of virginity, which she would never violate by any intercourse with man. And the high priest, being placed in great perplexity of mind, seeing that neither did he think that the vow should be broken contrary to the Scripture, which says, Vow and pay, nor did he dare to introduce a custom unknown to the nation, gave order that at the festival, which was at hand, all the chief persons from Jerusalem and the neighbourhood should be present, in order that from their advice he might know what was to be done in so doubtful a case. 

<span id="v7_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  And when this took place, they resolved unanimously that the Lord should be consulted upon this matter. And when they all bowed themselves in prayer, the high priest went to consult God in the usual way. Nor had they long to wait: in the hearing of all a voice issued from the oracle and from the mercy-seat, that, according to the prophecy of Isaiah, a man should be sought out to whom the virgin ought to be entrusted and espoused. For it is clear that Isaiah says: A rod shall come forth from the root of Jesse, and a flower shall ascend from his root; and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of wisdom and piety; and he shall be filled with the spirit of the fear of the Lord. [Isaiah 11:1-2](/en/Bible/Isaiah/11#v1) 

<span id="v7_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  According to this prophecy, therefore, he predicted that all of the house and family of David that were unmarried and fit for marriage should bring there rods to the altar; and that he whose rod after it was brought should produce a flower, and upon the end of whose rod the Spirit of the Lord should settle in the form of a dove, was the man to whom the virgin ought to be entrusted and espoused.


## Chapter 8

<span id="v8_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Now there was among the rest Joseph, of the house and family of David, a man of great age: and when all brought there rods, according to the order, he alone withheld his. Wherefore, when nothing in conformity with the divine voice appeared, the high priest thought it necessary to consult God a second time; and He answered, that of those who had been designated, he alone to whom the virgin ought to be espoused had not brought his rod. Joseph, therefore, was found out. For when he had brought his rod, and the dove came from heaven; and settled upon the top of it, it clearly appeared to all that he was the man to whom the virgin should be espoused. 

<span id="v8_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  Therefore, the usual ceremonies of betrothal having been gone through, he went back to the city of Bethlehem to put his house in order, and to procure things necessary for the marriage. But Mary, the virgin of the Lord, with seven other virgins of her own age, and who had been weaned at the same time, whom she had received from the priest, returned to the house of her parents in Galilee.

## Chapter 9

<span id="v9_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  And in those days, that is, at the time of her first coming into Galilee, the angel Gabriel was sent to her by God, to announce to her the conception of the Lord, and to explain to her the manner and order of the conception. Accordingly, going in, he filled the chamber where she was with a great light; and most courteously saluting her, he said: Hail, Mary! O virgin highly favoured by the Lord, virgin full of grace, the Lord is with you; blessed are you above all women, blessed above all men that have been hitherto born. [Luke 1:26-38](/en/Bible/Luke/1#v26) 

<span id="v9_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And the virgin, who was already well acquainted with angelic faces, and was not unused to the light from heaven, was neither terrified by the vision of the angel, nor astonished at the greatness of the light, but only perplexed by his words; and she began to consider of what nature a salutation so unusual could be, or what it could portend, or what end it could have. And the angel, divinely inspired, taking up this thought, says: Fear not, Mary, as if anything contrary to your chastity were hid under this salutation. For in choosing chastity, you have found favour with the Lord; and therefore you, a virgin, shall conceive without sin, and shall bring forth a son. 

<span id="v9_3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span>  He shall be great, because He shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth; and He shall be called the Son of the Most High, because He who is born on earth in humiliation, reigns in heaven in exaltation; and the Lord God will give Him the throne of His father David, and He shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever, and of His kingdom there shall be no end; [Luke 1:32-33](/en/Bible/Luke/1#v32) forasmuch as He is King of kings and Lord of lords, Revelation 19:16 and His throne is from everlasting to everlasting. 

<span id="v9_4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span>  The virgin did not doubt these words of the angel; but wishing to know the manner of it, she answered: How can that come to pass? For while, according to my vow, I never know man, how can I bring forth without the addition of man's seed? To this the angel says: Think not, Mary, that you shall conceive in the manner of mankind: for without any intercourse with man, you, a virgin, will conceive; you, a virgin, will bring forth; you, a virgin, will nurse: for the Holy Spirit shall come upon you, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow you, [Luke 1:35](/en/Bible/Luke/1#v35) without any of the heats of lust; and therefore that which shall be born of you shall alone be holy, because it alone, being conceived and born without sin, shall be called the Son of God. Then Mary stretched forth her hands, and raised her eyes to heaven, and said: Behold the hand-maiden of the Lord, for I am not worthy of the name of lady; let it be to me according to your word.

<span id="v9_5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span>  It will be long, and perhaps to some even tedious, if we insert in this little work every thing which we read of as having preceded or followed the Lord's nativity: wherefore, omitting those things which have been more fully written in the Gospel, let us come to those which are held to be less worthy of being narrated.

## Chapter 10

<span id="v10_1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span>  Joseph therefore came from Judæa into Galilee, intending to marry the virgin who had been betrothed to him; for already three months had elapsed, and it was the beginning of the fourth since she had been betrothed to him. In the meantime, it was evident from her shape that she was pregnant, nor could she conceal this from Joseph. For in consequence of his being betrothed to her, coming to her more freely and speaking to her more familiarly, he found out that she was with child. He began then to be in great doubt and perplexity, because he did not know what was best for him to do. For, being a just man, he was not willing to expose her; nor, being a pious man, to injure her fair fame by a suspicion of fornication. He came to the conclusion, therefore, privately to dissolve their contract, and to send her away secretly. 

<span id="v10_2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span>  And while he thought on these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in his sleep, saying: Joseph, you son of David, fear not; that is, do not have any suspicion of fornication in the virgin, or think any evil of her; and fear not to take her as your wife: for that which is begotten in her, and which now vexes your soul, is the work not of man, but of the Holy Spirit. For she alone of all virgins shall bring forth the Son of God, and you shall call His name Jesus, that is, Saviour; for He shall save His people from their sins. Therefore Joseph, according to the command of the angel, took the virgin as his wife; nevertheless he knew her not, but took care of her, and kept her in chastity. Matthew 1:18-24 And now the ninth month from her conception was at hand, when Joseph, taking with him his wife along with what things he needed, went to Bethlehem, the city from which he came. And it came to pass, while they were there, that her days were fulfilled that she should bring forth; and she brought forth her first-born son, as the holy evangelists have shown, our Lord Jesus Christ, who with the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost lives and reigns God from everlasting to everlasting.
