---
title: "LIX. The Chapter of the Emigration"
description: "The Qur'an — Sacred Books of the East"
published: true
date: 2024-11-10T18:38:5Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-10T18:38:5Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East/58">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">LVIII. The Chapter of the Wrangler</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East/60">
          <span class="pr-2">LX. The Chapter of the Tried</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

What is in the heavens and in the earth celebrates God's praises; He is the mighty, the wise!

<span id="p274">[<sup><small>p. 274</small></sup>]</span>

He it was who drove those of the people of the Book who misbelieved forth from their houses, at the first emigration [^381]; ye did not think that they would go forth, and they thought that their fortresses would defend them against God; but God came upon them from whence they did not reckon, and cast dread into their hearts! They ruined their houses with their own hands and the hands of the believers; wherefore take example, O ye who are endowed with sight!

Had it not been that God had prescribed for them banishment, He would have tormented them in this world [^382]; but for them in the next shall be the torment of the Fire! that is because they opposed God and His Apostle: and whoso op-poses God, verily, God is keen to punish!

\[5\] What palm trees ye did cut down or what ye left standing upon their roots was by God's permission, and to disgrace the workers of abomination; and as for the spoils that God gave to His Apostle from these (people) ye did not press forward after them with horse or riding camel; but God gives His Apostle authority over whom He pleases, for God is mighty over all [^383]!

<span id="p275">[<sup><small>p. 275</small></sup>]</span>

What God gave as spoils to His Apostle of the people of the cities is God's, and the Apostle's, and for kinsfolk, orphans, and the poor, and the wayfarer, so that it should not be circulated amongst the rich men of you.

And what the Apostle gives you, take; and what he forbids you, desist from; and fear God, verily, God is keen to punish!

And (it is) for the poor who fled [^384], who were driven forth from their houses and their wealth, who crave grace from God and His goodwill, and help God and the Apostle; they are the truthful.

And those who were settled in the abode [^385] and the faith before them, love those who fled to them [^386]; and they do not find in their breasts a need of what has been given to them; preferring them to themselves, even though there be poverty amongst them; and whoso is preserved from his own covetousness, these are the prosperous!

\[10\] And those who came after them say, ‘Our Lord, forgive us and our brethren who were beforehand with us in the faith, and place not in our hearts ill-will towards those who believe—our Lord! verily, thou art kind, compassionate!’

Dost thou not look on those who were hypocritical, saying to their brethren who misbelieved amongst the people of the Book [^387], ‘If ye be driven forth we will go forth with you; and we will never obey any one concerning you; and if ye be fought <span id="p276">\[<sup><small>p\. 276</small></sup>\]</span> against we will help you.’ But God bears witness that they are surely liars!

If they be driven forth, these will not go forth with them; and if they be fought against, these will not help them; or if they do help them, they will turn their backs in flight;—then shall they not be helped!

Ye indeed are a keener source of fear in their hearts than God; that is because they are a people who do not understand! They will not fight against you in a body save in fortified cities, or from behind walls; their valour is great amongst themselves;—thou dost reckon them as one body, but their hearts are separated. This is because they are a people who have no sense!

\[15\] Like unto those before them, recently [^388]; they tasted the evil result of their affair, and for them is grievous woe.

Like unto the devil when he said to man, ‘Disbelieve.’ But when he disbelieved, he said, ‘Verily, I am clear of thee! Verily, I fear God the Lord of the worlds!’ And the end of them both shall be that they shall both be in the Fire, to dwell therein for aye! for that is the reward of the unjust!

O ye who believe! fear God; and let each soul look to what it sends on for the morrow; and fear God; verily, God is well aware of what ye do!

And be ye not like those who forget God, and He makes them forget themselves; they are the workers of abomination!

\[20\] Not deemed alike shall be the fellows of the <span id="p277">[<sup><small>p. 277</small></sup>]</span> Fire and the fellows of Paradise: the fellows of Paradise they are the blissful!

Had we sent down this Qur’ân upon a mountain, thou wouldst have seen it humbling itself, splitting asunder from the fear of God! These parables do we strike out for men; haply they may reflect!

He is God than whom there is no god; who knows the unseen and the visible; He is the merciful, the compassionate! He is God than whom there is no god; the King, the Holy, the Peace-Giver, the Faithful, the Protector, the Mighty, the Repairer, the Great!—celebrated be the praises of God above what they join with Him.

He is God, the Creator, the Maker, the Fashioner; His are the excellent names [1](060.htm#fn_389)! His praises, whatever are in the heavens and the earth do celebrate; for God is the mighty, the wise!


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East/58">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">LVIII. The Chapter of the Wrangler</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East/60">
          <span class="pr-2">LX. The Chapter of the Tried</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^381]: 274:1 The Jews of en Na.dhîr, near Medînah, who at first promised to stand neuter between him and the idolaters. After his success at Bedr they came over to his side, but turned again after the defeat of Ohod. For this offence they were forced to leave the country.

[^382]: 274:2 Like those of Qurâi.dhah, who were slaughtered. See Introduction, p. xxxix.

[^383]: 274:3 The Muslims did not use cavalry on the occasion, Mohammed himself being the only mounted member of the expedition. For this reason the spoils were assigned to the prophet alone, and not divided in the usual manner as prescribed in Chapter VIII, verse 42, Part I, pp. 167, 168.

[^384]: 275:1 The poorer Muhâ_g_erîn were allowed to participate in the spoils, but not the Ansârs.

[^385]: 275:2 The Ansârs at Medînah.

[^386]: 275:3 The Muhâ_g_erîn.

[^387]: 275:4 The Jews.

[^388]: 276:1 Either the idolaters slain at Bedr, or the Jews of Qâinuqâh, or those of Na.dhîr.