---
title: "LXIV. The Chapter of Cheating"
description: "The Qur'an — Sacred Books of the East"
published: true
date: 2024-11-10T18:38:5Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-10T18:38:5Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East/63">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">LXIII. The Chapter of the Hypocrites</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East/65">
          <span class="pr-2">LXV. The Chapter of Divorce</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


<span id="p286">[<sup><small>p. 286</small></sup>]</span>

IN the name of the merciful and compassionate God.

What is in the heavens and what is in the earth celebrates God's praises; His is the kingdom, and His is the praise, and He is mighty over all!

He it is who created you, and of you is (one) a misbeliever and (one) a believer; and God on what ye do does look.

He created the heavens and the earth in truth; and has formed you and made excellent your forms; and unto Him the journey is!

He knows what is in the heavens and the earth, and knows what ye conceal and what ye display; for God knows the nature of men's breasts!

\[5\] Has there not come to you the story of those who misbelieved before, and tasted the evil result of their affair, and for them was grievous woe?

That is because their apostles came to them with manifest signs, and they said, ‘Shall mortals guide us?’ and they misbelieved and turned their backs. But God was independent of them; for God is rich and to be praised!

Those who misbelieve pretend that they shall surely not be raised: say, ‘Yea! by my Lord! ye shall surely be raised: then ye shall be informed of that which ye have done;’ for that is easy unto God.

So believe in God and His Apostle and the light which we have sent down; for God of what ye do is well aware!

On the day when he shall gather you to the day <span id="p287">\[<sup><small>p\. 287</small></sup>\]</span> of gathering, that is the day of cheating [^409]! but whoso believes in God and acts aright, He will cover for him his offences, and will bring him into gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye! that is the mighty bliss!

\[10\] But those who misbelieve and say our signs are lies, they are the fellows of the Fire, to dwell therein for aye! and evil shall the journey be!

No calamity befalls but by the permission of God: and whoso believes in God, He will guide his heart; for God all things doth know!

So obey God and obey the Apostle [^410]: but if ye turn your backs—our Apostle has only his plain message to preach!

God, there is no god but He; and upon Him let the believers rely!

O ye who believe! verily, among your wives and children are foes of yours: so beware of them! But if ye pardon, and overlook it, and forgive,—verily, God is forgiving, compassionate!

\[15\] Your property and your children are but a trial; and God, with Him is mighty hire!

Then fear God as much as ye can! and hear, and obey, and expend in alms: it is better for yourselves. But whosoever is saved from his own covetousness—these are the prosperous!

If ye lend to God a goodly loan, He will double it for you, and will forgive you; for God is grateful, clement!

<span id="p288">[<sup><small>p. 288</small></sup>]</span>

He knows the unseen and the visible; the mighty, the wise!


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East/63">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">LXIII. The Chapter of the Hypocrites</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Quran_Sacred_Books_of_the_East/65">
          <span class="pr-2">LXV. The Chapter of Divorce</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^409]: 287:1 I.e. both the righteous and the wicked will disappoint each other by reversing their positions, the wicked being punished while the righteous are in bliss.

[^410]: 287:2 This expression seems to indicate that this verse at least was revealed at Medînah.