# A Christmas Message to all Urantia Book Readers.

Then Jesus spoke, saying: "Now that you are ambassadors of my Father's kingdom, you have thereby become a class of men separate and distinct from all other men on earth. You are not now as men among men but as the enlightened citizens of another and heavenly country among the ignorant creatures of this dark world. It is not enough that you live as you were before this hour, but henceforth must you live as those who have tasted the glories of a better life and have been sent back to earth as ambassadors of the Sovereign of that new and better world. Of the teacher more is expected than of the pupil; of the master more is exacted than of the servant. Of the citizens of the heavenly kingdom more is required than of the citizens of the earthly rule. Some of the things which I am about to say to you may seem hard, but you have elected to represent me in the world even as I now represent the Father; and as my agents on earth you will be obligated to abide by those teachings and practices which are reflective of my ideals of mortal living on the worlds of space, and which I exemplify in my earth life of revealing the Father who is in heaven.

"I send you forth to proclaim liberty to the spiritual captives, joy to those in the bondage of fear, and to heal the sick in accordance with the will of my Father in heaven. When you find my children in distress, speak encouragingly to them, saying:
"Happy are the poor in spirit, the humble, for theirs are the treasures of the kingdom of heaven.
"Happy are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be filled.
"Happy are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.
"Happy are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
"And even so speak to my children these further words of spiritual comfort and promise:
"Happy are they who mourn, for they shall be comforted. Happy are they who weep, for they shall receive the spirit of rejoicing.
"Happy are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
"Happy are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of God.

"Happy are they who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Happy are you when men shall revile you and persecute you and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely. Rejoice and be exceedingly glad, for great is your reward in heaven.

"My brethren, as I send you forth, you are the salt of the earth, salt with a saving savor. But if this salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is henceforth good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden under foot of men.

"You are the light of the world. A city set upon a hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it gives light to all who are in the house. Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and be led to glorify your Father who is in heaven.

"I am sending you out into the world to represent me and to act as ambassadors of my Father's kingdom, and as you go forth to proclaim the glad tidings, put your trust in the Father whose messengers you are. Do not forcibly resist injustice; put not your trust in the arm of the flesh. If your neighbor smites you on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. Be willing to suffer injustice rather than to go to law among yourselves. In kindness and with mercy minister to all who are in distress and in need.

"I say to you: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you, bless those who curse you, and pray for those who despitefully use you. And whatsoever you believe that I would do to men, do you also to them.

"Your Father in heaven makes the sun to shine on the evil as well as upon the good; likewise he sends rain on the just and the unjust. You are the sons of God; even more, you are now the ambassadors of my Father's kingdom. Be merciful, even as God is merciful, and in the eternal future of the kingdom you shall be perfect, even as your heavenly Father is perfect.

"You are commissioned to save men, not to judge them. At the end of your earth life you will all expect mercy; therefore do I require of you during your mortal life that you show mercy to all of your brethren in the flesh. Make not the mistake of trying to pluck a mote out of your brother's eye when there is a beam in your own eye. Having first cast the beam out of your own eye, you can the better see to cast the mote out of your brother's eye.

"Discern the truth clearly; live the righteous life fearlessly; and so shall you be my apostles and my Father's ambassadors. You have heard it said: 'If the blind lead the blind, they both shall fall into the pit.' If you would guide others into the kingdom, you must yourselves walk in the clear light of living truth. In all the business of the kingdom I exhort you to show just judgment and keen wisdom. Present not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine, lest they trample your gems under foot and turn to rend you.

"I warn you against false prophets who will come to you in sheep's clothing, while on the 	
inside they are as ravening wolves. By their fruits you shall know them. Do men gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles? Even so, every good tree brings forth good fruit, but the corrupt tree bears evil fruit. A good tree cannot yield evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree produce good fruit. Every tree that does not bring forth good fruit is presently hewn down and cast into the fire. In gaining an entrance into the kingdom of heaven, it is the motive that counts. My Father looks into the hearts of men and judges by their inner longings and their sincere intentions.

“In the great day of the kingdom judgment, many will say to me, 'Did we not prophesy in your name and by your name do many wonderful works?' But I will be compelled to say to them, 'I never knew you; depart from me you who are false teachers.' But every one who hears this charge and sincerely executes his commission to represent me before men even as I have represented my Father to you, shall find an abundant entrance into my service and into the kingdom of the heavenly Father.” (1570/2)

# Jesus would not appeal to the Moral Majority

Sydney Harris

One of the rich ironies of the so-called “fundamentalist” movement is that while it preaches Christ, it forgets Jesus.

For the fact is that the living Jesus would not be an appealing figure to the members of the Moral Majority. For the fact further is that he was a thorn in the side of the fundamentalists of his own time.

Jesus wanted to reform and humanize the religion of his time and his church. He saw it falling into the hands of the legalists and the narrow moralists. He saw it as becoming proud and priggish and punitive—when it should be humble and compassionate and forgiving.

The fundamentalists of his church reviled and condemned him for his actions, his attitudes and his sayings. He associated with prostitutes and tavern- keepers and tax collectors. He mingled with the riff-raff not with the respectable members of the clergy.

He was a revolutionary in a moral, not in a political sense. He reminded us that the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath—which means that what is “right” or “wrong” to do depends on the human end, not on the legal code or ecclesiastical edict.

He was strict about the way we ought to behave toward one another, but lenient toward our personal weaknesses. He warned the self-righteous to, “Judge not that ye be not judged.” He preferred the poor, the outcast, the struggling, often the “sinner” to the pious, respectable, hypocritical upholders of the law and trustees of the temple.

This is why they hated him and hounded him. Because he saw that religion had hardened into ritual, that the early faith of the fathers had turned cold and formal and self-righteous, that the zeal of the prophets had been replaced by the dogmas of the priests.

You cannot read the New Testament without realizing that Jesus was irrevocably opposed to the Moral Majority of his time. His mission was to revitalize and re-humanize the Jewish church, to reawaken its early passion against injustice and oppression.

His idea of “morality” had nothing to do with gambling or drinking wine or such frailties. His idea was truly “fundamental” in that it went right to the bottom of men's relations with one another—in terms of brotherliness, tolerance, help, mercy.

His parable of the good Samaritan was shocking and revolting to the Moral Majority of his day—for he showed how the priests and the pious passed by a fallen man, while the despised Samaritan was the only one who tried to work God's will.

Whatever the modern fundamentalist claims to be, in the name of Christ, he is taking the name of Jesus in vain. For Jesus was not setting up a church, or establishing rules, or condemning his brothers. He was showing us how God wants us to act toward one another, by his own example. It is a lesson the fundamentalists still have to learn.

# On Being Morally Fragrant

“Morality can never be advanced by law or by force. It is a personal and freewill matter and must be disseminated by the contagion of the contact of morally fragrant persons with those who are less morally responsive, but who are also in some measure desirous of doing the Father's will.” (193)

Essentially, the book is telling us that if Urantia society is to advance spiritually, our morality cannot be static, moribund. It must go forward. However we cannot legislate or utilize punitive methods to enforce moral advance. A society makes such advances if, and only if, it has morally fragrant members whose morality is contagious—and at least some other members who are morally responsive.

The choice of the word “fragrant” by the revelators is interesting. In writing this, I initially used the word “superior.” But don't we all know those of “superior” morality who are nevertheless repugnant to others because of their “better than thou” attitude. If morality is to be disseminated by contact with “morally fragrant persons” then those persons have to be living examples of that higher morality. It is unproductive, and often counter-productive, to be  a person who says  “do as I do” (plus the implication of punishment for failure) or the more usual form, “do as I say, not as I do” (plus the implied punishment for failure). This is particularly true in “normal” human society where the “do as I do” and the “do as I say” types of persons say one thing in public and do another in private. In New Testament times it was the scribes, the lawyers, and the Pharisees who had the reputation of fulfilling this role. In modern times, it is the politicians and the lawyers who collect the publicity. But let's not forget parents, teachers, religionists, etc., for times have not changed much.

So how can Urantia Book readers be morally fragrant. Well, one example we have is Jesus. Are there others? In a recent T.V. interview, a winner of a swimming gold medal at the Atlanta Olympics was questioned intensively about his life-style, his other interests both in sport and elsewhere, and his intentions for his future swimming and after-swimming career. Out of the blue and quite out of context, he came out with the statement that friends and family were the most important thing in life. His remark was not further qualified and the T.V. host passed it by. However, I'm sure that in the eyes of many viewers, that particular sporting celebrity left behind him some true moral fragrance.

I think moral fragrance has to be unconscious. If we are conscious of our moral standards and in any way attempt to exhibit them to others, the fragrance will certainly diminish and probably die away. We have to “be” before we can “do.”

“That evening, while teaching in the house, for it had begun to rain, Jesus talked at great length, trying to show the twelve what they must ”be,“ not what they must ”do.“ They knew only a religion that imposed the ”doing“ of certain things as the means of attaining righteousness—salvation. But Jesus would reiterate, ”In the kingdom you must be righteous in order to do the work...but it was a difficult task to persuade these Galilean fishermen that, in the kingdom, being righteous, by faith, must precede doing righteousness in the daily life of the mortals of the earth." (1584)

Righteousness certainly includes morality, hence if the Fifth Epochal Revelation is to do its work, then we readers have to “be” both righteous and moral if we are to become morally fragrant and infectious.

It must be extremely difficult for an irreligious person to subscribe to a moral code that glorifies unselfishness as a supreme virtue. Religious people who are at the same time, moral, tend to believe in a God who is love personified and who extends the offer of that love to all mankind. It seems that any deviation from a belief system encompassing such a God inevitably opens the door for grossly immoral behavior.

Without a God who is love, and the promise of some desirable afterlife, the embracing of Paul's alternative philosophy becomes almost compulsory: “Eat, drink, and be merry for tomorrow we die.” (1 Cor. 15:32) And with its acceptance, comes a deterioration of morality with the tendency to the maximizing of selfishness, for without a divine authority, the basis for any morality becomes arguable and self-interest becomes the paramount motivation.

“When man fails to discriminate the ends of his mortal striving, he finds himself functioning on the animal level of existence.” (193)

Could it be that a major intention of the revelators in providing us with the Fifth Epochal Revelation is the hope that adherents should become those morally fragrant persons who, by their personal example, will become the goal setters for a new moral order in society?

# The Science and Historical Content of The Urantia Book. Fact, or fact punctuated by symbolism, mythology and allegory?

Based on a talk given at IC96 by Ken Glasziou, Maleny, Australia

About 10 years ago I was asked some questions about the science content of The Urantia Book and made the off-the-cuff reply that if some of its materials were written prior to 1955 (the original date of publication) then it was of genius quality. I then ventured that it was hard to see how some of it could have been written in the absence of prior knowledge on the part of the authors. I was asked to write on this for the Australian Newsletter, Six-0-Six, and for reasons unknown to me, this science content subject material has occupied a considerable portion of my subsequent life.

About 2 years later I found myself, together with my wife, in the home of Jim and Eunice Mills at Pensacola, Florida. The purpose of the visit was to discover as much as possible about cut-off dates for the writing of various materials in the book, i.e. was it all written by 1934/5, or could additions have been made up to and even after 1955. Jim Mills was an interesting character. Then more than 80 years of age, he was teaching philosophy classes at the Pensacola campus of the University of Florida. Originally Jim was some kind of industrial chemist, but during the years of his reading of The Urantia Book, he became imbued with the idea it should become an acceptable object for study in the appropriate departments of U.S. universities—philosophy, theology, religion, humanities, etc.

I could see Jim's point. If studied, for whatever reason, in any of the prestigious universities, sooner or later its study would filter through to the seminaries that train the ministers and priests of our various Christian sects, and maybe, at some future date, it would be respectable for such ministers of religion to present from the pulpit, teachings taken from The Urantia Book.

I suppose that, because of the 'accidents' that appear to shape our earthly lives, my knowledge of basic science was weighted differently from Jim's and I could already see that there was much material of a scientific nature in this strange book that would weigh heavily against it finding the kind of status in the academic world for which Jim was hoping.

In my view, it is undoubtedly true that, if written during 1934/5 and even up to 1955 and beyond, The Urantia Book does contain some remarkable scientific, archaeological, and anthropological material that is indicative of extraordinary knowledge on the part of its authors. For some of these individual items, I'm quite sure that a person with intense knowledge of the appropriate field, would be forced to accept that the odds against it being composed correctly by a human author would have to have been of astronomical proportions.

A persistent rumor indicates that a quite considerable number of new readers have perceived the “prophetic” science material as an adequate reason for them to undertake a serious study of the book, at least during the very initial stages of their contact. Later, its importance to them may decline to zero.

If most or all of the science material in the book had been of the quality of its prophetic science, it seems likely that the book would have been quickly accepted in academia and from there penetrated widely into the Christian churches. But this is not the case.

Besides its prophetic material, this strange book contains portions having the potential of being utilized for its ridicule. Thinking this over, I came to a rough figure of about 3% of its content that, if removed prior to the first printing, perhaps would have turned the book into the sensation that many of the original forum hoped for or expected. Given the removal of that material and some attention-drawing mechanism to its prophetic components (italics for example), then it seems likely that this revelation could have catalyzed a revolution, maybe even achieving already, the hope expressed in:

“What a transcendent service if, through this revelation, the Son of Man should be recovered from the tomb of traditional theology and be presented as the living Jesus to the church that bears his name...” (2091)

Assuming that those difficult bits and pieces had been edited out of the book and some emphasis given to the prophetic materials, let me quote from the book on what might have come to pass had its science been leading the way.

“The philosophic elimination of religious fear and the steady progress of science add greatly to the mortality of false gods.” (1124)

“Ancient magic was the cocoon of modern science, indispensable in its time but now no longer useful. And so the phantasms of ignorant superstition agitated primitive minds of men until the concepts of science could be born. Today, Urantia is in the twilight zone of this intellectual evolution. One half of the world is grasping eagerly for the light of truth and the facts of scientific discovery, while the other half languishes in the arms of ancient superstition and but thinly disguised magic.” (973)

“Science teaches man to speak the new language of mathematics and trains his thoughts along lines of exacting precision. And science also stabilizes philosophy through the elimination of error, while it purifies religion by the destruction of superstition.” (907)

So you see that if we scientists had been in the driver's seat, the false gods would all be dead, philosophic elimination of religious fear would have been achieved, and religion would have been purified by the destruction of superstition. Then, by thinking with exacting and virtually errorless mathematical precision, we could have led the world such that it was already on the brink of light and life. However, reality is different. The revelators themselves scuttled us and the opportunity is gone, perhaps forever.

How did the revelators scuttle us? Some readers may not have noticed the sections in the book (I call it the 'funny' stuff) that have the potential to cause embarrassment, even chaos, if we were called upon to defend them at some kind of promotional gathering or perhaps a TV host show. (Have you ever noticed that people have an intense fear of being ridiculed?) I'll only touch upon one of these sections but will also suggest that the revelators seem to have left us with an escape mechanism for this particular one, and that there may be similar escape mechanisms for some or even all other sections of 'funny' stuff—provided we examine them with the quality of scholarship that I have heard in Matthew Block's IC96 talk on the human sources and David Kantor's presentation on “Race, Evolutionary Biology, and the Kingdom of Heaven.”

Most readers will be familiar with the story of Adamson and Ratta, that they had a family of 67 children, 16 of whom are described as being “often invisible.” Remembering that both parents were superhuman, Adamson being a child of Adam and Eve, and Ratta a pureline descendant of the staff of the Planetary Prince, perhaps it was not an insurmountable shock to the scientifically-minded to cope with the book's declaration that these 16 children were “often invisible.”

What follows is a little more difficult to digest. When Adamson noted that the two first born invisible ones were male and female, he decided to embark upon a breeding experiment and, as this first effort was successful, he continued with the experiment, the final result being that the 8 pairs of “often” invisibles brought forth 1984 “always” invisible offspring. This group we know as the secondary midwayers.

The Caligastia rebellion plus the Adamic default had a drastic influence upon the secondary midwayers, more than half of them casting in their lot with Calgastia and some even taking to penetrating and possessing the minds of subnormal humans as a means of keeping themselves amused. This phenomenon was known to the ancients as possession by demons or evil spirits.

From questions asked of a sample of book readers, it appears that, like myself, most have read this story in a more or less cursory manner and come away with the impression that the births and maturation of both the 16 parents and the 1984 secondary midwayers were a fairly normal operation except for the “invisible” factor and the secondary midwayers being nourished by some kind of electrical energy unknown to we humans. 

A more scholarly reading quickly shows that while the parents of the midwayers lived and died like mortals of the realm (862), the “birth” of their offspring was quite extraordinary. One piece of information is on page 862, “each couple was capable of producing a secondary midwayer every seventy days by a combined technique of sex and non-sex liaison.” But we have to skip to page 866 for the next important piece about their origin. Referring to both primary and secondary midwayers, the book says, “While the midwayers were brought into existence fully developed—experiencing no period of growth or development from immaturity—they never cease to grow in wisdom and experience.”

There is no way the conception and maturation of the secondary midwayers was in any way parallel to that for a normal human child. In fact, there is no evidence that they underwent any process resembling being “born,” and neither did they grow. If I sought a parallel from the book, I think I would pick upon the method by which two ascending humans of finaliter status bring into being a “trinitized son,” a totally new being, via some extraordinary union of their two minds and personalities that personalizes a new and unique “idea.”

It is curious that the fact that the secondary midwayers came into being fully grown and fully mature gets no mention in Section 6 of Paper 77 which is specifically about them and their creation. The way this, and other stories, are told in the book is now leading some readers to question whether the revelators have used some technique akin to allegory in order to present us with a deeper overview of the cosmology of the universes than could otherwise be given if they are to stay within the rules governing revelation. If so, this may mean that much, perhaps all, of the 'funny' stuff is told using a symbolism, allegory, or mythology that hides much deeper realities.

The extensive and scholarly work of Matthew Block has drawn attention to the long overlooked fact that the revelators have drawn extensively upon human sources—just as is stated on pages 17 and 1343. As readers accept this fact, perhaps they will be more inclined to regard the Fifth Epochal Revelation, not as divine dictation, but as the word of God in the words of freewill celestial beings, some only a little higher than ourselves on the scale of intellectual ability and others many orders of magnitude above our level of knowledge, comprehension, and intellectual ability. These authors have combined together in providing us with what they believe is a reasonably comprehensible overview of the hierarchical structure for universe personalities, a new cosmology that is light years ahead of anything we have had previously, and authoritative insights into the natures of the Universal Father, the Eternal Son, the Infinite Spirit, the role of the Trinity, together with an expanded version of Jesus' living revelation of God-likeness—and much, much more. In doing so, they have chosen whatever means they, as individuals, considered were suitable to achieve the goals that were set for them.

It is also possible that a restraint was set on this revelation—that it had to be presented in a way that would not unduly upset the normal progress of the planet. It should be obvious from reading the revelation that the goal of mortal life on inhabited planets is not a competition to attain the life and light status in record time nor that our subsequent journey to Paradise is a race to see who can get there first. It is the experiences accumulated and the overcoming of adversity on the journey that appear to be of enormous value for the fulfillment of whatever is eventually in store for us.

The inclusion of “funny stuff” was surely the deliberate act of the revelators and may have slowed up the acceptance of the revelation. If so we have to bow to their superior wisdom, accept what is, and get on with the job in hand. A part of that job may be to explain the nature of the book to the world at large. Many have attempted to foist it on others as an errorless (except for typos) divine revelation, in concept not very different from the divine dictatorship for the Bible now acknowledged by scholars (and many others) as not only out of date but quite wrong. The best description now given is that the Bible contains the word of God in the words of men (Good News Bible, Catholic Study Edition, Thomas Nelson, N.Y. 1979) and it is true that many who hold to this view have discovered for themselves the same Universal Father and the same Jesus as we encounter in The Urantia Book.

A new era for The Urantia Book appears to be dawning, one in which scholarly research, followed by explanation, exposition, midrash, exegesis, etc., that will bring greater understanding of this great book. But first we must get past the divine dictation deadlock.   

To achieve better understanding, for some parts of the book it may only be necessary to update terminology in discussing its content. The book uses the phrase “mind circuits” to describe various aspects of mind, its roles, and its interactions. Perhaps the phrase “mind field” would now be more meaningful for all those who have become familiar with the “field” concept from high school and tertiary science education.

The idea of a “field” has been around among physicists for a long time, but in recent times it has blossomed to include the many quantum fields. Discussing these, Freeman Dyson, professor of physics at the Institute for Advanced Studies at Princeton states:

“We have put into the theory of the quantum field two big ideas, the idea of quantum mechanics and the idea of relativity. These two ideas force us to construct a mathematical model which, when we deduce its consequences, we find a miracle has emerged. Automatically there emerges a third big idea, that the world is built from elementary particles. This idea is a consequence of the fact that, in a quantum field, energy can exist only in discrete units which we call quanta. When we work out the theory of these quanta, we find that they have the properties of the elementary particles that we observe in the world around us.”

So from the electric field we get the electron emerging as its accompanying particle, from the electromagnetic field we get photons as vector boson particles that bring us the photo-electric effect (which we use to trap solar energy), light, our TV signals, etc. From the neutrino field there arises the neutrinos, the gluon field, the gluons, etc., etc.; and there are yet other fields for which the particle has yet to be demonstrated—from the gravitational field we expect to find the gravitons, from the Higgs field we hope to locate the Higgs particle, and who knows what for the future?

Although we sometimes try to make models using familiar things to allow us to visualize aspects of these fields (i.e. we use the flow of water from high to low pressure to visualize electric current flowing in the direction of a voltage difference) nevertheless it is a fact that a quantum field cannot be broken down into other constituents, it just is what it is.

Now if we stretch concepts a little, is it possible to think that a midwayer just naturally arises from something we'll call a midwayer field? And do absoniters arise from an absoniter field? And could it be that when two finaliters bring into a being a trinitized son, they are somehow using a trinitized son field in order to do so. Does that sound crazy? I can assure you that it is no more crazy than some of the concepts of quantum theory—or relativity theory for that matter. We just need to become familiar with the concepts for the strangeness to go away.

Although the use of “field” in these ways is descriptive and not empirical nevertheless it may be a good way for we Urantians to think about the mind in all its immense variations.

For example there may be a mind field accessible to the Physical Controllers that enables them to confer mechanical or non-teachable mind upon primitive organisms. Though the revelators use the words “mind circuits,” perhaps they would have used “field” if  the field concept had been in more common usage in the mid-30's.

The field concept gives us something we can visualize—for example, if we place an iron tack on a table then bring a magnet with range, although there is no visible contact between the two, we can make the tack move around. And if the magnet is strong enough we can actually feel its “pull” if we hold the tack in our fingers.

With such an example of the reality of a field in mind, it is not too difficult to visualize the Adjutant Mind Spirits being the source of a mind field that activates the electronic circuitry present in our brains and nervous system in order to allow us to react to stimuli in the way that we do. Then, beyond our world, there may be a morontia mind field, and who-knows-what beyond that. Have you ever felt the presence of a mind with which you are at one? Or the presence of a hostile or evil mind? If so, you may have experienced the interaction of mind fields. The extension of the “field” idea would provide us with both a vocabulary and concepts that are already familiar to us. The point about such ideas is that we use them if they help, and discard them if they do not.

Such models are not necessarily the truth, just a means of reaching towards truth. Galileo, Newton, Maxwell, and Einstein all used thought-models to help their thinking. For a scientist, the end test is (or at least used to be) experiment, but we Urantians may have to delay experimentation on concepts such as mind fields until we reach Mansonia or perhaps beyond—meanwhile taking comfort in the knowledge that the master philosophers of Paradise love to speculate.

Briefly reiterating what we have been through, we've seen that some readers such as myself firmly believe that The Urantia Book does contain material of a scientific nature that could only have been guessed at by a hypothetical human author both at the time of receipt of the Papers and also at the time of publication. But there is also the “funny stuff” that, if read as being factual, appears to be at least strange, and sometimes unbelievable. For the example of the secondary midwayers, a more intense reading shows that the detail of their origin can easily be misread, and that the whole truth is not provided. Perhaps then, in giving us the “funny stuff,” the revelators may be using techniques to convey information akin to those used by Jesus such as his parables, or his method of using gross exaggeration to get an idea across (i.e. a father giving his son a serpent or a camel getting through the eye of a needle). A technique the revelators have used extensively, and that many readers have been loath to believe even though clearly stated in the description of their mandate, is the inclusion of scientific material “soon to be outdated.” On occasion, this has been done in order to provide a cosmological overview, in principle, close to the truth but in detail, now factually incorrect.

I believe that many Urantia Book readers, myself included, have made an error more or less identical to that made by Christian fundamentalists in that our initial expectation was that the Fifth Epochal Revelation was not the word of God in the words of men, nor even the word of God in the words of celestial beings, some high, some low, but the word of God in the words of God himself. Hence we skipped over all the denials in the book itself in the hope that here at last we were in possession of absolute truth—and no longer would we have to live in uncertainty about anything. A careful study of The Urantia Book will reveal that such is not the way of the Universal Father.

We now have to re-read The Urantia Book in a more scholarly manner, recognizing its revelatory status but also recognizing that the revelators may have retained the techniques of the ages in bringing this revelation to mankind—the use of some myth, story telling, parable, anecdote, and allegory to convey that truth. At the very least, it is imperative that we explore the possibility that the first reactions many of us  experienced on receiving this revelation—that it is God-given, therefore literal, absolute truth—may not be the whole story. When providing details of the rules for revelation, the revelators did not relieve us from the task of thinking for ourselves. In The Urantia Book, we have a detailed cosmological overview of final reality from which we have to struggle, as always, to discover our own personal truth. A God who loves us could do no other.

In conclusion let's see what the book says:

“The proof that revelation is revelation is this same fact of human experience: the fact that revelation does synthesize the apparently divergent sciences of nature and the theology of religion into a consistent and logical universe philosophy, a coordinated and unbroken explanation of both science and religion, thus creating a harmony of mind and satisfaction of spirit which answers in human experience those questionings of the mortal mind which craves to know how the Infinite works out his will and plans in matter, with minds, and on spirit.” (1105)

# Consistency Column

Even for an author writing about recorded facts, consistency is not always easy to maintain for a work as extensive as The Urantia Book. For hypothetical authors seeking to foist a fake revelation upon the world, hence relying upon their imaginations, maintaining consistency would be a nightmare and much more so prior to the availability of computers and modern information technology. This bimonthly column presents information about our investigations on consistency in The Urantia Book. Input from readers would be welcome.

There are 68 references to “outer space” in The Urantia Book. On page 329 we are told that, “Master Force Organizers withstand temperatures and function under physical conditions which would be intolerable even to versatile Power Centers and Physical Controllers of Orvonton. The only other types of revealed beings capable of functioning in these realms of outer space are the Solitary Messengers and the Inspired Trinity Spirits.”

The Solitary Messengers are a more or less unique group and part of their task is to explore the uncharted regions of outer space. The Inspired Trinity Spirits are a bit of a mystery but have similarities to the Solitary Messengers and are even thought to be likely to supplement or replace them when the work load becomes too large. The Solitary Messengers are finite in number.

The Master Force Organizers consist of Primary Master Force Organizers who deal with the basic forces of the Unqualified Absolute, transmuting pre-energy into primary or puissant energy which then comes under the control of the Associate Master Force Organizers as the new energy form moves into the gravity grasp of the Isle of Paradise. Both groups are domiciled on Paradise but function throughout the Master Universe.

All sixty eight references to outer space were checked to see if discrepancies could be located relevant to the statement on p. 329 that only the three types of being could withstand the extreme conditions of outer space.

Two possible discrepancies were discovered. In one (1182), a Solitary Messenger speculates that Mystery Monitors may penetrate outer space levels but then says that the Solitary Messengers (who are able to sense the presence of an Adjuster) have never been sure of detecting Adjusters in outer space.

The other possibility is on p. 328 which states that the Frandalanks function in the domains of outer space. The Frandalanks are apparently difficult to classify. They are grouped with the Associate Power Directors but the author of Paper 29 calls them living machines that measure aspects of universe force. They are used extensively in the Grand Universe and presumably are placed in suitable locations in outer space where, essentially, they are recording machines. If we think of them as “instruments” rather than “beings” then their location in outer space is not an inconsistency. So perhaps we'll score 9.5 out of 10 for consistency on this point.

# My Odyssey of Peak Experiences

Dr Meredith J Sprunger, Fort Wayne, In.

Our lives are shaped by our peak experiences. These episodes of transcendence are sometimes difficult to explain, but most people have a sense of the ministry of a reality above and beyond themselves which is bringing meaning to their lives: “...at every crossroad in the forward struggle, the Spirit of Truth will always speak, saying, 'This is the way.'” (383)

My search for knowledge and truth started at an early age. I have a vivid memory at the age of four of a compelling urge and a deep hunger to know more about life. I was standing outside on the south side of our house in bright sunshine. I recall saying to myself, “There is something about life that I do not understand, but I'm going to find out.”

These prayers of the heart take years to integrate our minds and fashion our lives. Along the way critical peak experiences stand out  in our memory. The death of my mother when I was about nine, and the death of my father a year and a half later, were rugged reality probing confrontations. I recall sitting in our front room during the home funeral service of my father looking out of our picture window at a herd of cows grazing in the sunshine, and saying to myself, “Now I'm like those cows with no one to care for me but God.”

An aunt and uncle took me to live with them at their home in the country. When I was around thirteen, I went to the Mennonite Church in Berne, Indiana to hear the community chorus sing Handel's Messiah. I was so carried away by the spiritual grandeur of the lyrics and music that I became acutely aware of my finitude and insignificance. When we got home, I went up to my room and prayed fervently, “Lord, make me a part of something more important and significant than myself!” Little did I realize that one day I would have the privilege of being one of the pioneers associated with the Fifth Epochal Revelation.

My central interests have always been nature, philosophy and religion. As I struggled with the decision of what course of study I would pursue in college, I was drawn to a career a a naturalist. Since I was without parental guidance, I tried to think objectively. Reasoning that my attraction to nature was a passing adolescent fancy, I attempted to make a more mature, conventional choice. Since I was always interested in the “why and wherefore ” of things, I thought that chemistry fit this description. Knowing, however, that I did not want to spend my life in a laboratory, I settled on chemical engineering.

Although I got the highest grade in chemistry of any freshman chemical engineering student at Purdue that semester, I knew that I did not want to be an engineer.So I turned to my first love and transferred to the School of Forestry. Here I felt comfortable but more and more the idea of philosophy and religion seemed to be calling to me. Comments my uncle made about ministers led me to think he regarded them as  “parasites” on society. The idea occurred to me that I could earn my living as a forester and engage in ministry as an avocation. So I wrote Mission House Seminary asking if I could enroll in the Seminary after graduating from the School of Forestry. Their reply was, “No, you should have a liberal arts major to enter the seminary.” This was a devastating blow  to my life plan. What should I do? What was God's will? I walked late nights under the full moon in pasture fields near the agricultural campus trying to decide. It was an agonizing decision but finally I felt confident that God was calling me to transfer to Mission House College (now Lakeland), major in philosophy, and enter the seminary.

My life pilgrimage proceeded somewhat normally through Mission House Theological Seminary, B.D., Princeton Theological Seminary, M.Th., a pastorate at Trinity United Church of Christ, and earning a Ph.D. in psychology at Elmhurst College and a pastorate at Highland Avenue United Methodist Church in Chicago. The pressure of these two new positions plus the daily 25 mile drive through Chicago traffic began to take their toll. Being a hearty person with considerable ego-reinforcing courage, I plunged on until my physiological and psychological energy reserves were exhausted. Suddenly my ego invulnerability was shattered. I was thrown into the physical exhaustion and psychological depression of battle fatigue. Only those who have experienced the engulfing depth, anguish, and hopelessness of such depression can know what it is like. It is a psychological-spiritual event that tests the depths of the soul. It will either leave you a wounded and broken individual or a transformed and stronger person more in tune with spiritual reality.

While it was the dark night of the soul, it was also the transforming peak experience in my life. Stripped of all my ego-defenses and rationalizations, I was faced with either giving in to despair or surrendering my ego-defenses and giving myself completely to God regardless of consequences. I saw this as the only option with which I could identify. My life had been dedicated to God before but now I had faced the ultimate test. The restructuring of my inner life was slow but sure. I had a better understanding of what it means to be spiritually born again. I had passed through the tempering fire of testing and knew the spiritual invincibility of being a son of God. Much later my experience resonated with a passage I read in The Urantia Book:

“But long before reaching Havona, these ascendant children of time have learned to feast upon uncertainty, to fatten upon disappointment, to enthuse over apparent defeat, to invigorate in the presence of difficulties, to exhibit indomitable courage in the face of immensity, and to exercise unconquerable faith when confronted with the challenge of the inexplicable. Long since, the battle cry of these pilgrims became: 'In liaison with God, nothing—absolutely nothing  is impossible.'” (291)

In 1952 we took a pastorate at Grace Church in Culver, Indiana. I found that my spiritual insights and growth took on a new dimension. After several years of working out sermons and papers formulating my own spiritual experience and emphasizing the religion of Jesus rather than the religion about Jesus, I realized that a new spiritual approach was needed in mainline Christian theology. I tentatively outlined a couple of books that needed to be written, but I shied away from the discipline required to write these books. After some time of trying to avoid commitment to this project, I realized that in loyalty to this inner leading a decision had to be made.

To seek the will of God in making this decision I spent hours under the stars in our back yard in Culver. It seemed clear to me that a new theological-spiritual orientation was needed in understanding our Christian faith, and that God was leading me to move in this direction. I finally expressed my willingness to make the commitment to undertake this project. Not long after I made this decision, The Urantia Book was placed in my hands. I promised the friend who gave it to me, Judge Louis Hammerschmidt, that I would evaluate it. Its table of contents turned me off; I thought it would be a waste of time to read it. After months of procrastination, I started reading in its Life and Teachings of Jesus. I did not find what I expected to find. It confirmed and greatly enhanced the New Testament story. Often I read with tears streaming down my cheeks. When I finished reading the book, I realized that the basic ideas I had decided to write about were here presented much better than I could possibly formulate them. I had the pervasive sense that my whole life had been prepared for this new vision of spiritual reality: The Fifth Epochal Revelation. The rest of my life has been a postscript and postlude to this climaxing experience of my spiritual pilgrimage.

# Cosmic Reflections: Cosmology of the Material Universes. Why Science and The Urantia Book have different perspectives

Whereas there is no such thing as an official definition of the scientific method, nor what constitutes the logic and goals of science, there are some things that are understood by a majority of professional scientists.

The core of the scientific method is simply to explore the available data, formulate a hypothesis to explain as much as of the data as possible, then do experiments to test the hypothesis. This tends to be a never-ending sequence of modifying the hypothesis to accommodate new data, then repeat.

The method has brought enormous progress over the last few hundred years. Until recently it included the assumption that an untestable hypothesis has no value.

The modern media business has now changed the rules by granting the untestable hypothesis an enormous market value. Unfortunately, this relatively new phenomenon has grossly distorted both the layman's and the scientist's view of what constitutes science. Here we stick to the old fashioned values.

There are two practical but unwritten working rules for both the bench scientist and the theoretician. The 'laws' of science must be the same for all observers wherever, whenever, and whoever they are. This rule has the corollary that the 'laws' are immutable, God does not play dice with his rules. Second, every observable phenomenon must have a natural explanation.

It is the interpretation of these rules that causes so much misunderstanding both between scientists and religionists, and individuals within those groups.

To illustrate this point let's pretend we could bring Newton and Einstein together to discuss the interpretation of their concepts about gravity and effects upon the wobbles of the planet, Mercury as it circles the sun. Einstein points out that his concept complies better with the measurements than does Newton's and Newton responds that that is because God and his angels are channeling energy into the solar system in a way that slightly disturbs the orbits of Mercury. Einstein replies that God does not mess round with the laws of physics. Newton responds, “How do you know.”

End of debate. Why? Firstly because the 'laws' are not the same for both observers, and secondly because Newton has introduced 'non-natural' interference by God to explain what his theory does not.

Newton and Einstein were, of course, great men, far too great to behave in this manner and, in any case, both firmly believed in God as First Cause, and his non-interference with his own laws.

The major cause of misunderstanding about these unwritten rules is the assumption that God's non-interference implies no God.

Was it Laplace who said to Napoleon that he had no need for that hypothesis, meaning there was no necessity to postulate a God in order that 'natural' law should be operative?

Although the two unwritten rules do not require there to be a God in order to institute the 'laws' in the first place, neither do those rules state or imply anything about the reality of God, nor what he may or may not have done.

The confusion comes in when both scientists and religionists confound the issue by assuming non-interference by God is the same thing as no God at all.

It is indeed unfortunate that, in the modern world, so many have confused having a scientific attitude with a necessity to deny the existence of God. In reality, empirical science has no business saying anything about God, for the existence of God is, as yet, an untestable hypothesis.

It does not require very strenuous thought to realize that there is no conflict at all in believing in a personal God, and at the same time being a bench scientist investigating natural phenomena using natural law that assumes God is not interfering but does not deny that God exists.

In thinking about a scientist's view of cosmology, one of the rules to be taken into account is the law of conservation of energy (mass is now included as a form of energy) that used to be taught in high school science as, “Energy can never be created or destroyed.” The empirical support for this law, tested thoroughly for more than a century, is overwhelming. 

A consequence of the conservation of energy law is that since no more energy-matter is being produced (or can be produced), the unavoidable increase in entropy will ultimately ensure that an expanding universe must run down (entropy is a measure of disorder).

A steady state, finite universe having no new energy input is so unstable it cannot exist and the other alternative is that our universe will implode keeping the conservation law intact at least until the point where the laws of physics fail.

In thinking about how a universe might begin or end, the orthodox scientist operates within the restrictions of the unwritten rules. Philosophically speaking, it is imperative that scientists should continue to operate within the rules at least until they have exhausted every possible 'natural' explanation for observable phenomena—at which point their only valid 'scientific' conclusion should be that no 'natural' explanation has been found.

There is a foolish line of reasoning in existence among some scientists (and many lay people) that appears to arise from the irrational denial of a “First-Cause,”  which is, of course, an untestable hypothesis and therefore inadmissible as being 'scientific.' This irrational line of reasoning is illustrated by  arguments such as that since life exists, it must be inevitable that it will generate itself spontaneously. The same line of thinking is applied by the godless scientist to the existence of the universe—since it is here, then it must be possible for it to create itself—an obviously untestable hypothesis resting upon a previous untestable hypothesis and therefore worthless, scientifically speaking.

Leaving out the fact that The Urantia Book insists upon a God who is First Cause in whom and through whom all things exist, there is yet another reason for scientific cosmology and the cosmology of the book being at variance.

The Urantia Book tells us that energy flow into the grand and master universes is continuous and controlled. In our universe of Nebadon, there may be few signs that this is so at the present stage of universe development. However at some future date it will attain life and light and the book states, “This era of light and life, inaugurated by the Teacher Sons at the conclusion of their planetary mission, continues indefinitely on the inhabited worlds....these worlds settled in light and life are destined to go on throughout the eternal ages of all future time.” (681)

That would appear to indicate that the suns of light and life planets will be need to be prevented from running down, becoming red giants, and swallowing their inhabited planets in the process. Finally, for the Grand Universe, when all seven superuniverses are at life and light, the whole system settles down to last throughout eternity in perfected energy equilibrium. In such a state, it seems the stars must shine unchanged, forever.

Science will have discovered that energy flow in the universes is controlled long before the Grand Universe attains light and life, but for the present, at least on Urantia, to stick with their own tried and tested rules, true scientists should be satisfied with what can be observed and limit their speculation to what can be empirically demonstrated. If they want to talk about God, then they need to take off their lab. coat and put on their theological or philosophical hats.