---
title: Bill Sadler Talks — Some Comments on Deity Functions in the Master Universe
description:
published: true
date: 2022-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
tags: study aid, bill sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-11-28T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1958-1959 William S. Sadler Jr.<br>© 1975 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Bill_Sadler_Talks/25">Personal Growth and Mansion World Arrival</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Bill_Sadler_Talks/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Bill_Sadler_Talks/27">Spreading The Urantia Book</a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

We've taken note of the light in Havona. And we observe that it extends all the way from finite realities up to absolute realities, touching all intervening points. Havona, then, is a perfect expression of all levels of reality. So, in our concept of the fourth level of double Deity function we encounter the first departure from absolute reality, because in the creative expression of Havona, and in the subsequent creative expressions of Deity, in the post-Havona universes, we have realities which are less then absolute. I think that's maybe why the Universal Absolute, which is Deity, that is Deity–that's a perfect word, that can be either way–it's in the creative expression of Deity that we arrive at our firehouse.

Now, the Universal Father, by virtue of becoming Father of the Son, and with him parent of the Spirit, has fully expressed that which is personalizable in existential Deity, eternal Deity, absolute Deity. And now, in time, the Universal Father is engaged in an effort to duplicate experientially what he has done existentially, which is to say, to personalize three additional experiential Deities.

Did the absonite precede the finite, or follow it? Did the transcendental level precede the appearance of finite reality, or did it follow the appearance of finite reality? The papers neatly dodge the question by referring to the transcendental level as a pre- echo of the finite. It's both before and after the finite.

In a sense, in the planning sense, it must be before. In the consummational sense, it must be after. I like that term: pre-echo.

As we consider the evolutional level of Deity, we are up against the concept of God the Sevenfold. And I think we ought to take two looks at God the Sevenfold, because here we have the active function of Deity at any time in time and space. The first presentation of God the Sevenfold is found on page 11. I expect we have here a principle of Deity that will continue to operate throughout all future time, though not necessarily in this exact form.

One of the things we'll consider is a possible evolution of God the Sevenfold. We know, for example, there are two kinds of Creator Sons–Creator Sons and Master Sons, right? Well, we'll examine–in a minute we get into outer space. We're going to go on quite a long voyage today. We'll discover that there may be more than two kinds of Creator Sons, differentiated by experience, just as Thought Adjusters are differentiated by experience.

We'll consider different kinds of Creative Spirits. They may be different, too. You see, God the Sevenfold implies not only activities in the realm of divinity, but activities in the realm of equilibrium, of mass.

The second presentation of God the Sevenfold encompasses the Power Directors, and involves not the Eternal Son, but the Isle of Paradise. Both the First and Third Sources and Centers are involved in both aspects of God the Sevenfold.

(Break in tape)

The motions of time and space get this darn thing stabilized as Havona is stabilized. There are no cosmic collisions in Havona, but we have traffic accidents out in Orvonton. Space bodies collide. This thing is not yet completely organized. This is the big battle for the mind-dominance of matter in its grosser aspect.

Isn't that second presentation of the Sevenfold intriguing? You have the two together, and of course your first major tie-in is at the level of the Seven Master Spirits. With each Master Spirit is associated one of the Seven Supreme Power Directors. And of course the entire power organization stems out from there.

Your second great tie-in isn't too clearly shown here, it's at the superuniverse level. And it's what they call the council of equilibrium. It's not referred to very often. On page 651, they're talking about the issuing of the permit authorizing the organization of the nebula which gave birth to our sun.

> Just under a trillion years ago _"the Uversa archives testify, there was recorded a permit issued by the Uversa Council of Equilibrium to the superuniverse government authorizing the dispatch of a force organizer and staff to the region previously designated . . . "_ ([UB 57:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p1_4))

(Break in tape)

Page 324, second paragraph, in the section dealing with the Master Physical Controllers:

> _"Physical Controllers serve throughout the grand universe. They are directly governed from Paradise by the Seven Supreme Power Directors as far as the headquarters of the superuniverses; from here they are directed and distributed by the Council of Equilibrium, the high commissioners of power dispatched by the Seven Master Spirits from the personnel of the Associate Master Force Organizers."_ [UB 29:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p4_2)

Well, let's look at them right now.

Page 328, the last paragraph heading discusses the Frandalanks. They're living barometers. And since they're the joint creation of all three orders of the two Force Organizers and the Power Directors, they can accurately register all forms of physical energy. You'll recall that there are thirty forms of physical energy, of which the Power Directors are able to fully control only twenty-one. They have partial control over six more, but they can't touch the last three at all.

You can't say that the Supreme Being dominates the evolutionary level of total Deity action, because the Supreme Being isn't completely here. But a Creator Son is. The constituent parts, the active time-space parts of God the Sevenfold, are really here. The Seven Master Spirits are existent. The twenty one Ancients of Days are existent. And when a Creator Son is commissioned, well, he's not a Master Son, he is a Creator Son.

He is in process of evolving as also is his creative consort. But they're here. They're real. They do things.

The time space level embraces the sub-absolute members of God the Sevenfold: Master Spirits, Ancients of Days, Creator Sons. And when I say Creator Sons, I imply Creative Spirit also–you can't think of one without the other. And the papers give us a collective name for these three groups. They speak of them as the Supreme Creators.

The second grouping in God the Sevenfold obviously are the three Paradise Deities–Father, Son, and Spirit.

And the remaining member of God the Sevenfold is the evolving Supreme Being. He is the midpoint of God the Sevenfold. And his evolution is consummated by the completed cooperation of the Supreme Creators on the one hand and the Paradise Deities on the other. And that cooperation has reached its limit just once, and as pertains to just one thing, and that was cosmic intelligence.

When the Seven Master Spirits, the senior members of the Supreme Creators, completely exhausted their powers of collaborating with Paradise Deity in the production of reflective spirits, the evolution of the Supreme Being was complete as concerns that one phase of the Grand Universe. And that's why he could function as a creator. And that's why he's only functioned once as a creator, because it is with regard to reflectivity only that there is no further room for growth and collaboration. And, incidentally, when the Supreme Being functioned as a creator, where did the response take place? In the Deity Absolute. And I think that the broker was the Ultimate.

Audience: The what?

I think that the broker, who operated between the Supreme and the Deity Absolute, was the Ultimate. I don't think you get from the first floor to the third floor without going through the second floor. 

(Break in tape).

–get there this afternoon. Where in the papers does it speak of some kind of a relationship which would permit of an interaction between the Supreme, the Ultimate, and the Absolute? Just one place in these papers. The Trinity of Trinities has functioned.

Now, how can this be? (Break in tape).

Page 1291. The relationships that exist at the ceiling of the first floor. You're still in time, but you're getting awfully close to the transcendence of time. I don't believe the nucleus expands outward beyond the Grand Universe. It remains. The nucleus of the Grand Universe and these four outer space levels represent the development of the absonite level of experiential growth.

I think that the Supreme is functional throughout these levels. And I think that's why we run into the number ten in the number of Architects assigned to these levels. And let's take a good look at what these four outer space levels are going to be like.

They are not going to have within them the type of growth which is characteristic of the present universe age. Now let's consider the problems of the present universe age. In order to have our kind of growth, you have to put up with critters like us. War, and murder, and crime, and all that sort of thing. In short, the early stages of planetary growth are something of a stinking mess, aren't they? On all normal worlds, the pre-Planetary Prince era is a bloody one, isn't it?

If we didn't have help from the central universe, we couldn't make it, could we? We are dependent on help–whether it's a Divine Counselor writing a paper, whether it's Michael bestowing himself, whether it is the living ladder of descending personalities on which we climb–we just couldn't make it, could we?

We desperately need help coming out from a perfect universe to help us get over this imperfection. Havona helps us compensate for the fact that we didn't start out perfect.

Audience: What does that really do to true evolution? It's a matter of degree, this help?

Why, sure it is. Help in accordance with law.

Audience: I see. Yes.

We don't violate the purpose of the Supreme, but within the range of latitude permitted in that purpose, they give us all the help they can.

Audience: And it's still true evolution.

Sure, it's true evolution. Gee, whiz. You've got a Thought Adjuster, the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Spirit, one Adjutant of Wisdom (I sometimes wonder whether mine works at all or not), an Adjutant of Worship, a personality, an evolving soul–all kinds of help.

Audience: We're really fortified, aren't we?

Yes. A group guardian or a personal guardian, you know? We've got all the help which it's lawful to give.

Audience: In a framework–

Right. They do everything except–who was it? Was it Paul or Bill Fenderson, I've forgotten which, say—that said they wish they could just take a coal chisel and crack the skull and put the ideas in, see? That help they can't give us.

Audience: Laughter.

I think the people that appear out in outer space, these outerspacers, they are going to suffer from a terrible deprivation. They cannot participate in the growth of the Supreme. It's done. It's finished.

Audience: They won't be evolutional. Not in any way that we know.

Audience: There may be other ways.

Of course, of course. It's our job to go out there and compensate them in terms of this terrible deficiency. But if you're going to have the Supreme Being completed and functional, you can't have him keep on growing, can you? You just don't have your druthers there.

This, I think, is the mission of the finaliters: to do for outerspacers, in terms of their deprivation, what the perfect beings from Havona do for us in terms of our deprivation, the fact that we start out with imperfection.

Marvin?

Audience: Argument.

My argument is that these four ages of the four outer space levels go right on with the same nucleus that we now have, because I can't duplicate the condition which was obtained when the first nucleus was formed, and which would appear to obtain when the second nucleus was formed. It's just more of the same. They differ quantitatively more than qualitatively.

I think as we take a good look at these post-Supreme ages, or the outer space level ages, I think we're taking a look at a new mode of collaboration. The first universe age was the age of the partnership of the Father and Son, right? The present universe age is the age of the partnership of the Son and the Spirit. I would suggest that these ages of the outer universes will witness the active functioning of the Spirit and the Supreme. And I derive that from a very interesting statement made in the papers.

I can't find it in my own text here, but it says in the papers, _"That which began as Father-Son, and became Son-Spirit, will evolve into Spirit-Supreme, and on."_

I think that these outer space levels–you'll have a new form of collaboration between the Supreme Being and the Infinite Spirit, between the Supreme Being and the Seven Master Spirits, and I think you will have the active functioning of thousand creative trios in the first outer space level, consisting of the Creator Son/Creative Spirit union in association with some trinitized expression of creative Supremacy.

You see, what a Creator Son and a Creative Spirit can do initially is merely express Paradise perfection. But when a Creator Son has seven times bestowed himself, and has gone through all the tremendous experience of producing and perfecting a local universe, and when his Creative Associate has completed this lateral evolution from a pre-personal being to a personal being, and has personally participated with the Son in this local universe–these folks are experiential now, aren't they? as well as embodying Paradise Perfection.

And if they trinitize, they're going to trinitize what they've got on the ball. And they've got not only the perfection of Paradise on the ball, they have got experiential realities on the ball.

Michael of Nebadon is still a carpenter. The human nature of Jesus of Nazareth is a part of the eternal nature of Michael of Nebadon. And, believe me, that's experience! There's a touch of humanity in what they will trinitize, because there's a touch of humanity in Michael today. This will be an expression of experiential Supremacy, I think. 

(Break in tape)

We'll now see what we can do about getting to the seventh level of total Deity function. We established pretty well that as Havona is the nucleus of the grand universe, so the perfected grand universe similarly serves as the nucleus of the Master Universe. We observed that a nuclear universe forms whenever a Trinity forms. The appearance of Havona was associated with the appearance of the Paradise Trinity. Before Havona, there can be no Trinity, because before Havona, there is no Infinite Spirit, and without the Infinite Spirit, you don't have a Trinity.

The completion of the seven superuniverses, their perfecting in light and life, also inaugurates the formation of a Trinity. Until they are perfected, the Supreme Being is not completed, and until he is completed, the First Experiential Trinity cannot function in the complete sense of the word.

Audience: It's a sort of a parallel.

There is a parallel. We took inventory of a number of parallels. What we are saying is that Havona–I'm setting up a proportion, now–nuclear Havona is to the cytoplasmic seven superuniverses as the nuclear grand universe is to the cytoplasmic universes of the four outer space levels. And you get no new nuclear formation with the completion of any of these space levels short of the fourth, because no new experiential Deity is completed, and the Second Experiential Trinity will not form fully until God the Ultimate has completed his growth.

Now, let's take a look–we are now exploring the sixth level of total Deity function, and we are beginning to develop the seventh.

Let's take a look and do some speculating about the third universe age, which is the age of the first outer space level. What will inaugurate it? Well, we know what started the first universe age. It's not a time event. It was an eternity event. The creation of Havona. I choose to suggest as a marker separating the first and second universe ages the creation of the 21 Ancients of Days.

You can debate that. It's an arbitrary thing. It's like saying the western Roman Empire fell in 476 AD. That happens to be the time when the old Teutonic commander of the troops kicked the last Caesar off the throne. It's arbitrary. 475 wasn't much different from 477, but I think we've got to have a marker, and I think this is a good one.

What will inaugurate the third universe age? Well, I have a feeling that–there'll be a time lag there. You know, between the space levels there's quiet zones? And I think between the universe ages there are quiet periods. I don't think age three will get under full blast immediately age two ends. I think there's a twilight period. I think the second universe age will end with the appearance of the Supreme Being. And you know, for a little while I think we'll just enjoy life. You know, we'll get a quiet living, we won't take home new assignments. We'll sort of re-consolidate our victory. Let's romance a little bit. I can see during this quiet period–it's the postlude of the second universe age. Or, you could say it's the prelude of the third universe age. I can see, little by little, a trickling of the finaliter companies into Paradise. No great inward surging, just one by one they are moved in. And I think the third universe age will be born when the seven Corps of the Finality pass in review on Paradise, and are commissioned to begin the invasion of outer space.

I have the opinion that the formation of the finaliter corps may be associated with the evolution of the Supreme Being. If so, their numbers are limited. They may be vast, but they will not continue to grow.

Let's take a minute and compute it. We know the outside dimensions of the time span. The papers tell us that natives from our superuniverse have become Mighty Messengers. Then how old are the oldest inhabited worlds in Nebadon? We know that one, too. They are around 200 billion years old. Does it take that long to get to Paradise? We don't know. We know it can be done within that length of time.

But let's just take one unit. Let's take Havona.

Dorothy, you're going to Europe pretty soon. If you had unlimited means, and pleasant companionship, how long would you like to spend exploring this world? You're in good physical health now, no aches, no pains, lots of money, and people–you know– that you like to be with.

Audience: (Can't understand tape).

Would a century be too long?

Audience: Without getting homesick?

Well, no, you'd come back home, too, you know. How long would you like to spend, just batting around? Coming home, and maybe spending a year, and then taking another trip–

Audience: (Can't understand tape)–more than a hundred years–(can't understand tape).

Let me ask–would you get bored in a hundred years do you think?

Audience: No!

All right. Don't you imagine each world and Havona is much more exciting than this world?

Audience: Certainly!

And we're told that no matter how many you've seen, you're totally unprepared for the next one. If you spent one hundred years on each Havona world, that would be one hundred billion years, going through Havona.

Audience: Are we allowed to take that time?

Once you get to Havona, time isn't of any more consequence. It is prior to that time. I have a feeling that it may take a couple of hundred billion years to get to Paradise. I have a feeling that we aren't going to want to get there any sooner.

Gee, whiz.

While Dorothy was yakking at me last night, she said, "Do I have to take all these doggone required subjects, physics and everything?"

And I said, "Sure."

She said, "It sounds like regimentation." I said, "Well, I think it's like college."

I'll guess at percentages. I would guess that about 30% of the work that we–a third of the studies, a third of the assignments between here and Paradise are required, and about two thirds of them, I think, are elective and optional.

I think we have a certain minimum standard overlap, and the rest of it we explore. We aren't all going to be Celestial Artisans. We aren't all going to be Technical Advisors–you know, cosmic attorneys.

How about this gang that came down here with Caligastia? They took a side trip, which–if it hadn't been for the Lucifer rebellion–could well have lasted a half a million years.

How about Andon and Fonta? They've never gotten away from the mansion worlds. They petitioned, and it was granted. They're greater (can't understand tape) up there, welcoming their progeny from this world. (Break in tape).

–school up there, I don't think, is anything like going to school down here.

Audience: No, I don't either.

Once–twice, in my educational experience, I was thrilled by a teacher. A dozen times I've been pleased, but twice I had the real thrill of meeting a true educator. And I want to tell you, it didn't just make learning effortless–hell, no–with pleasure, I put forth ten times the effort. It was fun, you know? And these are old pros; they really know how to teach.

Audience: They love it.

You don't get bored, either, because you're doing what you're learning, and then teaching what you've learned. You don't have the distorting experience of being a pupil forever. You also are a teacher. And, incidentally, you become pretty empathetic with your teachers as you, in turn, teach. And what's more, you take the assignment with confidence, because these reflective folks can look inside your gut and pretty well determine that you have got the capacity to do it. If they tag you for a job, you know you can do it. You may not be able to do it at the start, but you're going to do some growing in the process. You'll be successful in the end. You can have confidence in the faculty. 

(Break in tape).

Well, I hope to be there. I think that's going to be the darndest thing that happened on Paradise since they commissioned the Ancients of Days. It may be the first and the last time that the Corps of the Finality will ever be assembled.

I've had the pleasure of passing in review with troops who were well-drilled with high morale. I want to tell you, it's fun to stand shoulder to shoulder with comrades like that. This is going to put them all to shame. What a parade ground Paradise would make, too.

An occasional curricula is not absolutely perfect. If it were, then the candidates for the Deity adventure would never fail–but occasionally they do.

Audience: That's what I'm wondering. Because if they are able to creep in everyplace–

However, the corrective application of re-education never fails.

Audience: Oh. (Can't understand tape).

Right. This is not operating in absolute perfection. It's just damn good, that's all.


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Bill_Sadler_Talks/25">Personal Growth and Mansion World Arrival</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Bill_Sadler_Talks/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Bill_Sadler_Talks/27">Spreading The Urantia Book</a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>