---
title: "A Study of the Master Universe — Appendix XXIII. The Trinity of Trinities"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: astronomy, cosmology, study aid, bill sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1961 William S. Sadler Jr.<br>© 1975 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_22"><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Appendix XXII. Power-Personality Synthesis</span></a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe#index"><span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span></a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_24"><span class="pr-2">Appendix XXIV. The Third Experiential Trinity</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span></a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

In the far, far distant epochs of the post-ultimate age the something emergence of the Trinity of Trinities will begin the final reunification of all actual (and actualizing) deity — existential and experiential. In relation to deity, this multiple-trinity appears to be the total of totals. As we contemplate the past-eternity origin of the Paradise Trinity, then ponder the eventual appearance of this threefold trinity in the utter remoteness of the almost-eternal future, the feeling of the cyclical nature of deity personalization and trinity formation is likely to grow upon us. The Papers comment on this:

> Human beings can best conceive of all that is Real, of Total Reality, by picturing ". . . an almost limitless ellipse which is produced by one absolute cause . . ." which, after great diversification converges in reunification, ". . . ever seeking some absolute and infinite potential of destiny." <a id="s28_300"></a>[UB 105:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/105#p0_1)

The cycle of deity starts in past eternity. It passes through many stages and many ages and is finally lost to concept beyond the distant horizon of future eternity. It all seems to start with the Infinite. And our final concept of the final quest is the search for the Infinite.

## § 1. The Eternal Cycle of Deity

Deity seeks expression in personalization <a id="s34_42"></a>[UB 0:12.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_4), and the Infinite achieves the original threefold personalization of deity, in the face of the inherent indivisibility of deity, by eternalizing the Paradise Trinity. <a id="s34_251"></a>[UB 0:12.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_1); <a id="s34_294"></a>[UB 0:12.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_2) Since the potentials of this Original Trinity are experiential <a id="s34_399"></a>[UB 0:12.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_2) it follows, that when Reality is projected on two subabsolute levels, this act predetermines the sometime appearance of two additional trinities of experiential nature. <a id="s34_610"></a>[UB 0:12.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_2) The functions of trinity encompass the realities of deity. <a id="s34_711"></a>[UB 0:12.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_4) And, as we have already observed ([Appendix X § 7](/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_10#h-7-footnote-trinity-and-personality)), the apparent prerequisites for the eventuation of trinity seem to be three deities functioning in relationship to each other, hence operating on the same level of Reality. Two such deities could have a "relationship," but three would eventuate a "system" <a id="s34_1186"></a>[UB 112:1.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p1_17), and it would seem that the appearance of trinity is inherent in the eventuation of such a system. In fact, trinity appears to be that very system.

The three deity presence of the eternal and existential Father, Son, and Spirit eventuate the Paradise Trinity, which is also eternal and existential. The Trinity Ultimate, of subinfinite and experiential status, seems to eventuate because of the emergence of three new deity presences: the deity presences of the Supreme Being, the Architect-Corps, and the Supreme Creator-Corps. These three deity presences seem to be functioning in relation to each other on the same level of reality — a level that is subinfinite and experiential.

Since trinity is also deity, it also seeks for new and further expression in the form of new deity personalization. <a id="s38_116"></a>[UB 0:12.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_4) Such trinity projection of new deity personalization will give rise to new relationships of deity. If such deity "relationships" evolve from twofold to threefold, then a new system is going to appear. This will result in the further unification of deity through the eventuation of a new trinity-encompassment of Total Deity in the reality-level concerned. (ibid) This must be what takes place when the emergence of Ultimate Deity encounters the presences of Supreme Deity and the Destiny Consummator on a post-ultimate (coabsolute) level of function. The result is the eventuation (formation) of the Second Experiential Trinity, the Trinity Absolute.

Prior to the appearance of the Trinity Absolute, the Paradise Trinity and the Triniy Ultimate could maintain a two-way "relationship." It would seem that this relationship becomes forever modified with the appearance of the third trinity. Three trinities in functional relationship must eventuate a new "system," even a "system of systems." The appearance of this new threefold system must thereupon eventuate in the trinity-totaling of three trinity-totals — the appearance of the Trinity of Trinities. This threefold trinity eventuates as the unification, the totaling of all actual (and actualizing) deity — existential and experiential — and provides the foundation whereon trinity may seek for final projection of deity personalization, the attempt to experientialize the existential Infinite. <a id="s40_799"></a>[UB 106:8.8-12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p8_8)

## § 2. The inventory of Three Trinities

The Papers inform us that the Trinity of Trinities is "an existential-experiential Trinity Infinite." <a id="s44_102"></a>[UB 0:12.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_9) If this is the case, then it should exhibit some of the characteristics of an experiential trinity. We have observed that experiential trinities seem to pass through three stages of growth: qualified reality, factual reality, and unified reality. ([Appendix XIX § 4](/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_19#h-4-a-comparison-of-trinities)) We suspect that the threefold trinity is now a qualified reality of some degree, and there is some indication in the Papers that this is the case. <a id="s44_677"></a>[UB 106:8.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p8_20) We are more interested, however, as to when this multiple-trinity can actually form as a factual reality. We do not believe that this can take place until the three constituent trinities have also formed as factual and actual trinities. This being the case, let us take a quantitative inventory of these trinities and follow this by making a qualitative inventory of these same trinities.

_A quantitative inventory of trinities._ When is it that each of these three trinities achieves the status of a factual reality? We can tabulate the data concerned:
- (a) _The Paradise Trinity._ This is the trinity of the deity-union of the Universal Father, the Eternal Son, and the Infinite Spirit. It has always existed as a factual reality; it is eternal and existential. <a id="s47_211"></a>[UB 8:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/8#p0_1)
- (b) _The Ultimate Trinity._ This is the trinity of the deity-union of the Supreme Being, the Supreme-Creator-Corps, and the Architect-Corps. <a id="s48_143"></a>[UB 0:12.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_6) It cannot actually form as a factual reality until Supreme Deity has emerged <a id="s48_262"></a>[UB 117:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/117#p7_4), and until the deity of the Supreme-Creator-Corps has evolved. ([Appendix X § 3](/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_10#h-3-evolution-of-the-members-of-the-trinity-ultimate)) Presumably, both events will take place at the end of the Second Universe Age, the present age, with the perfection of the superuniverses. (Here we are assuming that the deity-presence of the Architect-Corps is a completed deity-entity, hence already available for trinity membership.)
- (c) _The Absolute Trinity._ This is the trinity composed of Supreme Deity, Ultimate Deity, and the Unrevealed Consummator of Universe Destiny. <a id="s49_145"></a>[UB 0:12.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_7) It could hardly form as a factual reality until the Ultimate has fully emerged at the end of the Sixth Age, with the final completion of the master universe — from the seven superuniverses to the Quartan Space Level. <a id="s49_404"></a>[UB 106:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p5_2)

From this data we may conclude that the Trinity of Trinities cannot form as an actual fact — as a factual reality — until after the Sixth Universe Age (the completion of the master universe) and the emergence of the Ultimate. Any functions of this multiple-trinity prior to that time would have to be as a qualified reality.

_A qualitative inventory of trinities._ What kinds of trinities are we studying? Are they all alike? Each one of them is a trinity, but otherwise they appear to be quite different. The Paradise Trinity is existential and infinite <a id="s53_230"></a>[UB 0:12.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_9); it is also absolute. <a id="s53_294"></a>[UB 10:5.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/10#p5_6) The two post-Havona trinities are not existential; they are experiential <a id="s53_409"></a>[UB 0:12.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_1), and they are not infinite. <a id="s53_479"></a>[UB 0:12.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_3) These two post-Havona trinities are both experiential and subinfinite in status, but otherwise they are not alike. The Ultimate Trinity is subabsolute as well as subinfinite. This is the trinity that fosters the evolutionary co-ordination of the master universe <a id="s53_783"></a>[UB 106:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p3_2), and the master universe is neither absolute nor infinite. <a id="s53_886"></a>[UB 106:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p6_1) The full unification of the Trinity Ultimate will cause the final emergence of God the Ultimate <a id="s53_1026"></a>[UB 0:12.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_6) and, while the Ultimate is absonite and transcendental <a id="s53_1123"></a>[UB 106:8.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p8_15), he is not an absolute deity. <a id="s53_1199"></a>[UB 106:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p4_4) In contrast to all this, the Trinity Absolute (as might be deduced from its name) is "absolute in total function" <a id="s53_1357"></a>[UB 106:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p6_4), and its objectives are qualitatively absolute and quantitatively infinite. <a id="s53_1477"></a>[UB 106:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p6_3)

There is another difference between the two post-Havona trinities; this is a difference in unification. Trinities can form and become factual realities, but experiential trinities still have to earn a unified status before they can become undivided deity — Deity Unity. <a id="s55_270"></a>[UB 56:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/56#p5_4) The Ultimate Trinity is subinfinite and is able to unify completely <a id="s55_380"></a>[UB 0:12.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_8) because its objectives are also subinfinite. The Absolute Trinity is subinfinite and is not able to unify completely (ibid) because its objectives are not subinfinite <a id="s55_589"></a>[UB 106:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p6_5), and the final quantitative realization of these objectives would imply the exhaustion of infinity. <a id="s55_733"></a>[UB 106:7.2-3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p7_2); [Appendix XIX § 6](/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_19#h-6-non-unification-of-the-trinity-absolute))

We are now in position to summarize the qualitative inventory of the three trinities that constitute the Trinity of Trinities. They seem to have the following characteristics:
- (a) _The Paradise Trinity._ The Original Trinity is existential, absolute, infinite, and unified.
- (b) _The Trinity Ultimate._ The First Experiential Trinity is experiential, subabsolute, subinfinite, and unified.
- (c) _The Trinity Absolute._ The Second Experiential Trinity is experiential, absolute, subinfinite, and not unified.

At the close of the Sixth Universe Age, the Paradise Trinity is, as always, a factual reality and perfectly unified. The Trinity Ultimate is also a finished entity — completely unified. But the Trinity Absolute is apparently caught in a stalemate: its full unification is involved in a growth process, the completion of which seems to require the reaching of the ends of eternity and the exhausting of the potentials of infinity!

## § 3. The stage of incompletion: Stage One

Since each of the three component trinities is in existence as a factual reality, there is no reason why the Trinity of Trinities cannot also form as a factual entity. The First Level of this multiple-trinity consists of three trinities. This we can visualize without difficulty because each of these three trinities is present as a factual entity.

(In the analysis of the Trinity of Trinities in this Appendix, we are following the structure of the threefold trinity as it is presented in the Papers on page <a id="s68_160"></a>[UB 106:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p8_1), "The Trinity of Trinities.")

We encounter problems on the Second Level. This level is supposed to be made up of the union of three deities: Supreme Deity, Ultimate Deity, and "the Absolute." The first two members are factually present; they have fully emerged as deities of experiential nature. The third member is completely missing; God the Absolute has not emerged as an experiential actuality. There may be some sort of _qualified_ pre-presence of God the absolute, because the Second Experiential Trinity is a factual reality and is trying to unify; but there is no _factual_ presence of "the Absolute" because the Second Experiential Trinity is not able to unify, and the unification of this trinity is necessary to "experientialize Absolute Deity." <a id="s70_727"></a>[UB 0:12.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_7)

(The Deity Absolute is present, but the Deity Absolute is existential <a id="s72_70"></a>[ [UB 0:2.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p2_18)] and potential <a id="s72_129"></a>[UB 0:11.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p11_6) hence would appear to be non-functional in a trinity union with experiential and actual deity. This Absolute would have to undergo some degree of "experiential personalization" <a id="s72_348"></a>[UB 56:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/56#p9_5) before becoming functional [in that same degree] with experiential deity on the Second Level of the Trinity of Trinities.)

_Incomplete status._ We are blocked at this point in the effort to visualize the structure of the threefold trinity. We cannot even complete the Second Level — much less try to go on to the Third (and final) Level. We would designate this situation as Stage One in the formation of the Trinity of Trinities — the Stage of Incompletion.

_Compensated incompletion._ The Trinity of Trinities could still function despite the fact that it is incomplete. One of its constituent members is the Paradise Trinity, and this trinity (being infinite) could compensate any deficiencies in the multiple-trinity. Such compensated function would not, however, be the mature function of the Trinity of Trinities because such a compensating action by the Paradise Trinity would be purely existential and, in a sense, superimposed on the existential-experiential function of the threefold trinity. (As we contemplate the future growth of the Trinity of Trinities, it would appear that its full function will always require compensatory support from the Paradise Trinity. Such compensatory action may progressively diminish as the Trinity of Trinities progressively grows in unification, but we do not believe it will never entirely stop because it is not likely that the threefold trinity will ever achieve final and complete unification.)

## § 4. Supreme-Ultimate Trinitization

We have reached an impasse, a stalemate, in the study of the factual formation of the Trinity of Trinities. The First Level of this trinity can form in fact; apparently the Second Level cannot! The deity presence of God the Absolute is lacking on the Second Level, and it is lacking because he cannot emerge. He is unable to emerge because the Trinity Absolute (that should experientialize him) is unable to unify, and this trinity cannot unify because it is impossible to encompass infinity.

We do not see how this stalemate can be broken except through the trinitization of God the Absolute by the two experiential deities who have emerged and who are factually present on the cosmic stage of action. This line of reasoning is derived from a passage in the Papers:

> ". . . the eternal Paradise Trinity is an ever-present reminder that Deity trinitization may accomplish what is otherwise non-attainable; hence do we postulate the sometime appearance of the _Supreme-Ultimate_ and the possible trinitization-factualization of God the absolute." <a id="s84_280"></a>[UB 0:12.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_8)

The Paradise Trinity becomes existent when the Universal Father and the Eternal Son unite in the unlimited act of the deity trinitization of the Conjoint Actor, their infinite co-ordinate. <a id="s86_189"></a>[UB 8:0.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/8#p0_4); <a id="s86_230"></a>[UB 8:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/8#p1_3) What would happen if the Supreme and the Ultimate should engage in a similar deity-trinitizing action?

The Supreme and the Ultimate are subinfinite but (probably) coabsolute beings. ([Appendix XIX § 3](/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_19#h-3-the-growth-of-the-supreme)) The results of trinitizing action on their part would also be subinfinite, but probably not subabsolute. We believe that their trinitized expression of God the Absolute will be limited in universality (infinity) of reality but not limited in (absolute) quality of being. We have chosen to designate this being as the "trinitized expression of God the Absolute," or as the "Limited-Absolute." ([Appendix XXV, The Trinitized Nature of God the Absolute](/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_25).)

## § 5. The stage of initial factual reality: Stage Two

Given the appearance of God the Absolute, do we now have a complete Trinity of Trinities? We think not. This trinity can now form as a factual reality on two levels: the Second Level can be factually completed but it can be completed only in an initial sense, not in a final sense.

The trinitized expression of God the Absolute represents the maximum effort of the Supreme-Ultimate to mobilize the prepersonal potentials of the Deity Absolute and to personify them, to experientialize them in actuality. But neither the Supreme nor the Ultimate is infinite. <a id="s94_276"></a>[UB 0:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p9_5) We believe that the resulting personalization of deity will be absolute in _quality_ of divinity, but subinfinite in _quantity_ or universality of Reality encompassed in the trinitizing episode. In other words, the Supreme-Ultimate will be able to mobilize some significant part of the existential potential of the Deity absolute (and other Absolutes?) but not, by any means, all of this potential. <a id="s94_715"></a>[UB 106:8.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p8_20)

And, if the trinitized expression of God the Absolute is qualified and incomplete, then it is reasonable that the deity presence of this Limited-Absolute on the Second Level will also be qualified and incomplete. The one is different from the other, but we do not see how the one can be more than the other — in quantity or universality of reality.

What may we say about the Third Level? At this stage of development, the Universal Absolute would seem to represent the best concept of the Third Level. <a id="s98_153"></a>[UB 56:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/56#p9_5) At this stage of development, the Trinity of Trinities is by no means completely unified:
- (a) The Trinity Absolute, one of the constituent trinities, is still pre-unified.
- (b) The Limited-Absolute on the Second Level falls short of encompassing the whole of the Deity Absolute — much less of all three Absolutes. It has achieved a limited experiential absoluteness of being and function — but not in the universal sense.
- (c) The Second Level is pre-unified. We should remember that this level is also the corporative union of three experiential deities, hence trinity. ([Appendix XXIV, The Third Experiential Trinity](/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_24))

It would still require the independent action of the Paradise Trinity to activate those boundless and untouched potentials of the Deity Absolute that would still be external to the Limited-Absolute, hence also external to the Trinity of Trinities. A beachhead has indeed been established on the shores of infinity, but the establishment of this initial beachhead falls far short of the encompassment of infinity.

## § 6. The stage of growing unification: Stage Three

If we may assume the trinitized appearance of God the Absolute and the factual formation of the First and Second Level of the Trinities of Trinities, then we may continue our study of the further growth of this multiple-trinity. We do have a factual minimum of all requisite members on the first two levels — although hardly a maximum. Further growth toward trinity unification might include:
- (a) _The Trinity Absolute._ The Second Experiential Trinity is still far from completely unified; it falls very short of any sort of universal function; it is a growing reality, always taking in more and more — but never all. As it continues to grow in unification, this augments the experiential "personality focalization" and "power mobilization" of God the Absolute. <a id="s108_372"></a>[UB 0:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p9_3)
- (b) _God the Absolute_ is incomplete, hence can grow. He is factually present and can "personally" participate in the furtherance of his growth. (We have used the term "personally" to distinguish such participation from the "prepersonal" growth of the two earlier appearing experiential deities <a id="s109_297"></a>[ [UB 10:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/10#p5_5)] prior to their emergence.) ([Appendix XXV § 3 - 4](/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_25#h-3-the-personal-growth-of-the-limited-absolute))
- (c) _A unique relationship_ will likely exist between the Trinity absolute (whose non-unification makes it impossible for God the Absolute to emerge) and the emerged factual presence of the same God the Absolute (as a result of the trinitized expression of the Supreme-Ultimate.)
- (d) _The Second Level_ of Trinity of Trinities consists of Supreme Deity, Ultimate Deity, and the Limited Absolute. It appears to have all the characteristics of trinity and undoubtedly seeks for unification. ([Appendix XXIV](/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_24))
- (e) _Total unification_. The whole Trinity of Trinities appears to have the characteristics of trinity, hence (as total entity) it, too, will be growing towards unification.

If these are some of the activities that may characterize the eternal stages of growing unification, then to what do they point on the Third Level of the threefold trinity? We postulate that so long as any part of the residual potential of the Deity Absolute (and the other Absolutes) remains external to the Limited-Absolute, hence external to the Trinity of Trinities, it will be impossible for this trinity to achieve finality of unification and universality of function. During the eternal ages of growing unification the three Absolutes will still be almost totally external to the multiple-trinity. And no matter how much growth or unification takes place, these three Absolutes will still be almost totally external to this trinity. These Absolutes are inexhaustible — infinite in potential. It accordingly appears that the best conception of the Third Level of the Trinity of Trinities is still the presence of the Universal Absolute. <a id="s114_943"></a>[UB 56:9.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/56#p9_5) We should take note of the opinion of a Universal Censor <a id="s114_1042"></a>[UB 10:8.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/10#p8_8), who believes that the complexity and unfathomability of the Universal Absolute may be growing in direct proportion to the growth of the cosmos — and we are here considering a Cosmos Infinite.

This is not, however, a stalemate; this is a dynamic situation of unending growth.

We are instructed that the Paradise Trinity, when viewed from the finite perspective, is not concerned with anything except the total of a given situation, be it planet, universe, or grand universe. <a id="s118_199"></a>[UB 10:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/10#p7_2) We may ask the question: Will the threefold trinity, as it pursues its eternal goal of unification, disclose a concern for only the total of totals?

## § 7. The hypothetical stage of completion

Suppose, just suppose, that the Trinity of Trinities could actually unify in the total sense. On the First Level there would be three perfectly unified trinities, the existential trinity and the two experiential trinities. On the Second Level there would be the union of Supreme Deity, Ultimate Deity, and absolute Deity — and this would be _the_ Absolute, with no qualifications or limitations. Given such conditions, what would be present on the Third Level?

Within such philosophic _concept_, which will never become a _reality_, we have probably come close to visualizing the destiny-end of eternity. Just for comparison, let us review the picture that the Papers present of the causal-end of eternity. They describe "the hypothetical static moment of eternity" when the Infinite fills all things. <a id="s124_341"></a>[UB 105:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/105#p1_5) This must be the closest approach we can make to a pre-existential concept <a id="s124_460"></a>[UB 106:0.9,17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/106#p0_9); we are visualizing, or trying to visualize, pure and undiluted infinity in past-eternity.

Now that we have examined the _causal_-end of eternity, let us go forward again in concept to view the _destiny_-end of eternity — to view the concept of the final unification of the Trinity of Trinities. In the writer's belief, this is the "other hypothetical static moment of eternity." But there is a great difference: This would not be the "hypothetical _static_ moment;" this visualization of the future would be better designated as the "hypothetical _static-dynamic_ moment of eternity." This must be about as close as we can come to a post-experiential concept. (ibid)

In the theoretical static moment of past eternity, ". . . actuals are still contained within their potentials and potentials have not yet appeared . . ." <a id="s128_154"></a>[UB 105:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/105#p1_5)

In the theoretical static-dynamic moment of future eternity, all potentials would have been actualized; they would have been completely exhausted by having become infinitely experientialized. Hence the designation, "static-dynamic." This is the theoretical moment when the dynamics of pre-creativity, creativity, evolution, eventuation, and super-creativity would finally become static because there would be nothing left to actualize; there would be nothing more to do. It would be finished; all potentials would have become actual.

At this hypothetical static-dynamic moment in future eternity, the Universal Absolute no longer serves as an adequate concept for the presence on the Third Level of the Trinity of Trinities. This has to be true, because in this theoretical situation the Absolute would occupy the Second Level of this multiple-trinity in union with Supreme Deity and Ultimate Deity. And when we say the Absolute, we refer to the infinite unification of all three — "in infinity there are ONE." <a id="s132_477"></a>[UB 0:11.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p11_15) And if they ever could become experientially unified (as they are existentially so unified) then all three Absolutes — Deity, Universal, and Unqualified — would be united in and as one presence on the Second Level of the Trinity of Trinities.

At the destiny-end of eternity, we would expect to find the Infinite at the Third Level of the Trinity of Trinities. We encounter the Infinite (in concept) at the causal-end of eternity; we again encounter him (in concept) at the destiny-end. But this theoretical situation is valid only as a _concept_; as a _reality_ it is eternally remote.

Again to cite the opinion of the Universal Censor: "Only infinity can disclose the Father-Infinite." <a id="s136_101"></a>[UB 10:8.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/10#p8_9)


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_22"><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Appendix XXII. Power-Personality Synthesis</span></a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe#index"><span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span></a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler_Jr/Appendices_to_Study_of_the_Master_Universe/Appendix_24"><span class="pr-2">Appendix XXIV. The Third Experiential Trinity</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span></a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>