---
title: "Sibylline Oracles — Book I"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/Preface">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Preface</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Sibylline Oracles — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/2">
          <span class="pr-2">Book II</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p14">[<sup><small>p. 14</small></sup>]</span>

## CONTENTS OF BOOK I.

Announcement, 1-5. Creation of the earth and man, 6-47. First sin and penalty, 48-81. Condition of the first race, 82-107. The second race of men, 108-129. Third and fourth races, 130-148. The race of giants, 149-153. Call and preaching of Noah, 154-243. Entrance into the ark, and the flood, 244-281. Abatement of the waters, 282-319. Exit from the ark, 320-343. The sixth race and the Titans, 344-386. Prophecy of Christ, 387-468. Dispersion of the Hebrews, 469-485.

## BOOK I

<span id="p15">[<sup><small>p. 15</small></sup>]</span>

BEGINNING with the generation first[^1]
Of mortal men down to the very last
I'll prophesy each thing: what erst has been,
And what is now, and what shall yet befall
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> The world through the impiety of men.
First now God urges on me to relate
Truly how into being came the world.
And thou, shrewd mortal, prudently make known,
Lest ever thou should'st my commands neglect,
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span> The King most high, who brought into existence
The whole world, saying, “Let there be,” and there was.
For he the earth established, placing it
Round about Tartarus, and he himself[^13]

(1-10.)

<span id="p16">[<sup><small>p. 16</small></sup>]</span>

Gave the sweet light; he raised the heaven on high,
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span> Spread out the gleaming sea, and crowned the sky
With an abundance of bright-shining stars,
And decked the earth with plants, and mingled sea
With rivers, and the air with zephyrs mixed
And watery clouds; and then, another race
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span> Appointing, he gave fishes to the seas
And birds unto the winds, and to the woods
The beasts of shaggy neck, and snakes that crawl,
And all things which now on the earth appear.
These by his word he made, and every thing
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span> Was speedily and with precision done;
For he was self-caused and from heaven looked down
And finished was the world exceeding well.
And then thereafter fashioned he again
A living product, copying a new man
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span> From his own image, beautiful, divine,
And bade him in ambrosial garden dwell,
That labors beautiful might be his care.
But in that fertile field of Paradise
He longed for conversation, being alone,
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span> And prayed that he might see another form
Such as he had. And forthwith, from man's side
Taking a bone, God himself made fair Eve,
A wedded spouse, and in that Paradise
Gave her to dwell with him. And, when he gazed
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span> Upon her, on a sudden filled with joy
Great admiration held his soul, he saw
A pattern so exact; and with wise words
Spontaneous flowing answered he in turn
For God had care for all things. For the mind
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span> They darkened not with passion, nor concealed
Their nakedness, but with hearts far from evil

(11-36.)

<span id="p17">[<sup><small>p. 17</small></sup>]</span>

Even like wild beasts they walked with limbs exposed.
And afterwards delivering them commands[^48]
God showed them not to touch a certain tree;
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span> But the dread serpent drew them off by guile
To go away unto the fate of death
And to gain knowledge of both good and evil.
But the wife then first traitress proved to God;
She gave, and urged the unknowing man to sin.
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span> And he, persuaded by the woman's words,
Forgot the immortal Maker utterly,
And treated plain commandments with neglect.
Therefore, instead of good, received they evil
According to their deed. And then the leaves
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span> Of the sweet fig-tree piercing they made clothes
And put them on each other, and concealed
The sexual parts, because they were ashamed.
But on them the Immortal set his wrath
And cast them out of the immortal land.
<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span> For their abiding now in mortal land
Was brought to pass, since hearing they kept not
The word of the immortal mighty God.
And straightway they, upon the fruitful soil
Forthgoing, with their tears and groans were wet;
<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span> And to them then the immortal God himself
A word more excellent spoke: "Multiply,
Increase, work constantly upon the earth,
That with the sweat of labor ye may have
Sufficient food." Thus he spoke; and he made
<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span> The author of deceit to press the ground
On belly and on side, a crawling snake,
Driving him out severely; and he sent
Dire enmity between them and the one

(37-61.)

<span id="p18">[<sup><small>p. 18</small></sup>]</span>

Is on the look-out to preserve his head,
<span id="v80"><sup><small>80</small></sup></span> But man his heel; for death is neighbor near
Of evil-plotting vipers and of men.
And then indeed the race was multiplied
As the Almighty himself gave command,
And there grew up one people on another
<span id="v85"><sup><small>85</small></sup></span> Innumerable. And houses they adorned
Of all kinds and made cities and their walls
Well and expertly; and to them was given
A day of long time for a life much-loved;[^88]
For they did not worn out with troubles die,
<span id="v90"><sup><small>90</small></sup></span> But as subdued by sleep; most happy men
Of great heart, whom the immortal Saviour loved,
The King, God. But they also did transgress,
Smitten with folly. For with impudence
They mocked their fathers and their mothers scorned;
<span id="v95"><sup><small>95</small></sup></span> Kinsmen they knew not, and they formed intrigues
Against their brothers. And they were impure,
Having defiled themselves with human gore,
And they made wars. And then upon them came
The last calamity sent forth from heaven,
<span id="v100"><sup><small>100</small></sup></span> Which snatched the dreadful men away from life;
And Hades then received them; it was called[^102]
Hades since Adam, having tasted death,
Went first and earth encompassed him around.
And therefore all men born upon the earth
<span id="v105"><sup><small>105</small></sup></span> Are in abodes of Hades called to go.

(62-84.)

<span id="p19">[<sup><small>p. 19</small></sup>]</span>

But even in Hades all these when they came
Had honor, since they were the earliest race.
But when Hades received these, secondly
[Of the surviving and most righteous men][^109]
<span id="v110"><sup><small>110</small></sup></span> God formed another very subtile race
That cared for lovely works, and noble toils,
Distinguished reverence and solid wisdom;
And they were trained in arts of every kind,
Finding inventions by their lack of means.
<span id="v115"><sup><small>115</small></sup></span> And one devised to till the land with plows,
Another worked in wood, another cared
For sailing, and another watched the stars
And practiced augury with winged fowls;
And use of drugs had interest for one,
<span id="v120"><sup><small>120</small></sup></span> While for another magic had a charm;
And others were in every other art
Which men care for instructed, wide awake,
Industrious, worthy of that eponym
Because they had a sleepless mind within
<span id="v125"><sup><small>125</small></sup></span> And a huge body; stout with mighty form
They were; but, notwithstanding, down they went
Into Tartarean chamber terrible,
Kept in firm chains to pay full penalty
In Gehenna of strong, furious, quenchless fire.
<span id="v130"><sup><small>130</small></sup></span> And after these a third strong-minded race[^130]
Appeared, a race of overbearing men
And terrible, who wrought among themselves

(86-106.)

<span id="p20">[<sup><small>p. 20</small></sup>]</span>

Many an evil. And fights, homicides,
And battles did continually destroy
<span id="v135"><sup><small>135</small></sup></span> Those men possessed of overweening heart,
And from these afterward another race
Proceeded, late-completed, youngest born,
Blood-stained, perverse in counsel; of men these
Were in the fourth race; much the blood they spilled,
<span id="v140"><sup><small>140</small></sup></span> Nor feared they God nor had regard for men,
For maddening wrath and sore impiety
Were sent upon them. And wars, homicides,[^143]
And battles sent some into Erebus,
Since they were overweening impious men.
<span id="v145"><sup><small>145</small></sup></span> But the rest did the heavenly God himself
In anger afterwards change from his world,
Casting them into mighty Tartarus
Down under the foundation of the earth.
And later yet another race much worse
<span id="v150"><sup><small>150</small></sup></span> [Of men he made, to whom no good thereafter]
The Immortal formed, since they wrought many evils.
For they were much more violent than those,
Giants perverse, foul language pouring out.[^153]
Single among all men, most just and true,
<span id="v155"><sup><small>155</small></sup></span> Was the most faithful Noah, full of care
For noblest works. And to him God himself
From heaven thus spoke: "Noah, be of good cheer
In thyself and to all the people preach
Repentance, so that they may all be saved.
<span id="v160"><sup><small>160</small></sup></span> But if, with shameless soul, they heed me not
The whole race I will utterly destroy

(107-131.)

<span id="p21">[<sup><small>p. 21</small></sup>]</span>

With mighty floods of waters. Quickly now
An undecaying house I bid thee frame
Of planks strong and impervious to the wet.
<span id="v165"><sup><small>165</small></sup></span> I will put understanding in thy heart,
And subtile skill, and rule of measurement
And order; and for all things will I care
That thou be saved, and all who dwell with thee.
And I am He who is, and in thy heart
<span id="v170"><sup><small>170</small></sup></span> Do thou discern. I clothe me with the heaven,
And cast the sea around me, and for me
Earth is a footstool, and the air is poured
Around my body; and on every side
Around me runs the chorus of the stars.
<span id="v175"><sup><small>175</small></sup></span> Nine letters have I; of four syllables[^175]
I am; discern me. The first three have each
Two letters, the remaining one the rest,
And five are mates; and of the entire sum
The hundreds are twice eight and thrice three tens
<span id="v180"><sup><small>180</small></sup></span> Along with seven. Now, knowing who I am,

(131-145.)

<span id="p22">[<sup><small>p. 22</small></sup>]</span>

Be thou not uninitiate in my lore."
Thus he spoke; and great trembling seized on him
At what he heard. And then, within his mind
Having contrived each matter, he besought[^184]
<span id="v185"><sup><small>185</small></sup></span> The people and began with words like these:
"O men insatiate, smit with madness great,
Whatever things ye practiced they shall not
Escape God's notice; for he knows all things,
Immortal Saviour overseeing all,
<span id="v190"><sup><small>190</small></sup></span> Who bade me warn you, that ye perish not.
Be sober, cut off badness, do not fight
Perforce each other with blood-guilty heart,
Nor irrigate much land with human gore.
Revere, O mortals, the supremely great
<span id="v195"><sup><small>195</small></sup></span> And fearless heavenly Creator, God
Imperishable, whose dwelling is the sky;
And do ye all entreat him—he is kind—
For life of cities and of all the world,
And of four-footed beasts and flying fowls;
<span id="v200"><sup><small>200</small></sup></span> Entreat him to be gracious unto all.
For when the whole unbounded world of men
Shall be destroyed by waters loud ye'll raise

(146-163.)

<span id="p23">[<sup><small>p. 23</small></sup>]</span>

A fearful cry. And suddenly for you
The air shall be disordered, and from heaven
<span id="v205"><sup><small>205</small></sup></span> The fury of the mighty God shall come
Upon you. And it certainly shall be
That the immortal Saviour against men
Will send wrath if ye do not placate God
And from this time repent; and nothing more
<span id="v210"><sup><small>210</small></sup></span> Fretful and evil lawlessly shall ye
One to another do, but let there be
A guarding of one's self by holy life."
But when they heard him each turned up his nose,
Calling him mad, a frenzy-smitten man.
<span id="v215"><sup><small>215</small></sup></span> And then again did Noah sound this strain:
"O men exceeding wretched, base in heart,
Unstable, leaving modesty behind
And loving shamelessness, rapacious lords,
Fierce sinners, false, insatiate, mischievous,
<span id="v220"><sup><small>220</small></sup></span> In nothing true, stealthy adulterers,
Flippant in language, pouring forth foul words,
The wrath of God most high not fearing, kept
To the fifth generation to atone!
In no way do ye wail, harsh men, but laugh;
<span id="v225"><sup><small>225</small></sup></span> Sardonic smile shall ye laugh, when shall come[^225]
That which I speak—God's dire incoming flood,
When Eve's polluted race, in the great earth
Blooming perennial in impervious stem,
Shall, root and branch, in one night disappear,
<span id="v230"><sup><small>230</small></sup></span> And cities, men and all, shall the Earth-shaker[^230]

(164-187.)

<span id="p24">[<sup><small>p. 24</small></sup>]</span>

From the depths scatter and their walls destroy.
And then the whole world of unnumbered men
Shall die. But how shall I weep, how lament
In wooden house, how mingle tears with waves?
<span id="v235"><sup><small>235</small></sup></span> For, if this water bidden of God shall come,
Earth shall float, hills float, and even sky shall float;
Everything shall be water, and all things
Shall be destroyed by waters. And the winds
Shall stand still, and a second age shall come.
<span id="v240"><sup><small>240</small></sup></span> O Phrygia, thou shalt from the water's crest[^240]
First rise up, and thou first another race
Of men shalt nourish, once again anew
Beginning; and thou shalt be nurse for all."
But when now to the lawless generation
<span id="v245"><sup><small>245</small></sup></span> He had thus vainly spoken, the Most High
Appeared, and once more cried aloud and said:
"The time is now come, Noah, to proclaim
Each thing, even all which I that day to thee
Did promise and confirm, and to complete,
<span id="v250"><sup><small>250</small></sup></span> Because of a people disobedient,
Throughout the boundless world even all the things
Which generations of a former time
Did practice, evil things innumerable.
But do thou quickly enter with thy sons
<span id="v255"><sup><small>255</small></sup></span> And the wives. Call as many as I bid,
Of tribes of beasts and creeping things and birds,
And in as many as I ordain for life
Will I then put a willingness to go."
Thus spoke he; forth went (Noah) and aloud
<span id="v260"><sup><small>260</small></sup></span> Cried out and called. And then wife, sons and brides,
Entered the house of wood; then also went

(188-212.)

<span id="p25">[<sup><small>p. 25</small></sup>]</span>

The other things, as many as God willed
To shut in. But when fitting bolt was put
About the lid, and in its polished place
<span id="v265"><sup><small>265</small></sup></span> Was fitted sideways, then was brought to pass
Forthwith the purpose of the God of heaven.
And he massed clouds, and bid the sun's bright disk,
And moon, and stars, and circle of the heaven,
Obscuring all things round; he thundered loud,
<span id="v270"><sup><small>270</small></sup></span> Terror of mortals, sending lightnings forth;
And all the winds together were aroused,
And all the veins of water were unloosed
By opening of great cataracts from heaven,
And from earth's caverns and the tireless deep
<span id="v275"><sup><small>275</small></sup></span> Appeared the myriad waters, and the whole
Illimitable earth was covered o'er.
But on the water swam that wondrous house;
And torn by many furious waves, and struck
By force of winds, it rushed on fearfully;
<span id="v280"><sup><small>280</small></sup></span> But with its keel it cut the mass of foam
While the loud-babbling waters dashed around.
But when God deluged all the world with rains
Then also Noah took thought to observe
By counsels of the Immortal; for he now
<span id="v285"><sup><small>285</small></sup></span> Had had enough of Nereus. And straightway[^285]
The house he opened from the polished wall,
That crosswise was bound fast with skillful stays.
And looking out upon the mighty mass
Of boundless waters Noah on all sides—

(218-235.)

<span id="p26">[<sup><small>p. 26</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v290"><sup><small>290</small></sup></span> And 'twas his fortune with his eyes to see!—[^290]
Fear possessed and shook mightily his heart.
And then the air became a little calm,
Since it was weary wetting all the world
Many days; parting, then, it brought to light
<span id="v295"><sup><small>295</small></sup></span> How pale and blood-red was the mighty sky
And sun's bright disk awearied; scarcely held
Noah his courage. And then forth afar
Sent he a dove alone, that he might learn
If yet firm land appeared. But with tired wing,
<span id="v300"><sup><small>300</small></sup></span> Flying round all things, she again returned;
For not yet had the water ebbed away;
For it was deeply filling every place.
But after resting quietly for days
He sent the dove once more, to learn if yet
<span id="v305"><sup><small>305</small></sup></span> Had ceased the many waters. And she flew
And flew on, and went o'er the earth and, resting
Her body lightly on the humid ground,
Again to Noah back she came and bore
An olive branch—of tidings a great sign.
<span id="v310"><sup><small>310</small></sup></span> Courage now filled them all, and great delight,
Because they hoped to look upon the land.
But then thereafter yet another bird,
Of black wing, sent he forth as hastily;
Which, trusting to its wings, flow willingly,
<span id="v315"><sup><small>315</small></sup></span> And coming to the land continued there.
And Noah knew the land was nearer now.
But when on dashing waves the craft divine
Had here and there o'er ocean's billows swum,
It was made fast upon the narrow strand.
<span id="v320"><sup><small>320</small></sup></span> There is in Phrygia on the dark mainland

(236-261.)

<span id="p27">[<sup><small>p. 27</small></sup>]</span>

A steep, tall mountain; Ararat its name,[^321]
Because upon it all were to be saved
From death, and there was great desire of heart;[^323]
Thence streams of the great river Marsyas spring.[^324]
<span id="v325"><sup><small>325</small></sup></span> There on a lofty peak the ark abode
When the waters ceased, and then again from heaven
The voice divine of the great God this word
Proclaimed: "O Noah, guarded, faithful, just,
Come boldly forth, with thy sons and thy wife
<span id="v330"><sup><small>330</small></sup></span> And the three brides, and fill ye all the earth,
Increasing, multiplying, rendering justice
To one another through all generations,
Until to judgment every race of men
Shall come; for judgment shall be unto all."
<span id="v335"><sup><small>335</small></sup></span> Thus spoke the voice divine. Then from his couch
Noah, encouraged, hastened on the land,
And with him went his sons and wife and brides,
And creeping things, and birds and quadrupeds,
And all things else went from the wooden house
<span id="v340"><sup><small>340</small></sup></span> Into one place. And then went Noah forth
As eighth, most just of men, when on the waters
He had made full twice twenty days and one[^342]
Because of counsels of the mighty God.
Then a new stock of life again arose,
<span id="v345"><sup><small>345</small></sup></span> Golden first, which indeed was sixth, and best,

(262-284.)

<span id="p28">[<sup><small>p. 28</small></sup>]</span>

From the time when the first-formed man appeared;
Heavenly its name, because all things to God
Shall be a care. O first race of sixth age![^348]
O mighty joy which I thereafter shared,
<span id="v350"><sup><small>350</small></sup></span> When I escaped sheer ruin, by the waves
Much tossed, with husband and with brothers-in-law,
Stepfather and stepmother, and with wives
Of husband's brothers suffering terribly.
Fitting things now will I sing: There shall be
<span id="v355"><sup><small>355</small></sup></span> On the fig-tree a many-colored flower,[^355]
And afterward the royal power and sway
Shall Cronos have. For three kings of great soul,[^357]
Men most just, shall distribute portions then,
And many a year rule, rendering what is just
<span id="v360"><sup><small>360</small></sup></span> To men who care for toil and deeds of love.
And earth shall glory in her many fruits
Self-growing, yielding much corn for the race.
And the foster-fathers, ageless all their days,
Shall from diseases chill and dreadful be
<span id="v365"><sup><small>365</small></sup></span> Far aloof; they shall die as fallen on sleep,
And unto Acheron in the abodes[^366]
Of Hades they shall go away, and there
Shall they have honor, since they were a race

(285-303.)

<span id="p29">[<sup><small>p. 29</small></sup>]</span>

Of blessed ones, fortunate heroes, whom
<span id="v370"><sup><small>370</small></sup></span> The Lord of Sabaoth gave a noble mind,
And with whom always he his counsels shared.
But blessed shall they be even when they go
In Hades. And then afterward again
Oppressive, strong, another second race
<span id="v375"><sup><small>375</small></sup></span> Of earth-born men, the Titans. All excel[^375]
In figure, stature, growth; and there shall be
One language, as of old from the first race
God in their breasts implanted. But even these,
Having a haughty heart and rushing on
<span id="v380"><sup><small>380</small></sup></span> To ruin, shall at last resolve to fight
Against the starry heaven. And then the stream
Of the great ocean shall upon them pour
Its raging waters. But the mighty Lord
Of Sabaoth though enraged shall check his wrath,
<span id="v385"><sup><small>385</small></sup></span> Because he promised that again no flood
Should be brought upon men of evil soul.
But when the great high-thundering God shall cause
The boundless swelling of the many waters—
With their waves hither and thither rising high—
<span id="v390"><sup><small>390</small></sup></span> To cease from wrath, and into other depths
Of sea their measure lessen, setting bounds
By harbors and rough headlands round the land;
Then also shall a child of the great God
Come, clothed in flesh, to men, and fashioned like
<span id="v395"><sup><small>395</small></sup></span> To mortals in the earth; and he doth hear

(304-326.)

<span id="p30">[<sup><small>p. 30</small></sup>]</span>

Four vowels, and two consonants in him[^396]
Are twice announced; the whole sum I will name:
For eight ones, and as many tens on these,
And yet eight hundred will reveal the name
<span id="v400"><sup><small>400</small></sup></span> To men insatiate; and do thou discern
In thine own understanding that the Christ
Is child of the immortal God most high.
And he shall fulfill God's law, not destroy,
Bearing his very image, and all things
<span id="v405"><sup><small>405</small></sup></span> Shall he teach. Unto him shall priests convey
And offer gold, and myrrh, and frankincense;[^406]
For all these things he'll also bring to pass.
But when a voice shall through the desert land[^408]
Come bearing tidings to men, and to all
<span id="v410"><sup><small>410</small></sup></span> Shall call to make straight paths, and from the heart
Cast wickedness out and illuminate[^411]
With water all the bodies of mankind,
That being born again they may no more
From what is righteous go at all astray—
<span id="v415"><sup><small>415</small></sup></span> And one of barbarous mind, by dances bound,[^415]
Cutting that (voice) off shall bestow reward—

(326-343.)

<span id="p31">[<sup><small>p. 31</small></sup>]</span>

Then on a sudden there shall be a sign
To mortals, when, watched over, there shall come[^418]
Out of the land of Egypt a fair stone;[^419]
<span id="v420"><sup><small>420</small></sup></span> And on it shall the Hebrew people stumble;
But by his guiding nations shall be brought
Together; for the God who rules on high
They also shall know through him, and the way
In common light. For unto chosen men[^424]
<span id="v425"><sup><small>425</small></sup></span> Will he show life eternal, but the fire
Will be for ages on the lawless bring.
And then shall he the sickly heal, and all
Who are blameworthy who shall trust in him..
And then the blind shall see, the lame shall walk,[^429]
<span id="v430"><sup><small>430</small></sup></span> The deaf shall hearken, and the dumb shall speak.
Demons shall he drive out, and of the dead
There shall be an uprising; on the waves
Shall he walk; also in a desert place
Shall he five thousand satisfy with food
<span id="v435"><sup><small>435</small></sup></span> From five loaves and a fish out of the sea,
And with the remnants of them, for the hope
Of peoples, shall he fill twelve baskets full.
And then shall Israel, drunken, not discern,
Nor shall they hear, oppressed with feeble cars.
<span id="v440"><sup><small>440</small></sup></span> But when the maddening wrath of the Most High
Shall come upon the Hebrews, and take faith
Away from them, because they slew the Son
Of the heavenly God; then also with foul lips

(343-366.)

<span id="p32">[<sup><small>p. 32</small></sup>]</span>

Shall Israel give him cuffs and spittle drugged.[^444]
<span id="v445"><sup><small>445</small></sup></span> And gall for food and vinegar unmixed
For drink will they, with evil madness smitten
In bosom and in heart, give impiously,
Not seeing with their eyes, more blind than moles,
More terrible than crawling poisonous beasts,
<span id="v450"><sup><small>450</small></sup></span> Fast bound by heavy sleep. But when his hands
He shall spread forth and measure out all things,
And bear the crown of thorns, and they shall pierce
His side with reeds, for which dark monstrous night
Shall be for three hours in the midst of day,
<span id="v455"><sup><small>455</small></sup></span> Then also shall the temple of Solomon
Bring to an end a mighty sign for men,[^456]
When he shall to the house of Hades go
Proclaiming resurrection to the dead.
But when in three days he shall come again
<span id="v460"><sup><small>460</small></sup></span> Unto the light, and show his form to men
And teach all things, ascending in the clouds
Unto the house of heaven shall he go
Leaving the world a Gospel convenant.
And in his name shall blossom a new shoot
<span id="v465"><sup><small>465</small></sup></span> From nations that are guided by the law
Of the Mighty One. But also after this
There shall be wise guides, and then afterward
There shall be a cessation of the prophets.
After that, when the Hebrew people reap
<span id="v470"><sup><small>470</small></sup></span> Their evil harvest, shall a Roman king[^470]
Much gold and silver utterly destroy.
And afterward shall other royal powers
Continuously arise as kingdoms perish,

(366-390.)

<span id="p33">[<sup><small>p. 33</small></sup>]</span>

And they will oppress mortals. But great fall
<span id="v475"><sup><small>475</small></sup></span> Shall be for those men, when they shall begin
Unrighteous arrogance. But when the temple
Of Solomon in the holy land shall fall,
Cast down by barbarous men in brazen mail,
And from the land the Hebrews shall be driven
<span id="v480"><sup><small>480</small></sup></span> Wandering and wasted, and among the wheat
They shall much darnel mingle, there shall be
Evil contention among, all mankind;
And the cities suffering outrage shall bewail
Each other, in their breasts receiving wrath
<span id="v485"><sup><small>485</small></sup></span> Of the great God, since they wrought evil work.

(391-400.)

<span id="p34">[<sup><small>p. 34</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="p35">[<sup><small>p. 35</small></sup>]</span>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/Preface">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Preface</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Sibylline Oracles — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/2">
          <span class="pr-2">Book II</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Notes

[^1]: This book appears to be one of the latest in composition of this entire collection of oracles, but it was placed first on account of its contents, which relate to the creation and the earliest races of mankind. It is evidently of Christian origin, and was written probably as late as the third century.

[^13]: _Tartartus_, the prison of the Titans, is here conceived as encompassed by the earth and forming its interior. Hesiod (_Theog._, 720, _ff_) represents it as surrounded by a brazen fence and situated as far beneath the earth as earth is beneath the heaven; it would require nine days and nights, he says, for an anvil to fall from heaven to earth, and as many more for it to fall from earth to Tartarus. Comp. Homer, _Il_., viii, 13-16. Verg., _Æn_., vi, 577-581. It will be seen in line 127 and elsewhere that Gehenna is regarded as a part of Tartarus or identical with it, while Hades (line 106) comprehends the abode of all the dead.

[^48]: 48-52. Cited by Lact., _Div. Inst._, ii, 13. [L., 6, 325.]

[^88]: _Day of long time_.—Allusion to the remark the patriarchs as recorded in Gen. v.

[^102]: _Hades_.—The conception of Hades here set forth, as the great receptacle of the souls of men after death, is in essential harmony with both the Jewish and the Christian doctrines. The derivation of the name from Adam is noticeable as a purely arbitrary conjecture. Comp. book iii, 30, note; comp. Plato's explanation of the word in Cratylus, 404.

[^109]: Lines thus inclosed in brackets are believed to be spurious interpolations, but have too much MS. authority to be omitted from the text.

[^130]: _Third strong-minded race_.—The successive races here mentioned appear to be in imitation of Hesiod's ages or races of mankind. Hesiod applies to them the epithets of golden, silver, bronze, and iron. See _Works and Days_, 108-190, and comp. Aratus, _Phænom_., 100-134; Ovid, _Met_., i. 89-150; Juvenal, _Sat_., xiii, 27-30.

[^143]: _Erebus_ appears to be here employed merely as another name for the underworld, and interchangeable with Hades. Comp. Homer, _Il_., viii. 368. Tartarus is conceived as a still lower deep.

[^153]: _Giants_.—The _nephilim_ of Gen. vi, 4.

[^175]: _Nine letters_.—The connection shows that the name intended must be some title or designation of the Creator, but no word has been discovered that fully meets the conditions of the puzzle. The nearest solution is found in the word {Greek _?ane'kfwnows_}. This word has nine letters, four syllables, and five mutes, or consonants. The first three syllables have two letters each, and the sum of all the letters taken at their numerical value is 1,696. But the number stated in the text is twice 800, plus three times thirty (= 90) and seven = 1,697. {Greek _?ane'kfwnows_} must also be supposed to be a shortened form for {Greek _?anekfw'nhtos_}, used in ecclesiastical Greek writers to denote the unutterable name, Jehovah. Another name proposed is {Greek _Ðeo\`s Swth'r_}, but an obvious objection is that we have here two words, not, as the text suggests, one word of four syllables. Besides, these letters amount to only 1,692. There is, perhaps, an error in the text. If for the words with seven (line 180) we read with two, the numerical difficulty of the last-named solution would be met; or if we read with six, then the word {Greek _?ane'kfwnos_} solves the problem. Comp. the similar puzzle in lines 395-399 of this same book, and the well-known {footnote p. 22} enigma of the number of the beast in Rev. xiii, 18. A like example is also found in Capella (book ii, 193), who thus addresses the sun: “Hail, thou veritable face and paternal countenance of God, eight and six hundred in number, whose first letter forms a sacred name, a surname, and a sign;” which Kopp explains by the letters {Greek _frh_} (= 608), representative of the Egyptian name of the sun. Comp. also the designation of the Roman emperors in book v, 16, and following.

[^184]: _Besought the people_.—The O. T. narrative of the flood records nothing of Noah's preaching, but in 2 Pet. ii he is called a “preacher of righteousness” (comp. 1 Pet. iii, 20), and Josephus (_Ant._, i, iii, 1) confirms this tradition of the Jews. Comp. also Theophilus, _ad Autol_., iii, 19 [G., 61 1.145].

[^225]: _Sardonic mile_\—Expression supposed to have originated from a Sardinian plant so bitter as to cause the face of the cater to writhe in pain, though he might attempt to laugh. Comp. Hom. _Od._, xx, 302.

[^230]: _Earth-shaker_\—the Greek poets an epithet of Poseidon (Neptune), the god of the sea, here evidently applied to the God of Noah.

[^240]: _Phrygia . . . first_.—Comp. the statement of Herodotus (ii, 2), that the Phrygians were the most ancient of mankind.

[^285]: _Nereus_.—A sea god supposed to dwell in the bottom of the ocean, and called in Homer (_Il._ i, 556) the “old man of the sea.” His daughters were called Nereids. Nereus is here put by metonymy for the sea itself, and the Sibyl means to say that Noah had been long enough in the water.

[^290]: An aposiopesis. The poet is so appalled at the thought of what Noah saw that she leaves her sentence unfinished.

[^321]: _Ararat_.—Comp. the legends of this mountain and of the remains of the ark in Josephus, _Ant._, i, iii, 6.

[^323]: _From death_.—A reading proposed by Mendelssohn, and approved by Rzach in his _Addenda et corrigenda_.

[^324]: River Marsyas.—Two rivers of antiquity bear this name, one a branch of the Mæander in Asia Minor, the other a branch of the Orontes in Syria. Neither of these seems to meet the conditions of our text.

[^342]: _Twice twenty days and one_.—According to the statement in Gen. vii, 12.

[^348]: _Sixth_.—“ The Erythræan Sibyl says that she lived in the sixth age after the flood,” writes Eusebius, _Orat. ad Sanct._, xviii [G., 20, 1285]. Here we note that she assumes to be a daughter-in-law of Noah. Comp. close of book iii.

[^355]: _Many-colored flower_.—Here employed as an image of the fertility of the royal race of whom she is about to sing.

[^357]: _Three kings_.—The three sons of Noah would seem to have been identified in the Sibyl's thought with Cronos, Titan, and Iapetus of the Greek mythology. Comp. book iii, 130.

[^366]: Acheron was a river of the lower world. Verg., Æn., vi, 295.

[^375]: _Titans_.—Mythical sons of heaven and earth who figure much in Greek legend and poetry. See book iii, 130-185. Lactantius records a number of the legends and observes: “The truth of this history is taught by the Erythræan Sibyl, who says almost the same things, varying only in a few unimportant details.” _Div. Inst._, i, xiv [L., 6, 190].

[^396]: _Four vowels_.—The name Jesus in Greek, {Greek _?Ihsou~s_}, contains four vowels and the consonant is twice told, and the numerical value of all the letters is 888. Comp. line 175, and note.

[^406]: _Gold . . . myrrh_.—Comp. Matt. ii, 11.

[^408]: _A voice_.—Comp. Isa. xl, 3; Matt. iii, 3.

[^411]: _Illuminate_.—An expression relating to Christian baptism quite common with the early fathers, many of whom understood the word {Greek _fwtis-ðe'nte's_} in Heb. vi, 4, as referring to baptism. Justin Martyr, 1 _Apol_., lxi [G., 6, 421], says: “This washing is called illumination, inasmuch as those who learn these things have their understanding illuminated.” Cyril of Jerusalem wrote eighteen books of religious instruction, which are entitled Catechesis of the Illuminated [G., 33, 369-1060]. See also _Apost. Const._, viii, 8. For other references see Suicer, Thesaurus, under {Greek _fw'tisma_}.

[^415]: _Dances_.—See Matt. xiv, 6-10.

[^418]: _Watched over_.—By God and angels, as told in Matt. ii.

[^419]: _Egypt_.—See Matt. ii, 13-15, 21. _Stone_.—Comp. Matt. xxi, 42, 44, and I Pet. ii, 4-8; Zech. iii, 9.

[^424]: _Common light_.—Comp. John i, 4-9.

[^429]: 429-437. Comp. book viii, 270-274 and 361-369. Cited also by Lactantius in _Div. Inst._ iv, 16 [L., 6, 493].

[^444]: _Cuffs . . . spittle.—_Comp. Matt. xxvii, 30.

[^456]: _Sign_.—Comp. Matt. xxvii, 51.

[^470]: _Roman king_.—Titus, who carried the spoils of the temple to Rome.