---
title: "Sibylline Oracles — Book XIII"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/12">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book XII</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Sibylline Oracles — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/14">
          <span class="pr-2">Book XIV</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p224">[<sup><small>p. 224</small></sup>]</span>

## CONTENTS OF BOOK XIII.

Introduction, 1-8. A time of wars and woes, 9-16. Persian insurrection and the Roman soldier king 17-28. The warrior out of Syria and his son, 29-47. Persian war and the grain-producing land of Nile, 48-65. Another song for Alexandrians announced, 66-71. Wrath on Assyrians and Ægeans, 72-78. Wretched Antioch, 79-84. Cities of Arabia admonished, 85-97. Wars and treachery, 98-106. Roman ruler from Dacia, 107-116. The Syrian robber, 117-135. The Gallic king and dreadful woes, 136-156. Wretched Syria, 157-165. Wretched Antioch, 165-171. Woes on many cities of Asia, 172-189. Murders and wars, 190-208. Allegory of the bull, dragon, stag, lion, and goat, 209-230. Prayer of the Sibyl, 231-232.

<span id="p225">[<sup><small>p. 225</small></sup>]</span>

## BOOK XIII.

GREAT word divine he bids me sing again—[^1]
The immortal holy God imperishable,
Who gives to kings their power and takes away,
And who determined for them time both ways,
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> Both that of life and that of baneful death.
And these the heavenly God enjoins on me
Unwilling to bring tidings unto kings
Concerning royal power. . . .
.	.	.	.	.	.	.
.	.	.	.	.	.	.
And spear impetuous Ares; and by him[^9]
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span> All perish, child and the old man who gives
To the assemblies laws; and many wars
And battles there shall be, and homicides,
Famines and pestilences, earthquake-shocks
And mighty thunderbolts, and many ways
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span> Of the Assyrians over all the world,
And pillaging and robbery of temples.
And then an insurrection there shall be
Of the industrious Persians, and with them[^18]
Indians, Armenians, and Arabians;
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span> And unto these again a Roman king[^20]

(1-14.)

<span id="p226">[<sup><small>p. 226</small></sup>]</span>

Insatiate in war and leading on
His spearmen against the Assyrians
Shall draw near, a young Ares, and as far
As the deep-flowing silvery Euphrates
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span> Shall warlike Ares stretch his deadly spear
Because of . . .[^26]
For by his friend betrayed he shall fall down
In the ranks smitten by the gleaming iron.
And straightway coming out of Syria[^29]
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span> There shall a purple-loving warrior rule,
Terror of Ares, and also his son,[^31]
A Cæsar, shall even all the earth oppress;
And the one name is unto both of them:
On first and twentieth there are to be placed[^34]
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span> Five hundred. But when these in wars shall rule,
And laws shall be enacted, there shall be
A little rest from war, not for long time;
But when a wolf shall to a flock of sheep[^38]
Pledge solemn oaths against the white-toothed dogs,
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span> Then, having misled, he will tear in pieces
The woolly sheep, and cast his oaths aside;

(16-30.)

<span id="p227">[<sup><small>p. 227</small></sup>]</span>

And then shall there be an unlawful strife
Of haughty kings in wars, and Syrians
Shall perish terribly, and Indians
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span> And the Armenians and Arabians,
The Persians and the Babylonians
Shall one another by hard fights destroy.
But when a Roman Ares shall destroy[^48]
A German Ares ruinous of life
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span> Triumphing on the ocean, then is war
Of many years for haughty Persian men,
But for them there shall not be victory;
For as a fish swims not upon the point
Of a high many-ridged and windy rock
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span> Precipitant, nor does a tortoise fly,
Nor does an eagle into water come,
So also are the Persians in that day
Far off from victory, while the fond nurse[^58]
Of the Italians, in the plain of Nile
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span> Reposing by the sacred water's side,
Sends forth the appointed lot to seven-hilled Rome.
Now these things are; and while the name of Rome[^62]
Shall hold in numbers of revolving time,
So many years shall the great noble city
<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span> Of Macedon's lord, willing, deal out corn.
Another much-distressing pain I'll sing
For Alexandrians who are destroyed
By reason of the strife of shameful men.
Strong men who were aforetime terrible

(31-52.)

<span id="p228">[<sup><small>p. 228</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span> Being then impotent shall pray for peace
By reason of the wickedness of chiefs.
And there shall come wrath of the mighty God
On the Assyrians and a mountain stream
Shall utterly destroy them, which shall come
<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span> To Cæsar's city and harm Canaanites.[^75]
The Pyramus shall irrigate the city[^76]
Of Mopsus; then shall the Ægæans fall[^77]
Because of strife of very mighty men.
Thee, wretched Antioch, shall Ares strong[^79]
<span id="v80"><sup><small>80</small></sup></span> Leave not while round thee an Assyrian war
Is pressing, for a chief of men shall dwell
Within thy houses who shall fight with all
The arrow-hurling Persians, he himself
Having obtained of Romans royal power.
<span id="v85"><sup><small>85</small></sup></span> Now, cities of Arabians, deck yourselves
With temples and with places for the race,
And with broad markets and with splendid wealth,
With images, gold, silver, ivory;
And thou who art of all most fond of learning,
<span id="v90"><sup><small>90</small></sup></span> Bostra and Philippopolis, that thou may'st come[^90]
Into great sorrow; and the laughing spheres[^91]
Of the zodiacal vault, Aries,
Taurus, and Gemini, and as many stars
Ruling hours as with them in heaven appear

(53-71.)

<span id="p229">[<sup><small>p. 229</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v95"><sup><small>95</small></sup></span> Shall benefit thee not; thou, wretched one,
Hast trusted many, when that very man
Shall afterwards bring near that which is thine.
And now for Alexandrians loving war
Will I sing wars most dreadful; and much people
<span id="v100"><sup><small>100</small></sup></span> Shall perish while their cities are destroyed
By citizens against each other matched
And fighting for the sake of hateful strife,
And round them horrid Ares, rushing on,
Shall cease from war. And then one of great soul[^104]
<span id="v105"><sup><small>105</small></sup></span> Along with his own mighty son shall fall
By treachery on the older king's account.
And after him there shall rule powerfully[^107]
O'er fertile Rome another great-souled lord
Versed in war, coming from the Dacians
<span id="v110"><sup><small>110</small></sup></span> And numbering three hundred; he shall have
Also the letter of the number four,
And many shall be slay, and then the king
Shall all his brothers and his friends destroy
Even while the kings are cut off, and straightway
<span id="v115"><sup><small>115</small></sup></span> Shall there be fights and pillagings and murders
Suddenly on the older king's account.[^116]
Then, when a wily man shall summoned come,[^117]

(72-89.)

<span id="p230">[<sup><small>p. 230</small></sup>]</span>

A robber and a Roman not well known
From Syria appearing, he by guile
<span id="v120"><sup><small>120</small></sup></span> Into a race of Cappadocian men
Shall drive through and, besieging, shall press hard,
Insatiate of war. And then for thee,
Tyana and Mazaka, there shall be[^123]
A capture; thou shalt be enslaved and put
<span id="v125"><sup><small>125</small></sup></span> Upon thy neck again a fearful yoke.
Arid Syria shall mourn for men destroyed
And then Selenian goddess shall not guard[^127]
Her holy city. But when he by flight
From Syria shall before the Romans come,
<span id="v130"><sup><small>130</small></sup></span> And shall pass over the Euphrates' streams,
No longer like the Romans, but like fierce
Dart-shooting Persians, then, fulfilling fate,
Down shall the ruler of the Italians fall[^133]
In the ranks smitten by the gleaming iron;
<span id="v135"><sup><small>135</small></sup></span> And close upon him shall his children perish.
But when another king of Rome shall reign,[^136]
Then also to the Romans there shall come
Unstable nations, on the walls of Rome
Destructive Ares with his bastard son;[^139]
<span id="v140"><sup><small>140</small></sup></span> Then also shall be famines, pestilence,[^140]
And mighty thunderbolts, and dreadful wars,

(90-106.)

<span id="p231">[<sup><small>p. 231</small></sup>]</span>

And anarchy in cities suddenly;
And the Syrians shall perish fearfully;
For there shall come upon them the great wrath
<span id="v145"><sup><small>145</small></sup></span> Of the Most High and straightway an uprising
of the industrious Persians, and mixed up
With Persians shall the Syrians destroy
The Romans, but by the divine decree
They shall not make a conquest of their laws.
<span id="v150"><sup><small>150</small></sup></span> Alas, how many with their goods shall flee
Front the East unto men of other tongues
Alas, the dark blood of how many men
The land shall drink! For that shall be a time
In which the living uttering o'er the dead
<span id="v155"><sup><small>155</small></sup></span> A blessing shall by word of mouth pronounce
Death beautiful and death shall flee from them.[^156]
And now for thee, O wretched Syria,
I weep in sorrow; for to thee shall come[^158]
A dreadful blow from arrow-shooting men,
<span id="v160"><sup><small>160</small></sup></span> Which thou didst never think would come to thee.
Also the fugitive of Rome shall come[^161]
Bearing a great spear, Crossing on his way
Euphrates with his many myriads,
And he shall burn thee, and dispose all things
<span id="v165"><sup><small>165</small></sup></span> In a bad way. O wretched Antioch,[^165]
And thee a city they shall never call,
When by thy lack of prudence thou shalt fall
Under the spears; and stripping off all things
And making naked he shall leave thee thus
<span id="v170"><sup><small>170</small></sup></span> Coverless, houseless; and when anyone

(107-128.)

<span id="p232">[<sup><small>p. 232</small></sup>]</span>

Sees he shall of a sudden weep for thee.
And thou shalt be, O Hierapolis,[^172]
A triumph, also thou, Berœa; weep
At Chalcis over lately wounded sons.
<span id="v175"><sup><small>175</small></sup></span> Alas, how many by the steep high mount
Of Casius shall dwell and by Amanus[^176]
How many, and how many Lycus laves,[^177]
And Marsyas as many and Pyramus[^178]
The silver-eddying; for even to the bounds
<span id="v180"><sup><small>180</small></sup></span> Of Asia they shall treasure up their spoils,
Make cities naked, and bear idols off
And cast down temples on much-nourishing earth.
And sometime to Gauls and Pannonians,[^183]
To Mysians and Bithynians there shall be
<span id="v185"><sup><small>185</small></sup></span> Great sorrow when a warrior shall have come.
O Lycians, Lycians, there shall come a wolf
To lick thy blood, when Sannians shall come
With city-wasting Ares and the Carpians
Shall draw near with Ausonians to fight.
<span id="v190"><sup><small>190</small></sup></span> And then by his own shameless recklessness
The bastard son shall put the king to death,[^191]
And he himself for his impiety
Shall straightway perish. And again shall rule
After him yet another whose name shows

(128-144.)

<span id="p233">[<sup><small>p. 233</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v195"><sup><small>195</small></sup></span> First letter; but he too shall quickly fall[^195]
By mighty Ares, struck by gleaming iron.
And yet again the world shall be confused,
Men perishing by pestilence and war.
And the Persians maddened by the Ausonians[^199]
<span id="v200"><sup><small>200</small></sup></span> Shall in the toil of Ares yet again
Force their way. And then there shall be a flight
Of Romans; and thereafter there shall come
The priest heard of all round, sent by the sun,[^203]
From Syria appearing and by guile
<span id="v205"><sup><small>205</small></sup></span> Shall he accomplish all things. And then too
The city of the sun shall offer prayer;[^206]
And round about her shall the Persians dare
The fearful threatenings of the Phœnicians.
But when two chiefs, men swift in war, shall rule
<span id="v210"><sup><small>210</small></sup></span> The very mighty Romans, one of whom
Shall have the number seventy, and the other[^211]
The number three, even then the stately bull,[^212]
That digs the earth with his hoofs and stirs up
The dust with his two horns, shall many ills
<span id="v215"><sup><small>215</small></sup></span> Upon a dark-skinned reptile perpetrate—[^215]
Which draws a trail with his scales; and besides,

(145-161.)

<span id="p234">[<sup><small>p. 234</small></sup>]</span>

Himself shall perish. And yet after him
Again shall come another fair-horned stag,[^218]
Hungry upon the mountains, striving hard
<span id="v220"><sup><small>220</small></sup></span> To feed upon the venom-shedding beasts
Then shall a dread and fearful lion come,[^221]
Sent from the sun, and breathing forth much flame.
And then too by his shameless recklessness
Shall he destroy the well-horned rapid stag,
<span id="v225"><sup><small>225</small></sup></span> And the most mighty venom-shedding beast[^225]
So dread, that sends forth many piping sounds,
And the he-goat that sideways moves along,[^227]
And after him fame follows; he himself[^228]
Sound, unhurt, unapproachable, shall rule
<span id="v230"><sup><small>230</small></sup></span> The Romans, and the Persians shall be weak.
But, Lord, King of the world, O God, restrain[^231]
The song of our words, and give charming song.

(161-173.)

<span id="p235">[<sup><small>p. 235</small></sup>]</span>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/12">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book XII</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Sibylline Oracles — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/14">
          <span class="pr-2">Book XIV</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Notes


[^1]: The twelfth and thirteenth books are as closely connected as are the first and second, and like them are probably the work of one author. After the words “royal power,” in the eighth line, there is a noticeable defect in the text.

[^9]: _Impetuous Ares_.—Reference probably to Maximinus.

[^18]: _Persians_.—The Sassanidæ, as in book xi, 356.

[^20]: _Roman king_.—Gordian III, who defeated the Persian army under {footnote p. 226} Sapor on the banks of the Chaboras, a branch of the Euphrates, and was soon afterward killed by Philippus (M. Julius Philippus), who succeeded to the empire.

[^26]: Here the Greek text is somewhat corrupt and uncertain.

[^29]: _Out of Syria_.—The reference is to M. Julius Philippus, who was called the Arabian because of his birth in Bostra, Syria, somewhere to the south of Damascus.

[^31]: _His son_.—Philippus associated his son, of the same name, with him in the empire.

[^34]: 34, 35. The Greek letter for five hundred is {Greek F}, initial of Philippus. The “one and twenty” is to be understood as denoting the initials (A=1 and K=20) of Augustus, the title assumed by the father, and Cæsar (Kaisar), the name of his son.

[^38]: 38, 39. Comp. book xiv, 448, 449.

[^48]: _Roman Ares_.—Comp. book xii, 355, 356.

[^58]: 58, 59. Nurse of the Italians.—Alexandria, as representing Egypt and source of the grain supply of Italy and the Roman world.

[^62]: Name of Rome.—Comp. book viii, 195, and the note on the numerical value of the letters of the name.

[^75]: _Cæsar's city_.—Perhaps referring to Cæsarea Philippi.

[^76]: _Pyramus_.—River of Cilicia.

[^77]: _Mopsus_.—More commonly called Mopsuestia, a town situated on the Pyramus. _Ægæans_.—Inhabitants of the city of Ægæ, near the mouth of this same river.

[^79]: _Wretched Antioch_.—Comp. line 165, and book iv, 181.

[^90]: _Bostra_.—Situated some fifty miles to the south of Damascus.

[^91]: 91-95. These allusions to the constellations may imply notable devotion to astrology on the part of the people of Arabia.

[^104]: 104-106. The father and son here referred to are the same as those described in lines 29-33.

[^107]: 107-112. This seems to describe Trajan of Pannonia, who is better known as Decius. Sent by the emperor Philip against Mœsia, the troops proclaimed him emperor, and he exercised the imperial power for about two years. The names Trajan and Decius are represented by their initial letters, which are the Greek numerals respectively for _three hundred_ and _four_.

[^116]: Comp. line 106 above. The _older king_ is here apparently intended for Philip.

[^117]: _Wily man_.—Referring perhaps to Cyriades, one of the so-called “thirty tyrants” who arose in various parts of the empire about this time.

[^123]: _Tyana and Mazaka_.—Chief cities of Cappadocia.

[^127]: _Selenian goddess_.—Goddess of the moon. _Her holy city_ maybe understood as Seleucia on the Tigris, once noted for the worship of the moon.

[^133]: _Ruler of the Italians_.—Decius Trajan, described in lines 107-112 above, who was smitten down under a shower of darts while fighting the Goths.

[^136]: _Another king_.—Gallus Trebonianus, who was proclaimed emperor by the legions on the death of Decius.

[^139]: _Bastard son_.—Reference to Volusianus, son of Gallus.

[^140]: Comp. lines 11-14 above, and book xii, 149, 150, 202-204.

[^156]: Comp. books ii, 376, and viii, 468.

[^158]: 158-160. Comp. book iii, 387-389.

[^161]: _The fugitive_.—Nero. Comp. book v, 118-180.

[^165]: 165-168. Comp. book iv, 181-183.

[^172]: 172-174. _Hierapolis . . . Berœa . . . Chalcis_.—Cities of Syria, eastward from Antioch.

[^176]: _Casius_.—Rising to the south of Antioch. Amanus.—A mountain range north of Antioch and overlooking the valley of Pyramus.

[^177]: _Lycus_.—River of Pontus.

[^178]: _Marsyas_.—A river of Syria, a branch of the Orontes.

[^183]: 183-189. The mention of these widely separated provinces depicts the broad range of the desolating wars of this period.

[^191]: _Bastard son_.—The same as in line 139.

[^195]: _First letter_.—Evidently denoting Æmilianus, who was himself in turn cut off before he had reigned four months.

[^199]: _Persians . . . again_.—Under Sapor, who captured Valerian, put the Romans to flight, and spread destruction over Syria and Cappadocia.

[^203]: _Priest_.—Odenatus.

[^206]: _City of the sun_.—Here referring to Palmyra.

[^211]: _Seventy . . . three_.—The first is represented by {Greek _O_}, initial of the Greek form of the name Valerian [{Greek _Ou?alh~rianos_}], and the second by {Greek _G_}, initial of Gallienus.

[^212]: _Bull_.—Here representing Valerian, who dealt out many ills to the Persians, but was himself destroyed.

[^215]: _Dark-skinned reptile_.—Sapor, King of the Persians.

[^218]: _Stag_.—Macrianus, the Roman general.

[^221]: _Lion_.—Odenatus.

[^225]: _Most mighty . . . beast_.—The Persians.

[^227]: _He-goat_.—Reference doubtful. Alexandre suggests Balista, one of the so-called “thirty tyrants,” who made pretension to the throne in the reign of Gallienus. Comp. Dan. viii, 5, for the same figure.

[^228]: _He himself_.—Odenatus.

[^231]: 231, 232. Comp. conclusion of books xi and xii.