---
title: "Sibylline Oracles — Book IV"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha OT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book III</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Sibylline Oracles — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/5">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p98">[<sup><small>p. 98</small></sup>]</span>

## CONTENTS OF BOOK IV.

Introduction, 1-28. Blessedness of the righteous, 29-60. The Assyrian kingdom, 61-65. The Medes and Persians, 66-82. Woes on Phrygia, Asia, and Egypt, 83-100. Sicily burned by fire of Ætna, 101-104. Strife in Greece, 105-108. Triumphs of Macedon, 109-129. Triumphs of Italy, 130-168. Italy's punishment, 169-180. Woes of Antioch, Cyprus, and Caria, 181-197. Wrath in reserve for the impious, 198-209. Exhortations and threatening, 210-230. Resurrection, judgment, and reward, 231-248.

<span id="p99">[<sup><small>p. 99</small></sup>]</span>

## BOOK IV.

PEOPLE of boastful Asia and of Europe,[^1]
Hear how much, all too true, I am about,
Through a month many-toned, from my great hall
To prophesy; no oracle am I
<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> Of lying Phœbus whom vain men called god,[^5]
And further falsified by calling seer;
But of the mighty God, whom hands of men
Formed not like speechless idols carved of stone.
For he has not for his abode a stone
<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span> Most dumb and toothless to a temple drawn,
Of immortals a dishonor very sore;
For he may not be seen from earth nor measured
By mortal eyes, nor formed by mortal hand;
He, looking down at once on all, is seen
<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span> Himself by no one; his are murky night,
And day, and sun, and stars, and moon, and seas
With fish, and land, and rivers, and the month

(1-15.)

<span id="p100">[<sup><small>p. 100</small></sup>]</span>

Of springs perennial, creatures meant for life,
And rains at once producing fruit of field
<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span> And tree and vine and oil. This God a whip
Struck through my heart within to make me tell
Truly to men what things have now befallen
And how much shall befall them yet again
From the first generation to the eleventh;[^24]
<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span> For he himself by bringing them to pass
Will prove all things. But do thou in all things,
O people, to the Sibyl give all ear,
Who pours from hallowed mouth a truthful voice.
Blessed of men shall they be on the earth[^29]
<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span> As many as shall love the mighty God,
Offering him praise before they drink and eat;
Trusting in piety. When they behold
Temples and altars, figures of dumb stones,
[Stone images and statues made with hands]
<span id="v35"><sup><small>35</small></sup></span> Polluted with the blood of living things
And sacrifices of four-footed beasts,
They will reject them all; and they will look
To the great glory of one God and not
Commit presumptuous murder nor dispose
<span id="v40"><sup><small>40</small></sup></span> Of stolen gain, which things most horrid are;
Nor shameful longing for another's bed[^41]
Have they, nor vile and hateful lust of males.
Their manner, piety, and character

<span id="p101">[<sup><small>p. 101</small></sup>]</span>

Shall other men, that love a shameless life,
<span id="v45"><sup><small>45</small></sup></span> Not ever imitate; but, mocking them
With jest and joke like babes in senselessness,
They'll falsely charge to them as many deeds
Blameful and wicked as they do themselves.
For slow is the whole race of human kind[^49]
<span id="v50"><sup><small>50</small></sup></span> To believe. But when judgment of the world
And mortals comes which God himself shall bring
Judging at once the impious and the pious,
Then indeed shall he send the ungodly back
To lower darkness [and then they shall know
<span id="v55"><sup><small>55</small></sup></span> How much impiety they wrought]; but the pious
Shall still remain upon the fruitful land,
God giving to them breath and life and grace.[^57]
But these things all in the tenth generation
Shall come to pass; and now what things shall be
<span id="v60"><sup><small>60</small></sup></span> From the first generation, those I'll tell.
First over all mortal shall Assyrians rule,[^61]
And for six generations hold the power
Of the world, from the time the God of heaven
Being wroth against the cities and all men
<span id="v65"><sup><small>65</small></sup></span> Sea with a bursting deluge covered earth.
Them shall the Medes o'erpower, but on the throne[^66]
For two generations only shall exult;
In which times those events shall come to pass:

(36-55.)

<span id="p102">[<sup><small>p. 102</small></sup>]</span>

Dark night shall come at the mid hour of day[^69]
<span id="v70"><sup><small>70</small></sup></span> And from the heaven the stars and circling moon
Shall disappear; and earth in tumult shaken
By a great earthquake shall throw many cities
And works of men headlong; and from the deep
They shall peer out the islands of the Sea.
<span id="v75"><sup><small>75</small></sup></span> But when the great Euphrates shall with blood
Be surging, then shall there be also set
Between the Medes and Persians dreadful strife
In battle; and the, Medes shall fall and fly
'Neath Persian spears beyond the mighty water
<span id="v80"><sup><small>80</small></sup></span> Of Tigris. And the Persian power shall be
Greatest in all the world, and they shall have
One generation of most prosperous rule.
And there shall be as many evil deeds
As men shall wish away—the din of war,
<span id="v85"><sup><small>85</small></sup></span> And murders, and disputes, and banishments,
And overthrow of towers and waste of cities,
When Hellas very glorious shall sail[^87]
Over broad Hellespont, and shall convey
To Phrygia sorrow and to Asia doom.
<span id="v90"><sup><small>90</small></sup></span> And unto Egypt, land of many furrows,
Shall sorry famine come, and barrenness
Shall during twenty circling years prevail,
What time the Nile, corn-nourisher, shall hide

<span id="p103">[<sup><small>p. 103</small></sup>]</span>

His dark wave somewhere underneath the earth.
<span id="v95"><sup><small>95</small></sup></span> And there shall come from Asia a great king[^95]
Bearing a spear, with ships innumerable,
And he shall walk the wet paths of the deep,
And shall sail after he has cut the mount
Of lofty summit; him a fugitive
<span id="v100"><sup><small>100</small></sup></span> From battle fearful Asia shall receive.
And Sicily the wretched shall a stream
Of powerful fire set all aflame while Etna
Her flame disgorges; and in the deep chasm
Down shall the mighty city Croton fall.[^104]
<span id="v105"><sup><small>105</small></sup></span> And strife shall be in Hellas; they shall rage[^105]
Against each other, cast down many cities,
And fighting make an end of many men;
But equally balanced is the strife with both.
But, when the race of mortal men shall come
<span id="v110"><sup><small>110</small></sup></span> To the tenth generation, also then[^110]
Upon thc Persians shall a servile yoke
And terror be. But when the Macedonians
Shall boast the scepter there shall be for Thebes[^113]
An evil conquest from behind, and Carians
<span id="v115"><sup><small>115</small></sup></span> Shall dwell in Tyre, and Tyrians be destroyed.

(75-90.)

<span id="p104">[<sup><small>p. 104</small></sup>]</span>

And Babylon, great to see but small to fight,
Shall stand with walls that were in vain hopes built.
In Bactria Macedonians shall dwell;[^118]
But those from Susa and from Bactria[^119]
<span id="v120"><sup><small>120</small></sup></span> Shall all into the land of Hellas flee.
It shall take place among those yet to be,
When silver-eddying Pyramus his banks[^122]
O'erpouring, to the sacred isle shall come.[^123]
And Cibyra shall fall and Cyzicus,[^124]
<span id="v125"><sup><small>125</small></sup></span> When, earth being shaken by earthquakes, cities fall.[^126]
And sand shall hide all Samos under banks.
And Delos visible no more, but things
Of Delos shall all be invisible.
And to Rhodes shall come evil last, but greatest.
<span id="v130"><sup><small>130</small></sup></span> The Macedonian power shall not abide;
But from the west a great Italian war
Shall flourish, under which the world shall bear
A servile yoke and the Italians serve.
And thou, O wretched Corinth, thou shalt look[^134]
<span id="v135"><sup><small>135</small></sup></span> Sometime upon thy conquest. And thy tower,

<span id="p105">[<sup><small>p. 105</small></sup>]</span>

O Carthage, shall press lowly on the ground.
Wretched Laodicea, thee sometime
Shall earthquake lay low, casting headlong down,[^138]
But thou, a city firmly set, again
<span id="v140"><sup><small>140</small></sup></span> Shalt stand. O Lycia Myra beautiful,[^140]
Thee never shall the agitated earth
Set fast; but falling headlong down on earth
Shalt thou, in manner like an alien, pray
To flee away into another land,
<span id="v145"><sup><small>145</small></sup></span> When sometime the dark water of the sea
With thunders and earthquakes shall stop the din
Of Patara for its impieties.[^147]
Also for thee, Armenia, there remains[^148]
A slavish fate; and there shall also come
<span id="v150"><sup><small>150</small></sup></span> To Solyma an evil blast of war[^150]
From Italy, and God's great temple spoil.
But when these, trusting folly, shall cast off
Their piety and murders consummate
Around the temple, then front Italy
<span id="v155"><sup><small>155</small></sup></span> A mighty king shall like a runaway slave[^155]
Flee over the Euphrates' stream unseen,

(106-120.)

<span id="p106">[<sup><small>p. 106</small></sup>]</span>

Unknown, who shall some time dare loathsome guilt
Of matricide, and many other things,
Having confidence in his most wicked hands.
<span id="v160"><sup><small>160</small></sup></span> And many for the throne with blood
Rome's soil while he flees over Parthian land.
   And out of Syria shall come Rome's foremost man,[^162]
Who having burned the temple of Solyma,
And having slaughtered many of the Jews,
<span id="v165"><sup><small>165</small></sup></span> Shall destruction on their great broad land.
And then too shall an earthquake overthrow[^167]
Both Salamis and Paphos, when dark water
Shall dash o'er Cyprus washed by many a wave.
But when from deep cleft of Italian land
<span id="v170"><sup><small>170</small></sup></span> Fire shall come flashing forth in the broad heaven,
And many cities burn and men destroy,[^171]
And much black ashes shall fill the great sky,
And small drops like red earth shall fall from heaven,
Then know the anger of the God of heaven,
<span id="v175"><sup><small>175</small></sup></span> For that they without reason shall destroy
The nation of the pious. And then strife
Awakened of war shall come to the West,
Shall also come the fugitive of Rome,[^178]
Bearing a great spear, having marched across

(121-138.)

<span id="p107">[<sup><small>p. 107</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="v180"><sup><small>180</small></sup></span> Euphrates with his many myriads.
O wretched Antioch, they shall call thee
No more a city when around their spears
Because of thine own follies thou shalt fall.
And then on Scyros shall a pestilence[^184]
<span id="v185"><sup><small>185</small></sup></span> And dreadful battle-din destruction bring.
Alas, alas! O wretched Cyprus, thee
Shall a broad wave of the sea cover, thee
Tossed on high by the whirling stormy winds.
And into Asia there shall come great wealth,
<span id="v190"><sup><small>190</small></sup></span> Which Rome herself once, plundering, put away
In her luxurious homes; and twice as much[^191]
And more shall she to Asia render back,
And then there shall be an excess of war.
And Carian cities by Mæander's waters,[^194]
<span id="v195"><sup><small>195</small></sup></span> Girded with towers and very beautiful,
Shall by a bitter famine be destroyed,
When the Mæander his dark water hides.
But when piety shall perish from mankind,
And faith and right be hidden in the world,
<span id="v200"><sup><small>200</small></sup></span> . . . Fickle . . . and in unhallowed boldness
Living shall practice wanton violence,
And reckless evil deeds, and of the pious
No one shall make account, but even them all
From thoughtlessness they utterly destroy
<span id="v205"><sup><small>205</small></sup></span> In childish folly, in their violence
Exulting and in blood holding their bands;
Then know thou that God is no longer mild,

(139-159.)
<span id="p108">[<sup><small>p. 108</small></sup>]</span>

But gnashing with fury and destroying all
The race of men by conflagration great.[^209]
<span id="v210"><sup><small>210</small></sup></span> Ah! miserable mortals, change these things,
Nor lead the mighty God to wrath extreme;
Put giving up your swords and pointed knives,[^212]
And homicides and wanton violence,
Wash your whole body in perennial streams,[^214]
<span id="v215"><sup><small>215</small></sup></span> And lifting up your hands to heaven seek pardon
For former deeds and expiate with praise
Bitter impiety; and God will give
Repentance; he will not destroy; and wrath[^218]
Will he again restrain, if in your hearts
<span id="v220"><sup><small>220</small></sup></span> Ye all will practice honored piety.
But if, ill-disposed, ye obey me not,
But with a fondness for strange lack of sense
Receive all these things with an evil ear,
There shall be over all the world a fire
<span id="v225"><sup><small>225</small></sup></span> And greatest omen with sword and with trump
At sunrise; the whole world shall hear the roar
And mighty sound. And he shall burn all earth,
And destroy the whole race of men, and all
The cities and the rivers and the sea;
<span id="v230"><sup><small>230</small></sup></span> All things he'll burn, and it shall be black dust.
But when now all things shall have been reduced[^231]
To dust and ashes, and God shall have calmed

(160-179.)

<span id="p109">[<sup><small>p. 109</small></sup>]</span>

The fire unspeakable which he lit up,
The bones and ashes of men God himself
<span id="v235"><sup><small>235</small></sup></span> Again will fashion, and he will again
Raise mortals up, even as they were before.
And then shall be the judgment, at which God
Himself as judge shall judge the world again;
And all who sinned with impious hearts, even them,
<span id="v240"><sup><small>240</small></sup></span> Shall he again hide under mounds of earth
[Dark Tartarus and Stygian Gehenna].
But all who shall be pious shall again
Live on the earth [and (shall inherit there)
The great immortal God's unwasting bliss,]
<span id="v245"><sup><small>245</small></sup></span> God giving spirit life and joy to them
[The pious; and they all shall see themselves
Beholding the sun's sweet and cheering light.
O happy on the earth shall be that man].

(180-192.)

<span id="p110">[<sup><small>p. 110</small></sup>]</span>

<span id="p111">[<sup><small>p. 111</small></sup>]</span>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/3">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Book III</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Sibylline Oracles — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Sibylline_Oracles/5">
          <span class="pr-2">Book V</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Notes


[^1]: This fourth book was probably written by a Jew who lived during the latter part of the first century A. D. In lines 162-165 we find allusion to the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, and lines 169-174 are most naturally explained as referring to the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 A. D., which overwhelmed the cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum. The Nero legends also appear in this book (lines 154-159, 178-180), and serve to prove the date not earlier than about 80 A. D.

[^5]: Phœbus.—The god of archery, prophecy, and music, who had temples at Delos, Delphi, Patara, Claros, Miletus, Grynium, and other places, in all of which he gave forth oracles of the future. His oracles were, according to Herodotus (i, 66, 75), often ambiguous and misleading, 5-8. Cited by Clem. Alex., _Cohort. ad Græcos_, iv [G., 8, 111].

[^24]: _Eleventh_.—Or _tenth_? Comp. lines 58 and 110. The reckoning begins with the first generation after the flood. Comp. lines 64 and 65. By generation the author evidently means a long period, an age, but its duration is left indefinite.

[^29]: 29-37. Cited by Justin Martyr, _Cohort. ad Græcos_, xvi [G., 6, 273]; also by Clem. Alex., _Cohort. ad Græcos_, iv [G., 8, 161].

[^41]: 41,42. Cited by Clem. Alex., _Pæd_., ii, 10 [G., 8, 516].

[^49]: 49-67. Cited with verbal variations by Lactantius, _Div. Inst._, vii, 23 [L., 6, 807].

[^57]: Comp. Acts xvii, 25.

[^61]: _First ... Assyrians_.—Comp. Gen. x, 11. 63-65. Cited by Lactantius, _de Ira Dei_, xxiii [L., 7, 144].

[^66]: _The Medes o'erpowe_r.—Comp. Herod., i, 95: “When the Assyrians had ruled over upper Asia five hundred and twenty years, first the Medes began to revolt from them, and, having thrown off their slavery, became free.”

[^69]: _Night . . . day_.—Probably to be understood of a notable eclipse of the sun. Herodotus (i, 74) relates that during the wars of the Medes and Lydians it happened that in the heat of battle the day was suddenly turned into night. This event, he observes, Thales had foretold, designating beforehand the very year in which it actually occurred.

[^87]: 87-89. Reference to the Trojan War according to most critics, but according to Badt (_Das vierte Buch d. Sibyl. Orakel_, 10) to the beginning, of the Persian War by the revolt of southwestern Asia Minor, and the attack on Sardis by the Greeks.

[^95]: 95-100. Reference to Xerxes' invasion of Greece.

[^104]: _Croton_.—No city of this name is known to have existed in Sicily, and the well-known Croton, or Croto, in southern Italy, cannot be thought of as perishing by lava streams of Etna. Another reading {Greek _Brotw^n_}) is, “the great city of men.”

[^105]: 105-108. Reference to the Peloponnesian War.

[^110]: 110-120. Reference to the Macedonian power, which, under Alexander the Great, subdued the Persian Empire, and spread Greek colonies over its broad territory. The illusions are to be understood poetically, and were probably not designed to be altogether strict statements of fact.

[^113]: _Thebes_, in Bœotia, which was razed to the ground by Alexander before his expedition into Asia.

[^118]: _Bactria_.—The northeastern extreme of the Persian Empire, bordering on northern India.

[^119]: _Susa_.—The biblical Shushan, one of the capital cities of the Persian Empire.

[^122]: _Pyramus_.—A river of Cilicia flowing southward from Mount Taurus and emptying into the Mediterranean. Strabo (book i, chap. iii, 7) describes it and quotes these lines of the Sibyl as all ancient oracle.

[^123]: _Sacred isle_.—Referring probably to Cyprus, which word Strabo here reads.

[^124]: _Cibyra_.—City of Asia Minor, in Phrygia, near the border of Caria. _Cyzicus_ was a city of Mysia, on an island of the same name in the Propontis.

[^126]: 126, 127. On _Samos_ and _Delos_ comp. book iii, 454.

[^134]: _Corinth_.—Destroyed by the Romans the same year as Carthage, B. C. 146.

[^138]: _Lay low_.—Read {Greek _strw'sei_}. Comp. book v, 587 (Greek text, 438). So Mendelssohn, favored by Rzach.

[^140]: _Myra_.—Chief city of Lycia, on the southern coast, about a league from the sea. Its ruins witness to its ancient wealth and beauty.

[^147]: _Patara_.—Sec book iii, 551.

[^148]: _Armenia_.—There was Armenia Major, the vast territory south of the Caucasus Mountains and between the Euxine and Caspian Seas; and Armenia Minor, a, small section on the west of Armenia Major, and east of Cappadocia. All these lands were subject to Alexander, then to the Syrian princes, and were made a Roman province under Trajan.

[^150]: _Solyma_.—That is, Jerusalem.

[^155]: _Mighty king_.—Nero, whose murder of his mother is notorious, and whose flight beyond the Euphrates and expected return as antichrist was a superstitious tradition long maintained.

[^162]: 162-165. This evidently refers to the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple, and the subjugation of all Palestine by the Romans under Vespasian and Titus.

[^167]: _Salamis and Paphos_.—Famous cities, one at the east and the other at the west end of Cyprus. “How often,” says Seneca (_Epist_. 91), “has this calamity (earthquake) laid Cyprus waste? How often has Paphos fallen into ruin?”

[^171]: 171-176. The great eruption of Vesuvius, which destroyed Pompeii and Herculaneum, A. D. 79, is construed by the Sibyl as a sign of God's anger against the Romans for the slaughter of the Jews.

[^178]: Fugitive of Rome.—Nero, referred to in lines 154-159 above.

[^184]: _Scyros_.—Large island of the Ægean Sea east of Eubœa.

[^191]: _Twice as much_.—Comp. book iii, 434-441.

[^194]: _Mæander_.—This stream, having its sources in Phrygia, ran westward between Caria and Lydia, and was famous for its many windings. Comp. Ovid, _Metam._, viii, 162-166.

[^209]: See lines 224-230, and comp. 2 Pet. iii, 7; Cicero, _de Natura Deorum_, ii, 49; Ovid, _Metam._ i, 256-258. Justin Martyr refers to this passage in his first Apology, chap. xx.

[^212]: _Knives_.—Read {Greek _sto'nuxas_} instead of {Greek _stonaxa's_}. This emendation proposed by Mendelssohn seems more suitable than the reading groanings, and finds favor with Rzach.

[^214]: _Wash_.—Reference to Christian baptism.

[^218]: 218-220. Cited in Lactantius, _de Ira Dei_, xxiii.

[^231]: 231-248. This picture of resurrection, judgment, and awarding of {footnote p. 109} punishments and rewards embodies the substance of familiar Christian doctrine. This passage is quoted in the _Apostolical Constitutions_, book v, 7 [G., 1, 844], where we find a somewhat abbreviated text.















































