---
title: "No. 173. Makkaṭa-Jātaka"
description: "The Jataka (Vol. II)"
published: true
date: 2025-2-5T20:16:49Z
tags: Buddhism, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2025-2-5T20:16:49Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Jakata_Vol_2/172">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">No. 172. Daddara-Jātaka</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Jakata_Vol_2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Jakata_Vol_2/174">
          <span class="pr-2">No. 174. Dūbhiya-Makkaṭa-Jātaka</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


<span id="p47"><sup><small>[ p. 47 ]</small></sup></span>

\[68\] “_Father, see! a poor old fellow_,” _etc_.—This story the Master told whilst staying in Jetavana, about a rogue.—The circumstances will be explained in the Uddāla Birth [^44], Book xiv. Here too the Master said, “Brethren, not this once only has the fellow turned out a rogue; in days of yore, when he was a monkey, he played tricks for the sake of a fire.” And he told a tale of days long gone by.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Benares, the Bodhisatta was born in a brahmin family in a village of Kāsi.. When he came of years, he received his education at Takkasilā, and settled down in life.

His lady in time bore him a son; and when the child could just run to and fro, she died. The husband performed her obsequies, and then, said he, “What is home to me now? I and my son will live the life of hermits.” Leaving his friends and kindred in tears, he took the lad to the Himalaya, became a religious anchorite, and lived on the fruits and roots which the forest yielded.

On a day during the rainy season, when there had been a downpour, he kindled some sticks, and lay down on a pallet, warming himself at the fire. And his son sat beside him chafing his feet.

Now a wild Monkey, miserable with cold, spied the fire in the leaf-hut of our hermit. “Now,” thought he, “suppose I go in: they'll cry out Monkey! Monkey! and beat me back: I shan't get a chance of warming myself.—I have it!” he cried. “I'll get an ascetic's dress, and get inside by a trick!” So he put on the bark dress of a dead ascetic, lifted his basket and crooked stick, and took his stand by the hut door, where he crouched down beside a palm tree. The lad saw him, and cried to his father (not knowing he was a monkey) “Here's an old hermit, sure enough, miserably cold, come to warm himself at the fire.” \[69\] Then he addressed his father in the words of the first stanza, begging him to let the poor fellow in to warm himself:

“Father, see! a poor old fellow huddled by a palmtree there!
Here we have a hut to live in; let us give the man a share.”

<span id="p48"><sup><small>[ p. 48 ]</small></sup></span>

When the Bodhisatta heard this, up he got and went to the door But when he saw the creature was only a monkey, he said, “My son, men have no such face as that; ’tis a monkey, and he must not be asked in here.” Then he repeated the second stanza:

“He would but defile our dwelling if he came inside the door;
Such a face—’tis easy telling—no good brahmin ever bore.”

The Bodhisatta seized a brand, crying—“What do you want there?”—threw it at him, and drove him away. Mr Monkey dropt his bark garments, sprang up a tree, and buried himself in the forest.

Then the Bodhisatta cultivated the Four Excellences until he came unto Brahma's heaven.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth: “This tricky Brother was the Monkey of those days; Rāhula [1](../174#fn45) was the hermit's son, and I myself was the hermit.” ’





<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Jakata_Vol_2/172">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">No. 172. Daddara-Jātaka</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Jakata_Vol_2">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Buddhism/The_Jakata_Vol_2/174">
          <span class="pr-2">No. 174. Dūbhiya-Makkaṭa-Jātaka</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## Footnotes

[^44]: 47:1 No. 487.