---
title: "Introduction"
description: "Islam"
published: true
date: 2024-11-26T10:15:16Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-26T10:15:16Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam/1_5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">5. He Rewards and Punishes</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam/2_1">
          <span class="pr-2">1. Muhammad the Messenger</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p57">[<sup><small>p. 57</small></sup>]</span>

Next to the Qur’ān itself, the most important Islamic textual material is the _Ḥadīth_: the body of transmitted actions and sayings of the Prophet and his Companions.

Professor Wilfred C. Smith has made a most perceptive analogy: the Qur’ān is in Islam what Christ is in Christianity, and Muhammad stands in relation to it as the Twelve Apostles to the Logos. The _Ḥadīth_, the record of how the Revelation occurred, and the Acts of the Apostle, or Messenger, is to Islam then roughly what the New Testament is to Christianity. [^7]

But here one must understand something which seems at first paradoxical; there are vast numbers of _ḥadīths_ which are admitted by Muslim scholars to be spurious. Even among those accepted by the medieval scholars, there are many which the modernists would reject. No absolute canon of _Ḥadīth_ has ever been established; certain compilers are recognized as more trustworthy than others, and some sects and schools accept _ḥadīths_ not accepted by others. For example, the eponym of the Ḥanbalī law-school, Ahmad ibn Ḥanbal, was a great collector of _Ḥadīth_, but his standards of criticism were not considered sufficiently rigorous, so his collection has never won full acceptance from the other law-schools.

This situation stems in part from the fact that each <span id="p58">[<sup><small>p. 58</small></sup>]</span> _ḥadīth_ is a separate story handed down with the backing (_isnād_) of a chain (_sanad_) of narrators. To be fully sound the _ḥadīth_ must include the name of each human link in the chain between the man who wrote it down and the Prophet.

One of the chief religious sciences of Islam rose to sift the stories thus transmitted and to investigate the veracity of each transmitter. To be sure, a man accepted as trust-worthy by one school might not be accepted by another, and no way could be devised to keep men from manufacturing a “chain”—since all its links were dead men—along with the tradition they transmitted. The number of _ḥadīths_ which could be demonstrated to be above suspicion would thus no doubt prove to be relatively small.

Nevertheless, the _Ḥadīth_ conveys precious information: almost all the early history of Islam and many of the moral precepts of the Prophet. It is indeed precisely the preciousness of the material which led to its being counterfeited.

Moreover, traditions which are themselves false may have a certain historical and moral value for later generations, if they are accepted in the early collections; they reflect the religious opinions of the first generations of pious Muslim scholars, the “Consensus” which has been so vital in the formulation of law and doctrine. Thus they relay values which earlier generations of experts pronounced “Islamic,” whether or not they relate a historical event. It follows then that not even _ḥadīths_ of dubious authenticity may be rejected out of hand, much less the _Ḥadīth_ as a whole, as some modernist extremists have wished to do.

It remains to be seen whether a new orthodox school of _Ḥadīth_ criticism can rise in modern times. Certainly the <span id="p59">[<sup><small>59</small></sup>]</span> first condition for it would be a general agreement by responsible people that this is desirable.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam/1_5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">5. He Rewards and Punishes</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam/2_1">
          <span class="pr-2">1. Muhammad the Messenger</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^7]: 59:1 Wilfred Cantwell Smith, “Some Similarities and Differences Between Christianity and Islam,” in Kritzeck and Winder, _The World of Islam_ (New York, 1959).