---
title: "6. The Universality of The Law"
description: "Islam"
published: true
date: 2024-11-26T10:15:16Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-26T10:15:16Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam/3_5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">5. The Rejecting of the Reprehensible (Al-nāhī ‘an al-munkar)</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam/4_0">
          <span class="pr-2">Introduction</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Until the nineteenth century A.D. the general tendency of the _‘ulamā’_ was to expand the practical application of the Law—already in theory eternal and universal—so as to give religious value to every act and aspect of life.

One means of doing this was the legal interpretations of the _muftīs_, the jurisconsults. While the _qāḍī_, or judge, heard cases and administered law, the _muftī_ gave his expert opinion only when it was formally requested about some point of law not fully covered by the _fiqh_ books. Thus new situations could be met within the framework of the Law. The answer of the _muftī_ constituted a _fatwa_, a legal opinion which formed legal precedent and helped determine the practical application of the Law.

The following _fatwas_ were given by Ebū Su’ūd (Abū Su‘ūd), the famous _muftī_ of Sulayman “The Magnificent” (Ottoman Emperor (A.D. 1520-1566), who was Shaykh-al-Islam, or Grand Muftī of the empire, from A.D. 1545 to 1574.

In themselves historically interesting, they illustrate the point that within the traditional confines of the Law there is a considerable area for freedom of interpretation. When <span id="p133">[<sup><small>133</small></sup>]</span> the ruler could rely on co-operative _‘ulamā’_\—and due to his control of posts, professorships and fellowships, this was usually possible, after the neo-orthodox Saljūq restoration—this freedom of interpretation could be invoked on behalf of the ruler's interests.

The “People of the Book”—Christians, Jews, Samaritans, Mandaeans, etc.—were permitted to apply their own legal systems in Muslim states, but certain aspects of the Muslim law applied to them as well, especially when they offended against Muslim morality.

In giving his _fatwas_, Ebū [Su‘ūd](./errata.htm#1) is guided by the Ḥanafī School, the official school of the Ottoman Empire.

1\. _Question_: When in several Muslim villages there is not a single mosque, and the inhabitants do not perform the congregational prayers, must the authorities force them to build a mosque and punish those who neglect to pray there?

_Answer_: Yes. In A.H. 940 \[A.D. 1533\] express edicts were issued for the attention of the local rulers of the Well-protected \[Ottoman\] Empire, that they compel the inhabitants of such villages to construct mosques and establish regular prayers. They shall proceed accordingly. Ebū Su‘ūd wrote as follows, God have mercy on him: “The Call to Prayer is one of the distinguishing characteristics of Islam, so that if the people of a city, town, or village refuse, the _Imām_ should force them, and if they do not do it, he should take up arms against them. And if the people of a town neglect the Call to Prayer, the performance of prayer, and the congregational prayers, he must fight them, for these are earmarks and outward signs of religion.” [^76]

2\. _Question_. One of the conditions of marriage is the _walī_ (the legally empowered representative of the bride), who is a necessary condition for the valid performance of matrimony for minors, mentally-ill women, and slave-women. There is disagreement in the case of a mature free woman of sound mind, as to whether she may independently contract marriage. <span id="p134">[<sup><small>p. 134</small></sup>]</span> Abū Sulaymān (the disciple of the Ḥanafī doctor Muhammad al-Shaybānī) reports Shaybānī as holding her marriage null and void. Abū Hafs (also his student), reports him as saying it is permissible if she has no representative, but if she does it depends on his consent; if he permits it takes place; if he refuses the marriage is void, regardless of whether the husband is her equal or not. Is the decision a judge may make on this conflicting evidence effective?

_Answer_: In the year A.D. 951 \[A.D. 1544\] the _qāḍis_ were enjoined to accept no marriage contract without the permission of the bride's _walī_; Ebū Su‘ūd wrote this.

3\. _Question_: In the _Muḥīt_ (law-book) it says: “A Ḥanafī may reckon by Shāfi‘i law as regards eating hyena-flesh and purposely neglecting to say ‘In the name of God!’ and a Shāfi‘ī may reckon by Ḥanafī law as regards drinking _muthallath_ \[wine boiled to a third of the original volume: not punishable for Ḥanafīs\], and marriage without a _walī_.” Now if the judge says “In this matter the precedents and opinions differ, so I shall follow the other doctrine here; it is permissible to regard her marriage as legal,” is his verdict legally valid?

_Answer_: Since it is illegal, it is certainly not valid. The authority of the _qāḍi_ stems from the permission and authority of the holder of caliphal power. Also, the _qāḍis_ have been enjoined to make use of the soundest opinion, so that the option of basing themselves on this legal disagreement is taken from them, especially since the general corruption of our era is obvious (and very few can correctly interpret the Law).

The original of the Imperial Decree is preserved in the Law courts of Istanbul, Pera, and Scutari, forbidding such practices. The corruptness of such practices is clearer than day; if they are followed, the families of certain people will come to ruin! [^77]

4\. _Question_: If the Jew Bakr says to the Christian Bishr, “Your Prophet Jesus (God's blessing be upon him!) was (God forbid!) an illegitimate child,” what must be done with the accursed one according to the Law?

<span id="p135">[<sup><small>p. 135</small></sup>]</span>

_Answer_: The unbelievers who publicly abuse the prophets (God's blessing be upon them all) shall be put to death; Ebū Su‘ūd wrote this . [^78]

5\. _Question_: If Zayd says “The book _Fuṡūṡ al-Ḥikam_ of the _Ṡūfī_ Shaykh Ibn al-‘Arabī is outside the sublime _Sharī‘a_ and was composed to misguide people; whoever studies it is a heretic (_mulḥid_),” what should be done with him according to the Law?

_Answer_: It is well known that this book contains expressions impossible to reconcile correctly with the _Sharī‘a_; the false superstition with which certain ignoramuses who are unaware of the procedures of the sublime _Sharī‘a_ have attempted to reconcile them deserve neither confidence nor respect. There is no doubt that the correct statements, found in his book are his own, but as for those which it is impossible to reconcile with the _Sharī‘a_, the shaykh's fame as well as his verifiable testimony in his other works testify that they are erroneously ascribed to him. It is well known that a certain Jew interpolated them so as to lead people into error. \[This is a fable designed to avoid condemnation of a brother Muslim.\]

It is necessary for Muslims to be on guard against them, and an Imperial Prohibition has been issued to that effect. In any case, avoidance is necessary. [^79]

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam/3_5">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">5. The Rejecting of the Reprehensible (Al-nāhī ‘an al-munkar)</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/Islam/4_0">
          <span class="pr-2">Introduction</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^76]: 135:28 _Ibid_., pp. 70, 71.

[^77]: 135:29 _Ibid_., p. 75.

[^78]: 135:30 _Ibid_., p. 78.

[^79]: 135:31 _Ibid_., pp. 77, 78.