---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 1 — Summer 1996"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1996 Georges Michelson Dupont, Dominique Ronfet, Jean Davier, Jeanmarie Chaise, François Dupont, Anne-Marie Ronfet, François Le Rohellec<br>© 1996 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>


<p style="text-align:center;">
Journal of the association L'A.F.L.L.U. French-speaking Association of Readers of the URANTIA Book<br>
Member of the I.U.A.<br>
<br>
Head office:<br>
8, Passage of the Good Seed<br>
75011 PARIS—France<br>
</p>

## Summary

- _The President's Word_
- _A short story about Personality_ by Dominique Ronfet
- _Infallible cosmic compass_ by J. Davier
- _Reflections — They tell us_ by Jeanmarie
- _The Adjuster according to Carl Gustav Jung_ by François Dupont
- _When a little peace descends upon us_ by Anne-Marie Ronfet
- _Letter to a friend_ (ANONYMOUS)
- _Urantia on the Internet_ by François Le Rohellec

## A word from the President

Dear friends and readers,

The first French-speaking Association of Readers of the _Urantia Book_ has been created. It supports the efforts of the Urantia Foundation in its tasks and aims to serve French-speaking readers in a spirit of true fraternity and openness.

The Urantian Link, its periodical journal, aims to be a link allowing the expression of diversity while respecting uniqueness, and the entire Urantian Link team is mobilizing to provide the means to do so.

May he be an example of tolerance, inspiration and brotherhood. It is up to you.

May the peace and faith of Jesus dwell in you.

G. Michelson Dupont
President of the A.F.L.L.U.



> 1955 URANTIA Foundation. All rights reserved. These materials from The URANTIA Book are used with permission. Any artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s), implied or stated, are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of URANTIA Foundation or its affiliates.
{.is-info}

## Short story about personality.

Our hero, tired, had just returned home. A day of work (“ordinary” he thought) was thus ending. A music, a bath...maybe an 'aperitif'. He had deserved it.

In fact our hero was not very satisfied with this day.

Now that he was alone, calm was slowly returning to him...as well as a surprising sentence that he had read a few days before and had left him skeptical:

[Read more](/en/article/Dominique_Ronfet/Petite_histoire_a_propos_de_la_personnalite)

Dominique Ronfet

## Infallible cosmic compass

We have read and appreciated the article by Jacques Tétrault in issue 100 of “Réflectivité” and entitled “priority”. This text is fundamental, it turns out to be more than a one-off study on a subject that is often quickly forgotten or becomes secondary.

Jacques Tétrault reveals and summarizes a vibrant experience of reality extending over a long period; it implies a lot of work, struggle, effort. His text reveals a maturity that becomes a questioning of oneself, of our methods, of our rules of life. It offers us not an outlet for our disillusionment but an opening onto the true human reality, the one that is difficult to reach by the hard path of human realities: super emotional clairvoyance, cosmic vision guiding us towards the morontia mota and the spirit.

[Read more](/en/article/Jean_Davier/Infaillible_compas_cosmique)

J. Davier

## Reflection: They tell us...

The writers of The Urantia Book tell us that they are unable to define personality. Therefore, this is not the goal we will set for ourselves, at least not until we are much further along in our spiritual evolution. They also tell us that even when we have reached Sonarington it will remain an enigma to us. However, they do not stop talking to us about it, and it is by reading and rereading them that we will gradually form an ever-closer idea of how it is a reality, our reality, the true mystery of our existence.

They tell us that “**thanks to the action of the Universal Father, the personality functions in, on, and with a set of material, mental, spiritual energies whose interassociation constitutes a mechanism**” [UB 16:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p8_2). This mechanism is therefore similar to individuality, and when the latter is deprived of personality, it nevertheless remains a material, mental and spiritual entity. The personality is therefore an elusive unifier and coordinator, but it is something else as well.

[Read more](/en/article/Jeanmarie_Chaise/Reflexion_Ils_nous_disent)

Jeanmarie

## The Adjuster according to C.G. Jung

Conducted in parallel with the L.U., readers of the writings of the great minds of our century and previous centuries, prove to be sources of astonishing richness, revealing unknown or complementary aspects of our Divine Monitor.

Throughout time, men have felt an inner presence, different from their ego, and have shared it with their contemporaries.

Today, we will stroll through the books of C.G. JUNG presented by Marie-Louise Von FRANZ: “C.G. JUNG, his myth and his time”, Ed. Buchet Castel 1975.

We bet that other L.U. readers will contribute to expanding the Urantia Adjuster picture, with discoveries gleaned left and right.

[Read more](/en/article/Francois_Dupont/LAjusteur_selon_C_G_Jung)

Francois Dupont

## When a little peace descends upon us

“Love your neighbor as yourself.”

A very difficult word to apply... The most elementary precepts of Christianity seem to many to be an almost ridiculous utopian idealism. And the skeptics smile mockingly at the fact of turning the other cheek if the first is struck... We live in a world totally opposed to the precepts of Christ.

Where does love hide in our hesitant hearts? Most of the time, we are afraid of tomorrow, of the sneaky illness, of the threatening unemployment and of death which appears as an abyss, as a void, as a non-existence if we do not have faith.

[Read more](/en/article/Anne_Marie_Ronfet/Quand_un_peu_de_paix_descend_sur_nous)

Anne-Marie Ronfet

## Letter to a friend

I have often heard it said that we live in a world in the process of perfection, which implies that since nothing is perfect on Urantia, he who wants to play the angel plays the beast.

Having said this, the confession I would like to make will be easier for me and I ask the jury to grant me the mitigating circumstances.

Here are the facts as they happened:

A few years ago, one evening, shortly before going to sleep, during some habitual meditations, a prayer came to my mind. Humility not being my main quality, I found this one remarkably beautiful. So I decided to make it my evening prayer. It was not often formulated with words, but I felt it present there, somewhere in a corner of my consciousness. Every time my morale was at its lowest, when the pain of living was felt, it was a great help to me.

Now one day, during a meeting of readers of the Book that unites us, a reader showed me this prayer written in black and white. I, who had kept it hidden deep in my mind, felt invaded by a confused feeling of jealousy and revolt. My blood boiled and I organized a Machiavellian plan with the aim of stealing this little piece of paper which, later, in a fit of anger, I ended up burning.

For two years, remorse has been eating away at me and it is to ease my conscience that I restore the spirit of this prayer, because the original words have gone up in smoke:

"Oh my father
Let joy be read on my lips
Let your word be spoken through my mouth
Let your love burn in my heart
May your will be done through my actions
Let your deeds be done by my hands
Let your will shine in my head
May your sweetness be exalted in my soul
Today, dad, if I cry, I know that my tears are the source of the future,
For it is your tears that flow through my eyes.

I am sure that many readers, searching within themselves, will know that it was from them that I stole these few words which are now rewritten and returned.

For this reason, I will not sign this piece of paper.

My friend, “my fellow man, my brother”, you who recognize and find here the Spirit of your own thought, put your signature.

Anonymous

## Urantia on the Internet

**<ins>Site Information</ins>**

What is a web server?

A web server is the provision, for the whole world, of interactive information presented in the form of screen pages updated regularly. It is in some ways a very improved but much more powerful Minitel (colors, sounds, images, etc.).

In the same way as the latter, the “Internet user” (the Web user) can simply consult the information but also send a message to people who have an electronic mailbox, discuss (discussion groups) with other visitors to the site via written messages recorded and stored from day to day (a message posted one day, replies the next day, and so on ad infinitum), register on a list to subscribe to a service, place an order and all this simply using his computer and a few clicks of the mouse.

[Read more](/en/article/Francois_Le_Rohellec/Urantia_sur_Internet)

Francois Le Rohellec

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

