---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 72 — Winter 2015"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2015 Ivan Stol, Georges Michelson-Dupont, Patrick Morelli<br>© 2015 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-72-winter-2015">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 72 — Winter 2015</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_01">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## Editorial

Dear readers, seekers of truth, Dear members of the AFLUB, after this eventful summer, the people of Toulon have decided to end this year by exhibiting The Urantia Book once again in the Toulon wellness fair, at the ZÉNITH next to the train station.

During this show, three small conferences will take place for people who want to know more than our time allows on the stand and we plan to invite in small information groups people who wish to discuss it at greater length during additional group meetings in Toulon.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_01)

## In this issue

- **Editorial** _Ivan Stol_
- **Already 60 years old** _Georges Michelson-Dupont_
- **Bill Sadler's Study of Functional Synthesis and Coordination** _Patrick Morelli_
- **Quebec International Meeting** _Ivan Stol_
- **Consciousness — Self-consciousness & God-consciousness** _Georges Michelson-Dupont_
- **Visit to Italy** _Georges Michelson-Dupont_
- **Interactive Study Group: Second Series** _Georges Michelson-Dupont_


## Already Sixty Years

On October 12, 1955, the Urantia Foundation published _The Urantia Book_ in the United States in a print run of 10,000 copies. History reveals that this was the culmination of a long preparatory work of contact undertaken as early as 1911 between super-celestial beings and a small group of people in the city of Chicago. The process of contact and transmission resulted in the materialization of the Urantia Papers in four parts, the first and second in 1934, the third in 1935, and the last, the life of Jesus, in 1937. In the hierarchy of Urantia revelations, it is the fifth.

This sixtieth anniversary is an opportune moment to take stock of some past events and attempt to project into the future.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Deja_60_ans)

_Georges Michelson-Dupont. Reclosed_

## Bill Sadler's Study of Functional Synthesis and Coordination

In his study Bill gives us more than one clue to try to understand the “Challenge of the Personality-Power synthesis”.

Indeed, when one apprehends the approach of the Actuals and Potentials, the Deity Absolute, the Unqualified Absolute and the Universal Absolute, these three Absolutes are subinfinite since after the “I AM” but in infinity they are ONE. Contrary to the actualization by the Universal Father of the Eternal Son and the concomitant act creating the Paradise Island, one might have expected that the unification by an act of synthesis, in the same way as the Universal Absolute, would occur with the Eternal Son, the Paradise Island and the Infinite Spirit.

[Read more](/en/article/Patrick_Morelli/Etude_de_Bill_Sadler_sur_la_synthese)

_Patrick Morelli._

## International Urantian Meeting of Quebec

After a “timeless” journey (departure 12:00, arrival 14:00 and 9:00 flight) the 175 km transit between Montreal and Sherbrooke that takes us to Bishops University gives us a glimpse of a landscape that encourages us to ask all kinds of questions to the driver who was happy to answer them. The weather was nice, not too hot and everything was green with little relief.

Arriving at this university just in time to participate in the presentation evening on the 30th at 7:00 p.m., I was able to immediately see a volunteer organization that was up to par and welcoming.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Rencontre_Internationale_du_Quebec)

Ivan Stol

## Consciousness — Self-Consciousness & God-Consciousness

The definitions of “consciousness” found in classical or philosophical dictionaries differ among themselves depending on whether they come from philosophy, psychology, psychiatry or the general sense, but all are more or less vague or incomplete, some confusing the mind with the spirit, others making no difference between consciousness and self-consciousness. The Urantia Book has the merit of specifying these notions which are so important for understanding the origin of what is called “consciousness”, the evolutionary mechanism which allows us to apprehend the three domains of material, intellectual and spiritual reality and the transcendent goal of these endowments which is to know God, to love him and to seek to do his will.

**Awareness**

The Urantia Book recognizes several kinds of consciousness.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Conscience_de_soi_Conscience_de_Dieu)

_Georges Michelson-Dupont. Reclosed_

## IMPRESSUM

The Urantian Link is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office:** 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: aflu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: www.urantia.fr and http://forum. urantia.fr

**Publication Director:** Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-chief:** Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading committee:** Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol \& Patrick Morelli.

_The Link:_ Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

All rights reserved. Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

## Visit to Italy

THE very first meeting of Italian readers of _The Urantia Book_ took place in Verona, the beautiful and historic city of Romeo and Juliet from Friday 28th to Sunday 30th August. This event was initiated and organized by my long-time friend Danielle La Scala, an Italian-Swiss.

Of the eight Italians who had initially offered to come, 5 showed up and only 3 participated in the entire meeting. Memo Zago, the Italian translator of _The Urantia Book_, arrived on Saturday morning and another person did not come until Saturday afternoon. In addition to Danielle, my wife Marlene and myself, Antonio Shefer from the Netherlands, representing Urantia Association International (UAI), a Swiss reader from Lausanne and three French readers from the Marseille area were present, including the President of the French association.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Visite_en_Italie)

_Georges Michelson-Dupont_

## Interactive Study Group

> In the new edition of the Link, we invite you to explore some concepts from the _Urantia Book_ in an interactive way, somewhat like a study group. Questions on a given theme will be asked with a list of readings suggested to answer them.
> 
> These questions will also be posted on the forum and those who wish will be able to exchange their points of view. For a first attempt we have chosen the following theme which will be spread over four issues of the Link.
{.is-info}

**The Inevitable Injunction**

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Groupe_d_etude_interactif_2)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-72-winter-2015">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 72 — Winter 2015</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_01">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
