---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 73 — March 2016"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2016 Ivan Stol, Patrick Morelli, Robert Gallo, Jean-Claude Romeuf, Bernard Dugas, Georges Michelson-Dupont<br>© 2016 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>


## Editorial

Dear readers of the Link, dear Urantians, the editorial team of the Link hopes that the end of year 2015 holidays went well and that good resolutions for the beginning of the year have been made, such as actively participating in your Link by sending your thoughts and/or your articles related to your study of the _Urantia Book_.

- Issue 73 of The Link deals with the study of certain superhuman endowments and aids which ascending creatures receive on Urantia.
- From the Universal Father we receive The Personality. What is its purpose? When does it become functional? What role does it play in the Personality-Power synthesis? The authors will attempt to answer these questions.
- The Mother Spirit of the local universe is the source of the circuit of adjutant mind spirits, explains The Urantia Book. They play a primary role in the functioning of the minds of animal creatures and in the phenomenon of evolution. How do certain experiments tend to demonstrate this?

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_02)

## In this issue

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **Following the Personality-Power phenomenon**, _Patrick Morelli_
- **The circuits of the mental adjutant spirits**, _Robert Gallo_
- **Pierrot**, _Jean-Claude Romeuf_
- **History of the French-speaking movement in Europe**, _Ivan Stol_
- **Role of personality in our earthly experience**
- **Lumen**, _Bernard Dugas_
- **European Conference in Budapest**
- **Interactive study group: third series**, _Georges Michelson-Dupont_
- **About UBIS School**
- **UBIS School Courses for the April Term**


## Following the Power-Personality Phenomenon

In the attempt to understand the distinction that can be made between the Supreme Being, God the Supreme and the Almighty Supreme, does the Supreme Being have one personality or several? The three denominations certainly have only one and the same personality. The diversity probably comes from the level of their manifestation, paragraph 5 of the introduction to booklet 116 is evocative of this positioning.

This is the case with all of Divine creation, which taken separately, without a vision of synthesis of the whole, can appear disparate, anachronistic and lacking in logic. Although we are incapable of having a clear and precise vision of this totality, spiritual clairvoyance, through its fleeting flashes of lucidity, allows us to envisage certain designs of our Creator.

[Read more](/en/article/Patrick_Morelli/Suite_au_phenomene_Personnalite_Pouvoir)

***Patrick Morelli***

## IMPRESSUM

_The Urantian Link_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved. Materials from_ The Urantia Book _are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates._

## The Circuits of Adjutant Minds: What is the Evidence? How Does it Work?

In _The Urantia Book_ we read: “It is the presence of the seven adjutant mind-spirits on the primitive worlds which conditions the course of organic evolution; this explains why evolution is **premeditated and not accidental**” ( [UB 36:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p5_1) ).

Everything is said, the living is connected to a kind of “cloud” which guides and conditions it. From trilobites to mammals, the program was written...

Today, as yesterday, humanity is connected to the adjutant circuits which interact with the mind.

[Read more](/en/article/Robert_Gallo/Les_circuits_des_esprits_mentaux_adjuvats)

***Robert Gallo***

## PIERROT

Before telling this story, I remember the melody and lyrics of a beautiful Sevillian song called El Amigo. Every time a friend leaves, he leaves behind a lot of sadness and emptiness. So, when you are near him in his last hours, you would like to hold on to him a little longer, just a little while. The song says in Spanish: “Don't go yet, wait until my guitar cries as it says goodbye.”

But I could not keep my friend Pierrot on land. He was eleven years older than me. I remember that he took me for walks when I was a child and taught me to swim. Although he was often absent during my adolescence, our friendship developed in adulthood until death separated us. I can say without lying that I knew all the important events of his life. Modesty prevented me for a long time from recounting his last hours. After some hesitation, I am telling them today, counting on your discretion not to reveal this to anyone!

[Read more](/en/article/Jean_Claude_Romeuf/Pierrot)

***Jean-Claude Romeuf***

## The History of the French-speaking Urantia Book Movement

Dear French-speaking readers, for the twentieth anniversary of our association, the AFLUB office wishes to compile the main events that have made its history in order to reconstruct the chronology as faithfully as possible and present them in a synthetic manner following a historical methodology.

To do this we need your testimonies, your documents, your photos and more generally any document presenting content or historical value.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Histoire_du_mouvement_francophone_d_Europe)

## Role of personality in our earthly experience

_When is personality functional?_

**INTRODUCTION**

We are not going to try to define personality, but rather to understand when and how we can use personality on this planet. Before doing so we must make two preliminary remarks.

1. _The Urantia Book_ tells us that personality is the sole gift of the Father [[UB 33:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/33#p2_2)]. This sentence poses no problem in French, it is ambiguous in English, (_Personality is the sole bestowal of the Father_ ( [UB 32:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p2_2) ) and, out of context, could lead one to believe that it is the only gift that God gives us. Attentive readers know well that the Thought Adjuster... is the gift of the Father to man. ([UB 101:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/101#p3_2)) In fact, one should simply read this expression as if there were: “the father is the sole giver of personality.”

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Role_de_la_personnalite_dans_notre_experience_terrestre)

## Lumen

<p style="text-align:center;">

You, heart of my body, Flame<br>
Who weaves my thoughts with your Truth<br>
To bind me to you by building my Soul<br>
You thus offer me all of Eternity.<br>
<br>
You, center of my life, divine radiance<br>
Who plots with my Destiny<br>
To strengthen me along the way<br>
Your only desire is to see us engaged.<br>
<br>
</p>

[Read more](/en/article/Bernard_Dugas/Lumen)

***Bernard Dugas***

## European Conference for Readers of The Urantia Book

Organized by “The Blue Club” Budapest — September 15 - September 18, 2016

This meeting is organized by Le Blue Club, an association of European readers who have given several conferences mainly in Germany.

It will be held at the Novotel Budapest Central Hotel, Rakoczi ut 43-45, BudAPEST 1088

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Conference_Europeenne_de_Budapest)

## Interactive Study Group

> In the new edition of the Link, we invite you to explore some concepts from the _Urantia Book_ in an interactive way, somewhat like a study group. Questions on a given theme will be asked with a list of readings suggested to answer them.
> 
> These questions will also be posted on the forum and those who wish will be able to exchange their points of view. For a first attempt we have chosen the following theme which will be spread over four issues of the Link.
{.is-info}

**The Inevitable Injunction**

**Introduction to the third period**

During the second period we found that God has equipped us with everything we need to do his divine will, a mind, the “arena of choice” which provides us with consciousness; a unique personality with free will which gives us awareness of ourselves and others; a physical body as the vehicle of our personality; a Thought Adjuster bringing with it a perfect pattern of spiritual career to inspire and guide us to the Universal Father; and finally our soul, the joint creation of our material mind and our Thought Adjuster which grows as we do the will of God and eventually merges with our Thought Adjuster.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Groupe_d_etude_interactif_3)

## Urantia Book Internet School (UBIS)

About UBIS
http-//ubis.urantia.org/moodle/

UBIS is an online school operated under the sponsorship of Urantia Foundation. One of the goals of Urantia Foundation is “to implement means and methods” for the dissemination of the teachings of The Urantia Book. UBIS is one such means. UBIS provides a safe and friendly virtual classroom for small groups of truth seekers from around the world to share their insights without the constraints of time and space. Students of all ages (13 and up) are welcome to participate. (We are legally prohibited from enrolling students under the age of 13). Children are welcome with parental consent and supervision or that of a guardian. Family groups have had great success participating in UBIS classes.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/A_propos_de_l_ecole_UBIS)

## URANTIA BOOK INTERNET SCHOOL (UBIS) — April Term 2016 — Hearts in French

For more information, visit the foundation's website at: urantia.org/fr

**1. Course Title: Evolutionary Humanoid Life.**

**Course Level**: Intermediate.

**Lectures**: Sections of ascicles 34, 36, 42, 49, 52 and 65.

**Course Description:**

In this course we will see together how humanoid life appears on evolutionary planets, the types of life possible, who creates it and who is responsible for implanting it and how does it take place? We will also study the different planetary epochs traveled by all evolutionary mortals and we will complete this course with an overview of the control of evolution that celestial beings exercise on these worlds. The particular case of Urantia will eventually be the subject of another study.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Cours_de_UBIS_pour_le_trimestre_d_avril)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

