---
title: "Le Lien Urantien — Issue 75 — September 2016"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 2016 Ivan Stol, Moustapha K. NDiaye, Jean Royer, Jean Anet, Johan Vanderalle, Max Masotti, Tor Eriksen, Ralph D. Zehr MD.<br>© 2016 French-speaking Urantia Book Readers Association</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-75-septembre-2016">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 75 — September 2016</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_04">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## Editorial

Hello dear readers of the _Urantia Book_, It is the twentieth anniversary of the AFLUB and the results are not very brilliant. We live in a country whose inhabitants have many ideas but with great difficulty in giving them validity. They would like a brotherhood but do not ask themselves the question of what this implies. Similarly, many speak of their one God without thinking about what this concept really implies. This is the whole difference between a seeker of Truth and a simple believer.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_04)

## Imprint

_Le Lien Urantien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved. Materials from_ The Urantia Book _are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates._

## Issue 75 — September 2016

**Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
**Should We Be Afraid of Islam?**, _Moustapha K. NDiaye_
**Brief Reflections on Time**, _Jean Royer_
**ABFU Review and Resignation**, _Jean Anet_
**Spiritual Love**, _Jean Anet_
**Goodbye Bernhard**, _Johan Vanderalle_
**Chales National Meeting**, _Ivan Stol_
**2016 General Meeting Report**, _Max Masotti — Tor Eriksen_
**2016 Scientific Symposium in Chicago**
**Unicellular Organism The Cambrian Explosion — Nanomachines**, _Ralph D. Zehr MD._

## Should we be afraid of Islam for the future?

The recent massacres committed in North America, Europe and also in the Middle East have caused a wave of incomprehension and indignation throughout the world. This Islamist violence linked to Jihadism is claimed and justified in the name of a rigorous Islam by those who commit these mass massacres.

We wanted to know how these events are experienced by those who live their faith in Islam within the framework of the teachings of the Urantia Book and in a more direct way we asked the question “where is Islam going in the 21st century” to Moustapha Kemal N'Diaye from the Dakar group (Senegal).

[Read more](/en/article/Moustapha_NDiaye/Faut_Il_Avoir_Peur_de_L_islam)

Moustapha K. Ndiaye. Dakar, June 15, 2016

## Brief Reflection on Time

Man has always sought the elixir of long life; yet the _Urantia Book_ tells us: _human beings are born, live, and die in a relatively instant_. (<a id="a85_145"></a>[UB 112:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/112#p5_4))

The notion of time is variable for men and immortals.

Let us consider the following few facts:

> *987,000,000,000* years ago associate force organizer and then acting inspector number 811,307 of the Orvonton series, traveling out from Uversa, reported to the Ancients of Days that space conditions were favorable for the initiation of materialization phenomena in a certain sector of the, then, easterly segment of Orvonton. (<a id="a91_331"></a>[UB 57:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p1_3))

[Read more](/en/article/Jean_Royer/Breves_Reflexions_Sur_Le_Temps)

Jean Royer — July 2016

## Jean Anet, assessment and resignation of the presidency of the ABFU

_(Belgian Francophone Association of Urantia affiliated with the I.U.A.)_

ON AUGUST 12, 2006, Gaétan Charland and Gary Rasslings were in Belgium to inaugurate our Belgian Urantia association: the ABFU (Association Belge Francophone d'Urantia). I was appointed president of the association, François Dupont, secretary and Guillaume Kalonji, treasurer. We did not really function as three association leaders because François Dupont was already very ill, and it was I who carried the movement since then. My role consisted of relaunching membership applications each year and holding meetings at least once a year. I also took care of the UAI Journal that I sent to the members with the LINK each quarter. After several years, I became more involved in the movement, I started by organizing study groups at my home, then, as I was doing salons for my research, I set up a table to present the book, then I gave conferences at these salons on the Urantia Book.

[Read more](/en/article/Jean_Anet/Bilan_et_Demission_de_L_ABFU)

**JEAN ANNET — BELGIUM**

## Spiritual Love

On May 6, 7 and 8, a new course called 'Spiritual Love' took place in French-speaking Belgium.

This course was born from a desire expressed several times in the study groups in Belgium to concretely experience the teachings of The Urantia Book. Some felt that the study groups were too intellectual, too mental in the first sense of the term and often too far removed from reality.

During the international symposium in Sherbrooke, Quebec in 2015, a meeting took place between Guy Perron from Quebec and Jean Annet from Belgium as well as their respective wives and partners to consider a new seminar that would link the teachings of the _Urantia Book_ as well as Personal Development techniques.

[Read more](/en/article/Jean_Anet/L_amour_Spirituel)

Jean ANNET


## Goodbye Bernhard!

_Testimony of Johan Vanderalle (Belgium)_

Bernhard and I first met in 1999. From 2001 onwards we chose to follow a spiritual path which brought us closer together and we became best friends.

Almost four years ago, at the end of 2012, I proposed to develop together a seminar to ‘Learn to know God’ or to know Him better. A basic seminar called ‘Ecce Homo’ was developed, aiming

- To captivate the minds and touch the hearts of non-readers (thus unfamiliar with the Book) to the main theme—getting to know God—by responding to their basic spiritual needs and their questions concerning the true nature and meaning of their humanity, thus delicately introducing _The Urantia Book_ into this basic seminar course.

- To offer Cectors and study groups a different, progressive and thematic approach with cross-references.

[Read more](/en/article/Johan_Vanderalle/Au_Revoir_Bernhard)

## The National Meeting of Chales.

**Theme: Spiritual influences.**
_June 2 to 5, 2016_

The study of these influences on our life, here limited at first to that of the Adjuster and the angels, leads us to work on the understanding of the higher functions of our mind and all that contributes to it. The creation of the soul with the help of the Adjuster is done at a morontia level but the last two adjutant mind spirits work at levels which allow our personality, by using the super-consciousness of the mind to perceive the boundaries of these levels where spirituality is more apt to express itself. The soul is the reference which allows us to perceive the directives of the Adjuster. The more our soul grows, the more our communication with the Adjuster is real.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Reunion_Nationale_De_Chales)

**Ivan**

## Report of the General Assembly Year 2016

**INTRODUCTION**

This year, despite the low number of participants, and thanks to the modification of our statutes, we were able to hold a valid general meeting with 13 registered members and two proxies.

**General**

For several years the number of members has been decreasing, due to lack of renewal and the remaining members are doing as best they can to keep the association running. But if we look back over 20 years, this has often been the case.

**Agenda**

The operation does not pose any particular problems, but our reception of consultants is rather poor. How can groups be created with so few members so far apart?

[Read more](/en/article/Max_Masotti_and_Tor_Eriksen/Rapport_de_l_Assemblee_Generale_2016)

**Tor Eriksen & Max Mazotti**

## Scientific Symposium 2016

_Chicago — June 2-6, 2016_

The community of readers and students of The Urantia Book includes many scientists, academics and researchers who, as part of their activities, present the results of their studies in light of the data offered by The Urantia Book during annual symposia organized by different Urantia organizations. These works inspired by the revelation allow us to discern more deeply the facts of God, the law of God and the love of God by reconciling science, philosophy and religion. The reading committee of The Link has decided to translate and publish at the rate of one or two presentations per issue those that were given at the 2016 Scientific Symposium organized by the Urantia Foundation in Chicago last May. These presentations in English were filmed in their entirety and can be viewed on U-Tube at the following address:

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Symposium_Scientifique_2016_a_Chicago)

## Single-celled organisms The Cambrian explosion — Nanomachines

**So Many Moving Parts — How Do They Fit Together?**

_By Ralph D. Zehr M.D._

**Unicellular organisms**

IT IS GENERALLY THOUGHT that life began as single-celled organisms. An understanding of the morphology and function, particularly of single-celled organisms, is therefore essential to any serious study of the origin of life. All living cells belong to one of two groups: prokaryotes or eukaryotes.

**Prokaryotes** appear much simpler, lacking most organelles except ribosomes. They contain a region in which DNA molecules are relatively concentrated in the central region of the cell, in contrast to eukaryotes in which intracellular DNA is enclosed in a nuclear membrane or envelope.

[Read more](/en/article/Ralph_Zehr/Organisme_Unicellulaire_L_explosion_Cambrienne_Nanomachines)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-75-septembre-2016">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 75 — September 2016</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_04">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
