---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 78 — June 2017"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2017 Ivan Stol, Simon Orsini, Georges Michelson-Dupont, André Chappuis, Jaap Tera, Marta Elders<br>© 2017 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-78-juin-2017">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 78 — June 2017</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_07">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## Hello dear readers,

Our spiritual evolution requires a time of experiences and a time of reflection. Experience teaches us to perceive, through relationships in action, the laws that govern social life and the choices we can make according to our capacity to serve or satisfy our ambitions. But the true understanding of what we do or must do only comes from deep analyses of the ins and outs of our actions.

These analyses are of two types, those which make us feel the values and those which lead to meanings. The former appeal to the spirit, spirituality, the latter use our mind.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_07)

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.


## Issue 78 — June 2017

- **Editorial**, Ivan Stol.
- **The Part Makes the Whole Progress**, Simon Orsini.
- **UBIS The Study Framework — Pedagogy**, Georges Michelson-Dupont.
- **Planetary Overpopulation**, André Chappuis
- **The Urantia Book: Corrections to the 1955 text**, Georges Michelson-Dupont
- **10th International Conference of the UAI Association — Amsterdam, Netherlands**, Jaap Tera
- **The Spiritual Brain**, Marta Elders


## The Part Advances the Whole

The clinging belief has been overtaken by a higher consciousness of destiny, it is liberated by faith. Faith is the test pilot of the mind, for it allows each individual to have a direct connection with our creator.

When we decide to adopt spiritual values, we are in the right resolution, the spirit intercedes for us, because all those who are led by the spirit are sons of God.

It is important to advance the potential in a positive way, giving the negative only the value of an experience due to evolution.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/La_Partie_Fait_Progresser_Le_Tout)

Simon Orsini

## U.B.I.S. the study framework — Pedagogy

This presentation focuses on the importance of studying The Urantia Book with others in a stimulating setting, with a dynamic and progressive method. Taking seriously the fact that we are exposed to the teachings of The Urantia Book, gives us the immense opportunity to become a better person by developing our cosmic consciousness and improving our spiritual perception, that is, to better understand and live the will of the Heavenly Father.

The words of Jesus resonate in our hearts:

> “The new kingdom which my Father is about to establish in the hearts of his earthly children is destined to be an everlasting empire. There will be no end to this reign of my Father in the hearts of those who desire to do his divine will.”;

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/UBIS_Le_Cadre_D_etude_La_Pedagogie)

Georges Michelson-Dupont
Director of the UBIS school

## Planetary Overpopulation

According to current statistics, in 70 years, one third of humanity could be living in Africa. Statistics are necessary for politicians so that the decisions they make today have the best chance of resulting in correct facts in the future. But, statistics predicting the future we will have in just 15 or 20 years will be influenced by so many factors that what happens then will probably be very different from what we imagine today. So, to say that in 70 years one third of humanity will be African is perhaps a great exaggeration.

Our planet has been overpopulated for several decades, and decision-makers will soon be forced to make decisions to limit the population.

[Read more](/en/article/Andre_Chappuis/Surpopulation_Planetaire)

André Chappuis


## The Urantia Book — Corrections to the original 1955 text

### A Little History

The first three parts of _The Urantia Book_ were completed and certified by the Revelation Commission in 1934 A.D. The papers on the life of Jesus were not issued until 1935. The Revelation Commission then asked the members of the Forum to look again at the text and ask any questions that might “clarify the concepts” and “remove all ambiguities.” Questions were accepted until 1942.

On November 1, 1941, Donnelly began the process of composing the Introduction. The text was now in typewritten form. By the end of 1942, the text was completely typeset. Proofing could then begin. This took place over a period of more than 10 years (between 1942 and 1950). Each page was typeset by a typographer at Donnelly's press in order to produce a proof. It was carefully checked and compared to the corresponding page typed by Emma Christensen (one of the four people making up the Human Contact Committee) in order to detect and correct typos, punctuation errors, and typographical and/or grammatical errors. It was a monk's work, some pages were retyped up to five times. During this whole period of control it is interesting to note that the developers informed the contact committee that there were six significant errors. Three or four were found, approved by the developers and corrected.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/TUB_Corrections_au_texte_de_1955)

_Georges Michelson-Dupont_

## 10th International Conference of the UAI Association

***From April 12 to 15, 2018***

**Amsterdam — Netherlands**

**Conference Theme**

This conference, with the theme “Jesus the Teacher,” is expected to attract many readers of The Urantia Book from around the world. The subtitle, “Are You Ready to Live His Teachings in the 21st Century,” is a question that invites us to explore our knowledge of Jesus' teachings, his personal religion, and his message in this new century. How can we be disciples and teachers of the future?

[Read more](/en/article/Jaap_Tera/10eme_Conference_Internationnale_De_L_association_UAI)

## The Spiritual Brain — Evolutionary Understanding and Revelatory Illumination

By Marta A. Elders
(Presented at the 2016 Scientific Symposium)

The purpose of this paper is to examine our understanding of the brain in light of the revelatory information presented in _The Urantia Book_. We will proceed with our study, beginning with a brief description of the cosmological context as revealed in _The Urantia Book_ in which evolution occurs. We will then consider the significance of this process, the intricate beauty of this plan, and the structure provided by beings of a high order, while simultaneously exploring what we, as evolutionary beings, have discovered. We will discuss the mechanics of the brain, examine the relationship between the brain and the mind, and explore how the brain, through consciousness, becomes a conduit to the spirit. We will conclude with a brief overview of the research that supports a relationship between spirituality and our living brain.

[Read more](/en/article/Marta_Elders/Le_Cerveau_Spirituel)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-78-juin-2017">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 78 — June 2017</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_07">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
