---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 80 — December 2017"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2017 Ivan Stol, Claude Flibotte, Simon Orsini, Patrick Morelli<br>© 2017 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-80-décembre-2017">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 80 — Décembre 2017</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_09">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## Dear readers,

Despite a sustained controversy over the origins of The Urantia Book, those who have read it seem to be attached to it by discovering the true spiritual values it contains. This is how, throughout the world, under the impetus of small groups that are increasingly numerous, spirituality and fraternity are developing gradually and almost uniformly. On the other hand, the methods differ according to the continents and the peoples, allowing imagination and creativity to express themselves widely, announcing future instructive exchanges. I will speak about this later.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_09)

Ivan

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.


## Number 80 - December 2017

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **Questioning about God the Sevenfold and other definitions**, _Claude Flibotte_
- **The Universe Is There, Chance Has Nothing To Do With It**, _Simon Orsini_
- **Can the Term “Tension” Enlighten Us on the Trinity**, _Patrick Morelli_
- **Meeting in Italy**, _Ivan Stoll_
- **European Meeting in Spain**, _Ivan Stoll_
- **Toulon Book Fair**, _Ivan Stol_

## The universe is there, chance has nothing to do with it

The world did not appear by a magic wand of a so-called nature, but by a Creator whose design was carried out by subordinates. The organization of the universe is intelligent, so it must have the same origin.

The amoeba is the very type of single-celled organism that has perpetuated itself almost without modification.

This microscopic creature and its protozoan cousins correspond in animal creation to the bacteria of the plant world.

The stage was thus set for the appearance of the first vertebrate animals, fish.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/L_univers_Est_La_Le_Hasard_Ny_Est_Pour_Rien)

Simon Orsini

## Can the term “Tension” enlighten us on The Trinity?

The term tension in the singular and plural is used in 25 paragraphs, apart from meanings such as nervous, psychological or other tension.

> “_As a time-space creature would view the origin and differentiation of Reality, the eternal and infinite I AM achieved Deity liberation from the fetters of unqualified infinity through the exercise of inherent and eternal free will, and this divorcement from unqualified infinity produced the first *absolute divinity-tension.* This tension of infinity differential is resolved by the Universal Absolute, which functions to unify and co-ordinate the dynamic infinity of Total Deity and the static infinity of the Unqualified Absolute._” (<a id="a91_541"></a>[UB 0:3.21](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p3_21))

In this chapter the term tension is used for the first time in The Urantia Book. One of the observations which may be made concerning the liberation of Deity from the fetters of unqualified infinity is that the inherent and eternal free will of Deity is apparently not comprehended in the fetters of the unqualified. The term divorce also suggests a rupture between the static unqualified and the dynamic infinity of Deity which is resolved or compensated by the Universal Absolute, which reunifies and coordinates these two antipodal states. The Urantia Book infers from this that the Universal Absolute was inevitable in the act of the absolute free will of the Universal Father.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Terme_Tension_Peut_Il_nous_Eclairer_sur_la_Trinite)

Patrick Morelli

## Questioning God The Sevenfold and Other Definitions

Following the questioning of my friend Éric Tarissan and those raised by Guy Perron about God the Sevenfold, here is my understanding as of today. Despite the fact that I have been studying this theme and many others for several years within another study group, I do not consider myself an expert on the subject. I feel and see myself much more as a perpetual student facing the mysterious beauties that await me in the eternal future!

I believe that we must follow the example provided by our revelators and, first of all, grasp the meaning of the words used in order to clarify our thinking. Let us therefore look at some of these definitions.

[Read more](/en/article/Claude_Flibotte/Questionnement_sur_Dieu_le_Septuple_et_autres_definitions)

Claude Flibotte

## Meeting in Italy

In Rimini, on the shores of the Adriatic and opposite Croatia, kilometers of beaches hosted this third Franco-Italian meeting.

***The topic: Doing God's will***

***Participants:***
- _Jean Duveau_: duveaujeanmce@yahoo.fr
- _Ivan Stol_: ivan.stol@free.fr
- _Guy De Viron_: guydeviron@bluewin. ch
- _Lino Olivetta_: lino.olivetta@bluewin. ch
- _Danielle La Scala Martinet_: daniellelascala19@gmail.com
- _Alberto Dujela_: giovariete@gmail. com
- _Nirvana Bussadori_: nirvanabussadoridesigner@gmail.com
- _Deanna Bussadori_: deanna.bussadori@hotmail.com
- _Rosella_: rrvrosa@infinito.it
- _Eros_: dangeloerosd@alice.it
- _Maria_: maria.mery@alice.it
- _Sonia (Ketty)_: corte1957@gmail.com
- _Cesare Nicoletti_: cesare09@usa.com

They are now in the list of ectors_urantians_italians@urantia.fr.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Rencontre_en_Italie)

## European Meeting in Spain

Again, not far from the beach, the town of Sitges near Barcelona hosted this European inter-association meeting in Spain.

There were 18 of us for 8 associations:
- _Antonio Sheffer_ who passed the torch of head of the conference committee in Europe to _Sebastian Nozzi_
- _Olga Lopez Molina_, _Francisco Ruiz_ and _Carmelo Martinez_ from Spain
- _Danielle La Scala_, _Luis Garcia-Bory_ and _Sandra Burgo-Cisneros_ from Switzerland
- _Christopher Moseley_ of England
- _Alexander Hehlert_ and _Sebastian Nozzi_ from Germany
- _Eija Seppänen-Bolotinski_ and _Risto Mäntinen_ from Finland
- _Jaap Terra_, _Ina Terra_ and _Anna Zeven_ from the Netherlands
- _Karmo Kalda_ from Estonia
- _Ivan Stol_ and _Lucas Perier_ from France

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Rencontre_Europeenne_en_Espagne)

_Ivan Stol — November 2017_

## Some mota morontia pearls (<a id="a153_30"></a>[UB 3:2.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p2_15))

The weak take pleasure in resolutions, but the strong act. Life is but a day's work—do it well. The act is ours, its consequences are God's.

Knowledge is only possessed by sharing it; it is safeguarded by wisdom and made social by love.

Progress requires the development of individuality. Mediocrity seeks to perpetuate itself in uniformity.

The argumentation needed to defend a thesis is inversely proportional to the truth contained in that thesis.

## Book Fair in Toulon

Hello everyone. I again held a UB presentation stand in Toulon.

I met a few people who were surprised to discover a book that many volunteers were making known through their translation work, their donations and their rationality.

There were people, but only curious and intrigued people stopped to ask what it was about because as you can see in the photos, there was little information. Some even found the stand to have a more scientific than spiritual aspect.

Despite this, I had the joy of being able to speak about this book to several entire families, young people who were very alert and already on a personal path identical to that recommended in the book, and many others.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Salon_du_livre_de_Toulon)




## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-80-décembre-2017">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 80 — Décembre 2017</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_09">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
