---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 83 — September 2018"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2018 Ivan Stol, Danielle La Scala, Max Masotti, G. Michelson-Dupont, Thierry Lepage, Simon Orsini, Guy Stéphane Nyassé<br>© 2018 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-83-septembre-2018">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 83 — September 2018</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_12">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



Dear readers, truth seekers, here are new readings and opinions from some of you. This summer, after our instructive national meeting on our relationship with the Supreme, which I will tell you about later, there were interesting Zoom discussions on the “example of Jesus” as a type of man able to teach what he himself had learned and above all understood, then other equally captivating subjects. Through the exchange, we perceive better what tolerance, justice, doing the will of God implies.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_12)

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

# Issue 83 — September 2018

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **AFLUB Annual Meeting**, _Max Masotti_
- **Group Study of The Urantia Book**, _G. Michelson-Dupont_
- **Prayer in the form of a Poem**, _Thierry Lepage_
- **Electrons-Neutrons-Protons**, _Simon Orsini_
- **The Birth of the Spirit**, _A collective_
- **News from Cameroon**, _Guy Stéphane Nyassé_

## AFLUB Annual Meeting

JUNE 4-7, 2018

Estate of La Neylière

**Call list for the meeting of the Ordinary General Assembly**

On June 4, 2018 at 9 p.m., members of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ met at the La Neylière estate for an ordinary general meeting, at the call of President Ivan Stol.

- _Total number of members: Thirty-nine_ (39)
- _Number of participants: Sixteen_ (16)
- _Number of members present: Fourteen_ (14)
- _plus 10 powers_ (according to attached annex)

[Read more](/en/article/Max_Masotti/Reunion_Annuelle_de_l_AFLUB)

## Studying The _Urantia Book_ In A Study Group

The content of the _Urantia Book_ is totally different from any other teaching, it is _intellectual_ by the contribution of new information, forgotten or missing on our planet, _morontial_ by the presentation of new concepts on the Deity and the organization of the universe, and _spiritual_ by a renewed presentation of the truth throughout the book and the life and teachings of Jesus. The authors have gathered in a book of more than 2100 pages a collection of 197 fascicles logically organized from the transcendent to the immanent, presented as courses dealing each time with independent subjects but linked forming a gigantic puzzle.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Etude_du_Livre_D_Urantia_en_Groupe)

## Prayer in the Form of a Poem

I have no eyes,
than for God.

Young or old,
let us be pious.

In order to attain the kingdom of heaven,
and thus to taste the marvelous.

[Read more](/en/article/Thierry_Lepage/Priere_sous_forme_de_Poeme)

Thierry

## Electrons, Protons, Neutrons

Life and matter are two different things in our universe. Life as we know it could not exist without the presence of this matter. But matter by itself cannot give life, because its only source is that of the Universal Father.

In all universes, life and matter have different levels, different materials.

All you have to do is organize the particles of the atom differently to have another matter, another universe.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/Electrons_Neutrons_Protons)

Simon Orsini,
Carticasi, Corsica

## The Birth of the Spirit

How, in your own words, would you draw the analogy between the birth of a human and the birth of religion in the mind of man and ultimately the birth of the spirit?

**AGNES**

In the ideal situation, a man and a woman decide to combine the associable elements in order to bring forth, in the woman's womb, a new reality that is neither completely one nor completely the other. In this act of wisdom, that of unifying what is unifiable, an embryo is formed and grows according to the perfect laws of the Creator!

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/La_Naissance_de_l_Esprit)

## Cameroon News

Guy Stéphane NYASSÉ (Douala, Cameroon)

We received a wonderful package at the beginning of the year from AFFUB and it was with great enthusiasm that I went to the shipping company to pick it up. That day I was accompanied by my younger brother Bilong Junior. We were happy to carry this big bag, filled with 50 books! We brought this package back to Deido in our neighborhood. Our goals were simple, to share all these books, create more study groups and a local association of affiliated readers and eventually organize a first international conference in Cameroon.

[Read more](/en/article/Guy_Stephane_Nyasse/Nouvelles_du_Cameroun)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-83-septembre-2018">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 83 — September 2018</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_12">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
