---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 84 — December 2018"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2018 Ivan Stol, Nigel Nunn, Georges Michelson-Dupont, Dominique Ronfet, JeanMarie Chaise<br>© 2018 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-84-décembre-2018">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 84 — December 2018</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_13">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## My very dear sisters, my very dear brothers

(REPEAT WITH ME ALL IN HEART...)

LATELY, and following my many years at the head of our association and the participation in the many conferences in which I participated (but always in a self-effacing and passive way), many reflections have led me to glimpse certain evidences on the fact of the rapid diffusion of the _Urantia Book_.

The book was entrusted to people who were not only open-minded and cultured, but also who travelled a lot around the world and who therefore had an easy way of making contact and therefore a considerable potential for distribution. Even today, if the book reaches such diverse places, it is still thanks to this kind of people.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_13)

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

## Issue 84 — December 2018

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **She shudders at the edge**, _Nigel Nunn_
- **Visit to England**, _Ivan Stol_
- **Visit to Italy**, _Ivan Stol_
- **All those trips to Europe**, _Ivan Stol_
- **Our Adventure**, _Georges Michelson-Dupont_
- **Studying The Urantia Book. What for?**, _Dominique Ronfet_
- **The Parables**, _JeanMarie Chaise_

## “She shudders at the edge”

By Nigel Nunn

Urantia is now quivering on the very brink of one of its most astounding and exciting epochs of social adjustment, moral stimulation, and spiritual illumination.” (Paper 195:9.2, p. 2082.7).

According to The Urantia Book, the cultural epochs of our world have been sponsored and encouraged by a variety of means. The fact that none of these epochs have gone as planned is a testament to the fact that human free will and choice have been given free rein in this backward corner of creation. And now we teeter on the brink of one of the “most amazing and exciting epochs” of our time. Given the geopolitical landscape, the rise and positioning of so many interested factions, and the introduction of disruptive technologies, it is safe to say that many familiar systems and assumptions will soon be forced to evolve. Which begs the question: Is it possible for humans to lead this evolution? Can wise leadership help humanity navigate these “interesting times”? Can sincerity and good intentions help civilization advance?

[Read more](/en/article/Nigel_Nunn/Elle_fremit_Au_Bord)

## Visit to England

Since the conference in AMSTERDAM, I have been asked to participate in the national meeting of British readers of the Urantia Book. So, with the help of the association, I decided to respond and Gary Rawlings, president and organizer, kindly took care of the formalities of the stay in this Charney Manor a little south of Oxford from September 7 to 10, 2018.

After a ten-hour train ride (incidentally, EUROSTAR does not deserve its name because I did not see any stars), I arrived at this mansion and was fraternally welcomed by the staff and the Urantians. Here is the schedule of the stay:

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Visite_en_Angleterre)

## Visit to Italy

Once again this year, we met the Italians, but if our dynamic Danielle LA Scala once again participated well in the organization of this meeting and once again played a key role as interpreter, we intervened much less in the course of the exchanges and the Italians acquired a certain mastery in this area.

And we did not come alone, Spaniards and the European coordinator were there with us to show everyone's interest in their work in disseminating the book in their country.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Visite_en_Italie)

## All these trips in Europe

This year, I have traveled a lot, Amsterdam, England, Italy, to meet European readers and tried to understand their expectations. It turns out that our mentalities are generally in agreement and the means of exchange are gradually being put in place despite the language barriers. It will take some time for a solid organization to be set up to offer proper support to all European countries wishing to start implementing an effective structure to help meet readers.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Tous_ces_voyages_en_Europe)

Ivan

## Our Adventurer — Journey through the ages of the master universe

_Georges Michelson-Dupont_

At some point, everyone can stop and think about the meaning of life. For what? For whom? Love? Suffering? Death? To this legitimate questioning, institutional religions and human philosophies cannot provide a satisfactory answer because it can only come from the one who planned the universe, that is to say, the First Source-Center. It is up to it to enlighten us because, locked as we are in our earthly and material tautology, we can only escape with the help and support of the Creator. This is the purpose of the revelations of the epochal periods of which The Urantia Book is a part. The careful study of this revelation must lead us to a better understanding of our life, our future, our relationship with this Source and our place in the universe. For this, the authors have been given the mandate to broaden our conceptual framework, to relax our cosmic consciousness in order to enhance our spiritual perception because God is spirit.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Notre_Aventure)

## Study The Urantia Book. To Do What?

Dominique Ronfet

Another provocative title!

Be serious.

This is the 5th revelation of the era all the same!!

\- So for you this stamp is enough?

\- But finally, weren't you transformed by reading it? Didn't this book change your life?

[Read more](/en/article/Dominique_Ronfet/Etudier_le_Livre_d_Urantia_Pour_Quoi_Faire)


## The Parables

JeanMarie Chair

(Quotations from _The Urantia Book_ are in italics. To emphasize their importance, some passages have been put in bold.)

It is interesting to return to the use of parables, their meanings, their effects and their advantages. Thus, on page 1692, Jesus enlightens us very well on the use of parables, especially those referring to nature:

[Read more](/en/article/Jeanmarie_Chaise/Les_Paraboles)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-84-décembre-2018">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 84 — December 2018</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_13">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
