---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 85 — March 2019"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2019 Ivan Stol, Simon Orsini, Jean-Marie Chaise, Ralph Zehr, Georges Michelson-Dupont<br>© 2019 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>


Dear friends and readers, the same question keeps running through our heads: where am I in my evolution?

The answer is not obvious, but objectively and with the help of some passages of the Lu it is possible to answer it partially. I say partially because we are only at the beginning before eternity and the enlightenment of our cosmic consciousness reveals little by little obscure passages of our favorite book.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_14)

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

## Issue 85 — March 2019

- **Editorial**, Ivan Stol
- **Conference in Tallinn**
- **One Ridge Can Hide Another**, Simon Orsini
- **The Parables**, Jean-Marie Chaise
- **How Long Until Heaven**, Ralph Zehr
- **Our adventure**, Georges Michelson-Dupont
- **AFLUB Annual Meeting at Notre Dame des Lumières**


## 2nd European Urantia Conference — Tallinn — Estonia

July 11-14, 2019

Organized by the Estonian Urantia Association

**Theme**

This lecture, entitled “***Sowing the Seeds—Internal Qualitative and External Quantitative Growth***” will attract readers of The Urantia Book from around the world. We will focus on the topic of “***Sowing the Seeds***”—how we can grow internally and in numbers.

On Friday and Sunday, the program will focus on possibilities for spiritual growth. On Saturday, the focus will be on increasing the number of readers. During these two days, experiences carried out in different countries of Europe and also other continents to find new readers and form new study groups will be presented and discussed.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Conference_a_Tallinn)

## One Ridge Can Hide Another

1. From atom to cell, from cell to molecule, each case represents an infinity of electrochemical actions and reactions, sometimes magnetic, with a possibility of unimaginable combinations thanks to the controlled organization of electrons and protons.
2. We can no longer believe that chance reigns supreme, because we ourselves are part of this reality, it extends over an infinite number of ordered movements, controlled in a determined space, I will not dwell on everything that is outside of matter.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/Une_Crete_Peut_En_Cacher_une_autre)

Simon Orsini


## The Parables

(Quotations from _The Urantia Book_ are in italics. To emphasize their importance, some passages have been put in bold.)

**IT IS INTERESTING** to return to the use of parables, their meanings, their effects and their advantages.

Thus, on page 1692, Jesus enlightens us very well on the use of parables, especially those referring to nature:

[Read more](/en/article/Jeanmarie_Chaise/Les_Paraboles_2)

**Jean-Marie Chaise**

## How Long Until Heaven

This question has been asked for a long time. A number of students of the book have concluded that the answer to this question is not contained in its contents. Another reader was of the opinion that the time required to complete the ascension career was of the order of 200 billion years. His reasoning was based on two widely separated statements in The Urantia Book, the first of which is associated with the discussion of the Mighty Messengers (22:2,4), where we are told: “And the last group of this order (Mighty Messengers) to qualify for Paradise embrace ascending pilgrims from the local universe of Nebadon.”

[Read more](/en/article/Ralph_Zehr/Combien_De_Temps_Jusquau_Paradis)

**Ralph Zehr, MD**, (translated by Guy Perron)

## Our Adventure

_Journey through the ages of the master universe_

Georges Michelson-Dupont

(Continuation of the article started in LE LIEN of December 2018)

**SEQUENCE 4**

**Trinities, Triunities and Triodities**

In THE preceding LINK, we followed, step by step, the path of the acts posed by the absolute will of the I AM to free itself from the solitude in which its absoluteness encloses it and this thanks to relations of **unity** within itself then of **duality** by eternalization of these relations under the aspect of the 7 Absolutes of Infinity. Thus freed from its absoluteness it is now ready to begin associations between the different Absolutes to lay the foundations of its creative project.

The sequences are described by Melchizedek as follows:

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Notre_Aventure_2)

## National Meeting of French-Speaking Readers of the Urantia Book

Dear readers and friends,

The AFLUB (Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia) invites you to participate in its national meeting which will take place in June 2019 from Thursday 13 at 6 p.m. to Sunday 16 at 2 p.m. at Notre Dame de Lumières -84220 — Goult.

This weekend will be an opportunity to study the following theme:

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Reunion_Annuelle_De_l_AFLUB_A_Notre_Dame_des_Lumieres)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

