---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 86 — June 2019"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2019 Ivan Stol, Jean-Marie Chaise, Claude Flibotte, Simon Orsini, Agnès Lazar, Claire Mylanus, Georges Michelson-Dupont<br>© 2019 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-86-juin-2019">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 86 — June 2019</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_15">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



Dear friends and readers, The URANTIAN world continues to evolve slowly, but it seems to be more rapidly in certain countries. It is true that countries without social structure or technological advancement are more willing to hear the great message of hope that The Urantia Book brings, but this does not seem to be a generality. There is more movement in Africa and northern South America than in India or China where the majority of the world's population is concentrated.

That said, it is referring to the existence of associations that disclose information, and not to a reality not very known or disclosed of the number of readers of this book in the different Countries, which is quite surprising because the publications are controlled by the Foundation that should have a certain estimate of the number of books sold, in which language and in which Country. There must surely be a lack of staff to carry out this kind of task.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_15)

Ivan

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

## Issue 86 — June 2019

- **Editorial**, Ivan Stol
- **The Symbolism of Numbers**, Jean-Marie Chaise
- **Energy and Food**, Claude Flibotte
- **Time, Energy and Matter**, Simon Orsini
- **A Love Story**, Agnès Lazar
- **The World Cultural Symposium**, Claire Mylanus
- **Our Adventure**, Georges Michelson-Dupont

## The Symbolism of Numbers in the Urantia Book

**INTRODUCTION**

In paragraph 4 of page 141 of The Urantia Book, a Perfecter of Wisdom informs us that:

"Mathematics, the material science, is indispensable for intelligent discussion of the material aspects of the universe, but its knowledge is not necessarily part of a higher realization of truth or of a personal appreciation of spiritual realities. Not only in the realms of life, but also in the world of physical energy, the sum of two or more factors very often represents something more than the sum of the foreseeable consequences of that combination, or something different.

[Read more](/en/article/Jeanmarie_Chaise/La_Symbolique_des_nombres)

**Jean-Marie Chaise** France

## Energy and food

_Claude Flibotte; Sainte-Julie, Quebec (Canada)_

Food, whether vegetable or animal, is an essential need to sustain the life of a material creature! The revelators give us several pieces of information gleaned here and there from over two thousand pages of _The Urantia Book_. By energy absorption, we must include, in addition to ingested food, the absorption of energy by respiration or directly by light energy or energies drawn from the space currents running throughout the universe for certain classes of individuals.

Replenishing oneself with energy is also associated with the phenomenon of rest. In the cosmos, there is more than one form of restorative rest. What do the revelators tell us about this:

[Read more](/en/article/Claude_Flibotte/Energie_Et_Nourriture)

**Claude Flibotte; Sainte-Julie, Quebec.**

## Time, Energy, Matter

In our universe, energy comes in the form of infinitesimal balls, these balls rotate on themselves at a fantastic speed and give off heat which would eliminate matter and return it to its origin if we put them in contact.

These infinitesimal balls, in their journey, have a position in space but have no presence at our material level.
There is a real laboratory being created at our level of space, it will transform energy into matter.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/Le_Temps_l_Energie_et_la_Matiere)

**Simon Orsini**

## A Love Story in Service: Who Teaches Who?

Agnes Lazar-Belgium

> “I have come into this world to do the will of my Father and to reveal his loving character to all mankind. That, my brethren, is my mission. And this one thing I will do, regardless of the misunderstanding of my teachings by Jews or gentiles of this day or of another generation. But you should not overlook the fact that even divine love has its severe disciplines. A father’s love for his son oftentimes impels the father to restrain the unwise acts of his thoughtless offspring. The child does not always comprehend the wise and loving motives of the father’s restraining discipline. But I declare to you that my Father in Paradise does rule a universe of universes by the compelling power of his love. Love is the greatest of all spirit realities. Truth is a liberating revelation, but love is the supreme relationship. And no matter what blunders your fellow men make in their world management of today, in an age to come the gospel which I declare to you will rule this very world. The ultimate goal of human progress is the reverent recognition of the fatherhood of God and the loving materialization of the brotherhood of man. (<a id="a111_1139"></a>[UB 143:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/143#p1_4))

Drawing on the prayer of Saint Francis, completely dedicated to service, as well as on passages from the Urantia Book, I will bear witness to a most extraordinary experience (the extra being God: the act is man's, the consequences are God's) that Our Father offered me to live with Him, Guy Perron and Aurore Hennebert, as well as a group of Senegalese and Canadians who accompany, in prayer, this extraordinary service, in a place deserted by love: prison.

[Read more](/en/article/Agnes_Lazar/Une_Histoire_D_amour)

## The World Cultural Symposium

The World Cultural Symposium was held at Urantia Foundation in Chicago from April 11 to April 15, 2019.

This project began three years ago and our committee formed by Marilynn Kulieke, Marta Elders and myself began to think about ways to bring the Revelation to other cultures and civilizations, taking into account their cultural heritage.

The purpose of this unique Symposium was to better understand the opportunities and challenges inherent in the different continents in order to assist Urantia Foundation in introducing and distributing The Urantia Book in these remote parts of the world, often unknown to the Western world.

[Read more](/en/article/Claire_Mylanus/Le_Symposium_Culturel_Mondial)

## Our Adventure

***Journey through the ages of the master universe***

_Georges Michelson-Dupont_

(Continuation of the article started in LE LIEN of December 2018)

In The Previous Link, our adventure stopped at the inspection of the 7 triunities, these triune associations of the Seven Absolutes of Infinity including the presence of the Universal Father to ensure the functions necessary for the realization of his divine plan and which, functioning in a total manner, functionally unifies infinity. If a single one were missing, the unit of functioning would be broken a bit like in the human body, if one of the functions (for example the nervous system) were missing, we simply could not live. Let us recall here that the absoluteness and infinity of the first Source Center prevent it from acting on subinfinite levels. This is why by associating in a triune manner, the 7 Absolutes of Infinity become functional.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Notre_Aventure_3)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-86-juin-2019">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 86 — June 2019</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_15">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
