---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 89 — March 2020"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2020 Ivan Stol, Sebastian Nozzi, Marjorie Ray, Gard Jameson, Max Masotti<br>© 2020 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>


## Dear Urantian readers,

This link almost didn't appear, but a tenacious will ensures it.

In recent times, there have been controversies about the use of mailing lists, some of which are more or less valid.

The UB contains information on a variety of subjects that, I understand, are not of interest to everyone. But should we therefore prevent people from expressing themselves?

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_18)

Ivan.

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.


## Issue 89 — March 2020

**Editorial**, Ivan Stol
**Christianity As An Opportunity**, Sebastian Nozzi
**Water: Truth, Beauty and Goodness**, Marjorie Ray
**A Great Confusion About Race**, Gard Jameson
**National Meeting at Notre Dame Des Lumières**, Max

## Christianity as an opportunity

Sebastian Nozzi

Tallinn, July 2019

**Sebastian Nozzi**.

_Sebastian is the European continent coordinator for the AUI._

_Originally from Argentina, Sebastian has lived in Germany and Austria since 2000._

_Sebastian encountered The Urantia Book in 2001. After 10 years of solitary study, he set out to find study groups in Germany to share his experience with other readers. Sebastian attended conferences in Frankfurt, Berlin, Budapest and finally Tallinn._


**INTRODUCTION**

Over the past centuries, Christianity has been a dominant force in Europe and Western civilization. Churches were packed and religion was an integral part of life.

[Read more](/en/article/Sebastian_Nozzi/Le_Christianisme_Comme_Une_Chance)

## Water: Truth, Beauty and Goodness

Marjorie Ray

Scientific Symposium November 2019

URANTIA FOUNDATION

_Marjorie Ray encountered the Urantia Book 45 years ago and has been a student ever since. She was most fortunate that very early on she was mentored by Jim and Eunice Mills. She has participated in, hosted and fostered study groups from the beginning._

_Marjorie was trained as a biochemist and spent her entire career in academic science; retiring after more than 35 years as a researcher. Her particular areas of interest were protein/lipid interactions, lipoproteins and integral membrane proteins. Her career afforded many wonderful opportunities for academic publications, national and international collaborations/travel, and work experiences in dynamic environments._

_In retirement, she has returned to a long standing interest in philosophy, especially the area of ethics. She currently lives outside Birmingham, Alabama, USA but is anticipating relocation to the Pacific Northwest USA very soon._

The entire science of mathematics, the entire domain of philosophy, the most advanced physics and chemistry could neither predict nor know that the union of two gaseous atoms of hydrogen with one gaseous atom of oxygen would produce a new and qualitatively superadded substance liquid water. The observation of this physicochemical phenomenon alone should have prevented the development of materialist philosophy and mechanical cosmology. ([UB 12:9.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p9_3))

[Read more](/en/article/Marjorie_Ray/L_eau_Verite_Beaute_Et_Bonte)

## A BIG CONFUSION ABOUT RACE

_Gard Jameson_

of any problem of reality—human or divine, earthly or cosmic—except by the complete and unprejudiced study and correlation of three phases of universal reality: origin, history, and destiny. The right understanding of these three experiential realities provides the necessary basis for a wise estimate of the present status." ([UB 19:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_6))

Our present difficulty in grasping the “present state” of the race question arises from the fact that our appreciable understanding of the origin, history, and acquired destiny of The Urantia Book is largely confined to the pages of the book itself. The absence of corroborating evidence in the human record will be sufficient to turn many thinking people away. Such is our present status. In spite of his own divine status, his teachings, and his life, Jesus suffered the same misunderstanding.

[Read more](/en/article/Gard_Jameson/Une_Grande_Confusion_Sur_La_Race)

## National Meeting of the A.F.L.L.U

_Our Lady of Lights_

_From Thursday June 4 to Sunday June 7, 2020_

Reminder:

Thanks to those who want to come to the national meeting in Lumières, send me an email to book, apart from those who have already responded.

[Read more](/en/article/Max_Masotti/Reunion_Nationale_A_Notre_Dame_Des_Lumieres)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

