---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 90 — June 2020"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2020 Ivan Stol, Claude Flibotte, Samuel Heine, Myriam Delcroix, Sophie Malicot, Patrick Morelli, Simon Orsini, Moustapha NDiaye<br>© 2020 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>


Dear fraternity of readers, each crisis brings new experiences, and if they are global, their results are even more profound. Faced with the difficulties they bring, it is necessary to evaluate failures, mistakes and priorities. Some people are in disarray because, having no ideal, do not really understand the situation and are lost and helpless. Others try to take advantage of the situation to obtain more privileges. The wisest will use their discernment to improve their perceptions and their cosmic consciousness.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_19)

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

## Issue 90 — June 2020

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **The Human Personality**, _Claude Flibotte_
- **Contact With The Thought Adjuster**, _Samuel Heine_
- **For Jesus**, _Myriam Delcroix_
- **In This Affair**, _Sophie Malicot_
- **Essays on the Definition of Space**, _Patrick Morelli_
- **Reflection on Thought**, _Simon Orsini_
- **Who Am I?**, _Moustapha K. Ndiaye_

## The Human Personality

Much discussion on UBIS revolves around the proper understanding of personality. I would like to share with you my very personal view on the subject!

> Human personality is the time-space image-shadow cast by the divine Creator personality. And no actuality can ever be adequately comprehended by an examination of its shadow. Shadows should be interpreted in terms of the true substance. ([UB 1:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p6_1))

[Read more](/en/article/Claude_Flibotte/La_personnalite_humaine_2)

Claude Flibotte

Sainte-Julie

## “Contact with The Adjuster.”

As for me and with hindsight over the years, I have been able “for my personal case” to determine some conditions favorable to this kind of spontaneous experiences, “difficult to explain” to others except on rare occasions with men or women who have personally lived this kind of experience.

However, I am one of those who hold on to the “discreet and modest” reserve concerning the fact of going to proclaim from the rooftops this kind of “intimate” experiences which are for many well beyond the objective and rational world. For me, these are intuitive and instantaneous manifestations which are consciously “received” in the association of ideas, but which are not “emitted” by the reasoning faculty of the thinker.

[Read more](/en/article/Samuel_Heine/Contact_Avec_L_Ajusteur_de_Pensee)

Samuel. H

## For Jesus

Myriam Delcroix

The man walked in his garment of light carrying the torch of hope,
and his magic words to men devoid of knowledge,
brought like a momentum, like a force crossing borders.

The man spoke as if attached to the stars
and invisible bonds connected him to the heavens
and the man in our frozen solitudes tore the veil
which separated us from the power of God.

[Read more](/en/article/Myriam_Delcroix/Pour_Jesus)



## Calligraphy by Sophic Dalicot

(February 2020)

In this matter, time is on my side. From the beginning, it has been my constant ally, through the same progression with which it endows the world.

I was provided with peaks and sharp points, sharp, like the mountainous reliefs. Yews stood tall, soaring vertically above the more modest plains. And immediately after, a dizzying fault with abysmal depths. I crossed the eternal snows of the cold of the soul, the frosts of the heart followed immediately by the summer heat, in a rhythm much faster than the movement of the seasons. Passing from one to the other and measuring the intensity of life by the yardstick of contrasts. From frosts to burns, from storms to calms so flat that life itself seems at the end of its course. The antagonism of the duels gave the illusion of a stronger, more intense existence. However ...

[Read more](/en/article/Sophie_Malicot/Dans_Cette_Affaire)

Sophie MALICOT

> POSTPONEMENT OF THE ANNUAL MEETING OF THE A.F.L.L.U.
> 
> Due to the Covid 19 pandemic, the annual meeting of our association is postponed. It will take place in Lumières as originally planned.
> 
> The dates are as follows:
> 
> Arrival Thursday October 29 to Sunday November 1, 2020
> Let it be said!!!

## ATTEMPT TO DEFINE SPACE

In this attempt to define space, the Central Island of Paradise is to be excluded, because it has no location in this space, and moreover is totally timeless, although:

> “The eternal Isle is composed of a single form of materialization—stationary systems of reality. This literal substance of Paradise is a homogeneous organization of space potency not to be found elsewhere in all the wide universe of universes. It has received many names in different universes, and the Melchizedeks of Nebadon long since named it *absolutum.* This Paradise source material is neither dead nor alive; it is the original nonspiritual expression of the First Source and Center; it is *Paradise,* and Paradise is without duplicate.” ([UB 11:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p2_9))

**1 — Diagram of the Unpenetrated Space and the Penetrated Space.**

The Urantia Book allows us, before any intellectual approaches, to give us a moment of popularization of what these two kinds of spaces can be, with the island of Paradise as the center:

[Read more](/en/article/Patrick_Morelli/Essais_De_Definition_De_L_espace)

Patrick Morelli.

## Reflection on Thought

The physical brain and nervous system, together, possess an innate sensitivity to the ministry of thought, just as evolving thought possesses an aptitude for spiritual receptivity.

Spiritual endowments are perfectly integrated into the natural and established process of evolution.

This is why, in thought, we are unable to discern anything other than the action of nature and the working of natural processes.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/Reflection_Sur_La_Pensee)

Simon Orsini

## “Who am I?”

By Moustapha K. NDIAYE

February 24, 2020
(Dakar, Senegal)

This reflection of Moustapha came in the following way: One day, my daughter, then six years old (she is twelve this year) asked me “It seems that with mom, it is you who made me. I would like to know how and why?” Having perceived my surprise, she continued by saying: “It is not urgent, answer later or when you want”. A few days later, I reminded her of her question, and she no longer seemed to remember it. I then immediately understood that it was my Adjuster who was trying to tell me “It is time for you to take an interest in how you were created, and why you were created, in other words to ask me ”Who am I?“ This was for me a positive indication of several things at once. First, that God the Father, via our Thought Adjuster, uses all avenues and all voices to express Himself, through the functioning of God the Supreme. Next, that this manifestation of the Supreme, through family, social, professional, etc., relationships, is the very technique of growth, through service, which thus finds all the requisite means of expression in the lives of men. And finally, that it is to this service, thus illuminated from within by the Adjuster and the soul, and requiring worship and prayer for personal appropriation, that the Master invites us. When understood, accepted, and implemented, it conveys the fact that ”it is our will that His Will be done."]

[Read more](/en/article/Moustapha_NDiaye/Qui_Suis_Je)




## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

