---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 91 — September 2020"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2020 Ivan Stol, Tom Allen, Simon Orsini, Patrick Morelli, Claude Flibotte, André Desjardins, Agnès Lazarre, Guy Perron<br>© 2020 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>


Dear Readers of the Book of Uranria, the latest virus has caused quite a bit of disruption across the planet. Once again, fear and not reason have been the driving force behind decisions, compounded by a lack of organization and anti-humanism. However, for some, isolation has allowed for awareness and brought up a lot of existential questions thanks to the open-mindedness of these times.

As a result, more people should be ready to receive the message of _The Urantia Book_ and we, with a few volunteers, will work on this.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_20)

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.


## Issue 91 — September 2020

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **“The Intergalactic Vagabond”**, _Tom Allen (USA)_
- **The Prophets**, _Simon Orsini_
- **How Big Is Heaven?**, _Patrick Morelli_
- **Earth Escape**, _Claude Flibotte (Quebec)_
- **The Soul Within**, _André Desjardins (Quebec)_
- **Is there an Archetype, an Ideal Model for the Man-Woman Relationship?**, _Agnès Lazarre and Guy Perron_

## “The Intergalactic Vagabond” Heading Towards the Lynx Constellation

A Hypothesis on the Location of Uversa

By Tom Allen (U.S.A)

Fall 2019

**Introduction**

The hypothesis I wish to present is that Uversa is located in the globular cluster NGC 2419 which is in or near “**this great solar cluster**”—the physical and astronomical center of the seventh space segment of the superuniverse.

The “**Verification Triad**” is a research technique I use to create frameworks of the universe with a lower degree of error. This research model helps validate all aspects of the truth that we have.

[Read more](/en/article/Tom_Allen/The_Intergalactic_Wanderer)


## The Prophets

Simon Orsini (Corsica — The island of beauty)

To become a prophet, it is preferable to have special dispositions. One of these dispositions is transcendental faith, which allows one to express the truth regardless of the level of education. No longer quoting _The Urantia Book_ would mean that we would have an intuitive faculty that would allow us to know, memorize, and understand all the chapters of a book coming from another world.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/Les_Prophetes)

## How Big Is Heaven?

_Patrick Morelli (France)_

The Paradise Island is the source of all the energetic power of the Universe and all the gigantic masses of creation gravitate around this body.

We know that it appears as a vast flattened ellipsoid whose major axis is one-sixth longer than its minor axis and its “thickness” (the distance between the upper surface and the lower surface) is one-tenth of the minor axis. We also know that this central Island is ([UB 11:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p0_1)) “**the most gigantic organized body of cosmic reality in the entire master universe**”.

[Read more](/en/article/Patrick_Morelli/Quelle_Est_La_Dimension_Du_Paradis)

## Land Escape

Claude Flibotte (Sainte-Julie (Quebec))

Following an exchange of emails, I noticed that we do not all interpret in the same way what happens to us beyond death. Let us see together what the revelators tell us on this subject.

**All equal before death**

The Melchizedek of the Jerusem school of administration tells us this: the different physical types do not matter

[Read more](/en/article/Claude_Flibotte/Evasion_Terrestre)

## The Soul Within

André Desjardins

St-Alexis-des-Monts, (Quebec)

All human beings on our planet have an idea or concept of the soul according to their education or personal belief. According to The Urantia Book: [[UB 111:0.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p0_7)] “Every evolving Urantia race of mortals has a word equivalent to the concept of soul.” Thus this statement confirms that all human beings living even in the most remote corners of our planet can have a pictorial concept of the soul of a spiritual nature. The concept of the soul is integrated and innate within us even without personal contact with any religion, level of instruction or spiritual education received.

[Read more](/en/article/Andre_Desjardins/L_ame_En_Soi)

## 3rd Dakar Summit

From February 20 to February 27, 2020 In Dakar, Senegal at Moustapha's

**Main themes: DIVINITY AND HUMANITY**

In dedicated and selfless service for the welfare of humanity

In THE previous LINK (June 15, 2020), we published a presentation made by Moustapha K. NDIAYE entitled “WHO AM I?”. Here is now the presentation made by Agnès Lazare and Guy Perron during this summit on the theme of the Woman-Man relationship.

**Is there an archetype, an ideal model for the male-female relationship?**

[Read more](/en/article/Agnes_Lazar_and_Guy_Perron/Y_a_t_il_un_Archetype_pour_Relation_Homme_Femme)




## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

