---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 92 — December 2020"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2020 Ivan Stol, Georges Michelson-Dupont, Jean Annet, Patrice Monsigny, Simon Orsini, Claude Flibotte, Robert Gallo<br>© 2020 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-92-décembre-2020">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 92 — December 2020</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_21">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



Dear friends and readers,

The current situation may be a blessing for us, because many people who find it difficult to communicate may need to understand that this necessity is essential for a personality, but this notion of personality must be well acquired.

If our association has included in its statutes that we should not look into religious, political or social trends, it is so that we can look into research aimed at finding what will allow us to find what we must bring to our neighbor so that he avoids stagnating and can open up to new horizons. As an example, Jesus spoke about everything but only to encourage his listeners to glimpse new paths through questioning and suggestions.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_21)

Ivan

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.


## Issue 92 — December 2020

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **Study Revelation For What Purpose?**, _Georges Michelson Dupont_
- **The Urantia Book in Esperanto**, _Jean Annet (Belgium)_
- **Science and Revelations**, _Patrice Monsigny_
- **A Universe Without Big Bang**, _Simon Orsini_
- **The Personality**, _Claude Flibotte (Quebec)_
- **Can We Still Hunt Dinosaurs in Satania?**, _Robert Gallo_

## Studying Revelation For What?

> The expansion of material knowledge permits a greater intellectual appreciation of the meanings of ideas and the values of ideals. A human being can find truth in his inner experience, but he needs a clear knowledge of facts to apply his personal discovery of truth to the ruthlessly practical demands of everyday life. (<a id="a77_323"></a>[UB 111:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/111#p6_7))

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Etudier_La_Revelation_Pour_Quoi_Faire)

## Sciences and Revelation

Here is an interesting question from our friend Patrice Monsigny published on the AFLUB forum that we are delivering to the sagacity of readers: Your comments or reasoned responses are welcome in the editorial office, they could be published in your next LINK.

Hello everyone

**For physicists and astronomers:**

It is not easy to replace the Big Bang with the nuclear island of Paradise or even the “Paradise-Havona” system.

**For Geologists and Biologists:**

[Read more](/en/article/Patrice_Monsigny/Science_Et_Revelations)

## A Universe Without Big Bang

How was our universe created? A major question in astrophysics, but not for believers.

The Big Bang is a theory that starts from the observation that the universe is expanding. Scientists realized that the galaxies were moving away from each other, because the color of the spectrum was turning red.

We are told that the Big Bang created space and time.
Because of time, the theoretical start date of the Big Bang is pushed back as we get closer to it. This would mean that the universe has always existed, so no transition from nothing to something, so no creationism, this is the scientists' answer to religions.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/Un_Univers_Sans_Big_Bang)

## The Urantia Book in Esperanto: La Urantia Libro

In 2003, Jean-Marie Chaise completed, after 7 years of effort, the translation of the _Urantia Book_ into Esperanto.

During an email exchange, during our very first UBIS URANTIA course on the Internet with JeanMarie, we had shared our common passion for this universal language. He had then sent me his translation of the book in Esperanto, telling me that he had to undergo medical examinations and that we would discuss it again after. Unfortunately, he never left the hospital.

[Read more](/en/article/Jean_Annet/Le_Livre_D_urantia_En_Esperanto)

## Personality According to Booklet 112

We are all blessed with the immense gift of personality. Although every individual on this planet is endowed with it, what do we really know about personality? In order to take a step further in understanding it, I suggest that you undertake with me a rereading of the beginning of booklet 112. This booklet is really very loaded with information and for those who know how to dwell on it seriously, a new light opens up to you in a spectacular way. Following a careful study of each paragraph, try to visualize what the Solitary Messenger was kind enough to reveal to us about what personality is. I have underlined the important words in the sentence for you. Do not read my interpretation right away, but first form your own personal idea. Then, you will be able to join your discoveries to mine and thus take the next step towards the cosmic awareness of what your personality is and its possibilities. There you are, you are ready... Happy discovering!

**The Urantia Book**

[Read more](/en/article/Claude_Flibotte/La_personnalite_2)

Claude Flibotte
Sainte-Julie (Quebec)

## Can We Still Hunt Dinosaurs In Satania?

My adolescence was marked by the novels of Henri Vernes and his hero Bob Morane and I have always kept a fond memory of his novel “_The Dinosaur Hunters_” whose characters were able to go back to the Jurassic times. It took decades for Hollywood cinema to take hold of this theme with the famous Spielberg film “_Jurassic Park_” and its sequels which worked to make these animals a quasi-reality almost banal. On Urantia, the large dinosaurs disappeared more than 60 million years ago and it is impossible to go back in time to find them; but in the Satania system there are still 381 worlds which have not reached the stage of inhabited world and which are in various states of animal evolution.

[Read more](/en/article/Robert_Gallo/Peut_On_Encore_Chasser_Le_Dinosaure_Dans_Satania)

Robert Gallo




## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-92-décembre-2020">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 92 — December 2020</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_21">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
