---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 93 — March 2021"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2021 Ivan Stol, Dominique Ronfet, Jean Annet, Georges Michelson Dupont, Claude Flibotte, Simon Orsini, Robert Gallo, Jean D'Ormesson<br>© 2021 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>


Dear Urantians, lately, the topics of discussion seem to revolve around the virus that is causing many problems. But when an apostle asked Jesus what to do about wars and rumors of wars, he replied that it was better to take care of one's salvation and the kingdom of heaven. Furthermore, all this chatter about the virus is practically the same as talking about the weather, “I like it, I don't like it,” but no one can do anything about it because no one seems to have control over it.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_22)

Ivan

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

## Issue 93 — March 2021

- **Editorial**, Ivan Stol
- **The Prayer Was Not One**, Dominique Ronfet.
- **The Urantia Book and the Great Conspiracy Theory?**, Jean Annet
- **News From The Foundation**
- **UBIS Pocr What to Do?**, Georges Michelson Dupont
- **A Fantastic Journey**, Claude Flibotte
- **From Energy to Matter**, Simon Orsini
- **4000 Years of Machiventa Melchizedek**, Robert Gallo
- **Journeys of Jesus Before His Public Ministry**
- **Chronology of the Life of Jesus**
- **The Apparitions of Jesus**
- **The Train**, Jean D'Ormesson

## LITTLE FOX

LITTLE FOX, JUST OUT OF HIS BURROW, MET A LITTLE MAN IN THE DAMP MORNING, SITTING ON A STUMP. HE APPEARED TO BE BUSY WITH HIS NOTEBOOK.

WHAT ARE YOU WRITING LITTLE MAN?

THIS IS MY MORNING PRAYER. A PRAYER, WHICH IS NOT ONE.

YOU ARE ADDRESSING THE BIG FOX,
THE QUIET CRUSH?

FOR ME HE IS THE FATHER OF MYSTERIES.

LITTLE FOX, INTERESTED, THEN ASKED HIM:

BUT WHAT DO YOU MEAN BY “PRAYER THAT IS NOT ONE”?

[Read more](/en/article/Dominique_Ronfet/La_Priere_N_en_Etait_Pas_Une)

## Does The Urantia Book Have Anything To Do With The Grand Conspiracy Theory?

The very exceptional situation that we are currently going through because of COVID 19 has given me this reflection regarding The Urantia Book: does it have anything to do with the book? Is the conspiracy theory that very often fuels reflections regarding the origin of the virus totally foreign to the teaching of the book?

Before getting to the heart of the matter, I would like to give you my understanding of conspiracy theory. For me, human beings are crossed by two opposing tendencies: one tends towards the material world, even the animal world, the other tends towards the spiritual world (quotes). We could also say, either we do God's will, or we don't. Either we enter into God's plan, or we don't. There are thus two tendencies in the world: the one that goes towards our neighbor, towards more altruism, fraternity, and the other that tends towards selfishness, withdrawal, the disorderly accumulation of wealth and material goods. It is the struggle between good and evil, between spirituality and materiality. Between God and...

[Read more](/en/article/Jean_Annet/UB_Et_La_Theorie_du_Grand_Complot)

Jean Annet (Belgium - January 2021)

## Urantia Foundation News

Despite the pandemic, much has been accomplished at Urantia Foundation. Here is some news and practical information.

**The Translations**

Currently, in addition to the original English, 23 translations have been published. (See list at urantia.org). All are available online and downloadable from the Foundation's website free of charge and in multiple formats.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Nouvelles_De_La_Fondation)

## What is Ubis School for?

Everyone agrees that reading and then studying the book alone is intellectually arduous, thus turning many potential readers away from the benefit they could derive from the revelation for themselves and those around them. We are not here to pass judgment but to try to find solutions.

During a week of sharing during a UBIS course, two legitimate and closely associated questions were invited to the discussion table: How can the intellectual study of the facts presented in the booklets promote personal spiritual progress and develop social fraternity, not the one we read on the pediments of the monuments of the French Republic, a social and secular solidarity, but that which arises from the active awareness of our filiation with God, the Father of all creatures living in the universe of universes.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/L_ecole_UBIS_Pour_Quoi_Faire)

## A fantastic journey


My consciousness awakens, I am there, alone, total darkness and absolute silence envelop me, I float in nothingness. Suddenly, a tiny point of light places itself in front of my field of vision. I observe it carefully, then I realize that I am being drawn into a dizzying dive, a mad race in tow of this luminosity. Throughout this journey, I question my presence and the purpose of this journey.

Suddenly, without warning, I find myself enveloped in a bright light. I realize that I am face to face with the Infinite within Infinity. I have the strange sensation of understanding everything instantly as events unfold. I am aware of being both in the presence of God, and simultaneously, part of God.

[Read more](/en/article/Claude_Flibotte/Un_Voyage_Fantastique)

Claude Flibotte
Sainte-Julie (Quebec) Canada

## From Energy to Matter

If you ask an astronomer the following question: what is the origin of the Big Bang, he will answer: “The Big Bang has no origin.” Those who seek the origin of the origin are joining metaphysics.

I was listening to a scientist who taught that before the Big Bang there was nothing, how can you ask someone to figure out nothing? No nothingness, not even emptiness, no space, no time.

And yet a presence in nothing, the mystery of energy constitutes the barrier that science and philosophy cannot overcome. For scientists, energy designates a force, an action.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/De_L_energie_A_La_Matiere)

Simon Orsini

## The 4000 years of Machiventa Melchizedek

Jesus was born at noon on August 21, 7 BCE (7 BC), and so on August 21, 2021, we will celebrate his 2027th birthday on Urantia. Furthermore, it is written in Paper 93:2.1:

> “It was 1,973 years before the birth of Jesus that Machiventa was bestowed upon the human races of Urantia. His coming was unspectacular; his materialization was not witnessed by human eyes. He was first observed by mortal man on that eventful day when he entered the tent of Amdon, a Chaldean herder of Sumerian extraction. And the proclamation of his mission was embodied in the simple statement which he made to this shepherd, “I am Melchizedek, priest of El Elyon, the Most High, the one and only God.”” ([UB 93:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p2_1))

[Read more](/en/article/Robert_Gallo/4000_Ans_De_Machiventa_Melchizedek)

Robert Gallo.



## The Travels of Jesus before his Public Ministry

Around the Mediterranean; in a caravan Towards the Caspian Sea; Five months of solitary wanderings

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Vovages_De_Jesus_Avant_Son_Ministere_Public)

## Chronology of Important Events in the Life of Joshua ben Joseph


**March, 8 BC** [UB 122:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/122#p1_1) Joseph (age 21) and Mary are married after a two-year courtship. Caesar Augustus orders a census of the Roman Empire.

**June, 8 BC** [UB 122:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/122#p2_1) Gabriel's announcement to Elizabeth.

**November, 8 BC** ([UB 122:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/122#p3_1)) The day after his conception, Gabriel announces to Mary the good news that she will bear the promised child.

**March 25, 7 BC** ([UB 135:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/135#p0_1)) Birth of John the Baptist

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Chronologie_De_La_Vie_De_Jesus)

## Apparitions of the Risen Jesus

No. | Date | Time | Apparitions | Witnesses | Ref. LDU
--- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
1 | Sun- 9, Apr. | Evening | **Jerusalem**: At the new family tomb of Joseph of Arimathea where the body of Jesus was laid; Mary Magdalene; Mary, the mother of the twins Alpheus; Salome, the mother of the brothers Zebedee; Joanna the wife of Chuza: and Susanna the daughter of Ezra of Alexandria | 5 | [UB 189:4.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p4_10)
2 | | 6 p.m. | **Jerusalem**: at the tomb; to Mary Magdalene | 1 | [UB 189:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p5_4)
3 | | Noon | **Bethany**: The empty tomb of Lazarus; to John, Jesus' brother in the flesh | 1 | [UB 190:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/190#p2_2)

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Les_Apparitions_De_Jesus)




## The Train

Jean D'Omesson

When we are born, we get on the train and meet our parents, and we believe that they will travel forever with us.

Yet, at one station, our parents will get off the train, leaving us alone to continue the journey...

As time goes by, other people get on the train.

And they will be important: our siblings, friends, children, even the love of our life.

Many will resign (even the love of our life) and leave a greater or lesser void.

Others will be so discreet that you won't realize they've left their seats.

[Read more](/en/article/Jean_DOrmesson/Le_Train)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

