---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 95 — September 2021"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2021 Ivan Stol, Georges Michelson Dupont, Claude Flibotte, André Desjardins, Michelle Heulot, Simon Orsini<br>© 2021 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>


## Dear Readers,

A global event is “PASSING” that leaves few people indifferent. We are at a technological advance in the manipulation of the tools of the human genome in order to make it more resistant to viruses. As Sophie Malicot pointed out to me, it may not be bad but the method is risky and unconventional, risking causing the opposite effect. And the human being, lacking spirituality, lets himself be dominated by fear and risks being abused.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_24)

Ivan

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

## Issue 95 — September 2021

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **The Cosmogony of Urantia**, _Georges Michelson Dupont_
- **Science or Revelation**, _Claude Flibotte_
- **Life in Spirit**, _André Desjardins_
- **What The Urantia Book Means to Me**, _Michelle Heulot_
- **God, Time, The Universe**, _Simon Orsini_
- **Reprint of The Urantia Book**, _Georges Michelson Dupont_

## THE URANTIA COSMOGONY

_Sixtieth anniversary_

By Georges Michelson-Dupont,
Vice President and Director of Translations, Urantia Foundation
Reclosed, France

Sixty years ago, in the fourth quarter of the year of grace 1961, the first volume of The Cosmogony of Urantia came out of the presses of the Tournon printing house. The second volume came out in the first quarter of 1962 and the third in the second quarter of the same year.

I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to Jacques Weiss who, thanks to his tenacity, intelligence and open-mindedness, left us the translation of the revelation. Jacques Weiss died on January 27, 1987.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/La_Cosmogonie_dUrantia)

## Science or revelation?

Claude Flibotte Quebec

August 2021

> Claude Flibotte is the author of a very well-documented study entitled “The Evolution of Life on Earth”. It is based on solid archaeological documentation augmented by the facts that the authors of the _Urantia Book_ reveal to us.
> 
> It contains a number of maps, photos and drawings that illustrate in a playful way a study that usually remains rather austere. You will find it at the following address: https://www. urantia-quebec.ca/publications/textes-deslecteurs (two-thirds of the way down the web page)
{.is-info}

My attention was drawn to a file in the journal Science \& Vie from July 2021 entitled: “The truth about the genetic history of France and our regions...”. Since my ancestors arrived in Quebec in 1656 on my mother's side, then around 1670 on my father's side, from France, my interest in reading this file was assured. Although very interesting, my disappointment grew as the author's remarks progressed. I will summarize the content of his article for you. According to him, there would be four major genetic influences and some regional particularities in the French genome. Initially, he admits that there were archaic humans in France whose tools were found to be more than 1.2 million years old, but, still according to him, the true French genetic history begins with the arrival of foreigners from Africa.

[Read more](/en/article/Claude_Flibotte/Science_ou_Revelation_2)

## LIFE IN SPIRIT

André Desjardins

St-Alexis-des-Monts
Quebec — Canada

I heard a comment from a reader of The Urantia Book about his eagerness to go to the mansion world. I wondered about this remark: must we wait until we pass away in the body in some hypothetical future in order to reach the mansion worlds or other spirit worlds? I am well aware that it is impossible to “go” materially to the mansion worlds or other spirit spheres, but it is perfectly possible to go in spirit and transcendentally to any place on these worlds at our desire through The Urantia Book. The question is: What do we do while we wait for our passing away? It is difficult for me to imagine our Heavenly Father limiting us in our mental actions on the grounds that we must wait until we pass away to reach the morontia worlds or other spirit worlds. The Father of Love does not close the door or place any restrictions on the evolution of His children; He does not impose His will against their own absolute sovereign will and desires except the limits His children impose upon themselves. An Archangel of Nebadon tells us:

[Read more](/en/article/Andre_Desjardins/La_Vie_En_Esprit)


## What The Urantia Book Means To Me

Michelle Heulot

We are all pilgrims on the path of life and truth. Mine was illuminated when I found _The Urantia Book_ or rather when it found me! I was then in the midst of religious and spiritual upheaval, my scientific, archaeological and historical research had shaken my convictions based on a literal interpretation of the Bible.

For decades, I had placed blind trust in a religious institution, the sole holder of “the truth” but which distorts it by adding rules and interpretative dogmas. These progressive discoveries provoked painful states of consciousness in me: bitterness, indignation, shame, sadness, discouragement, depression...

[Read more](/en/article/Michelle_Heulot/Ce_que_UB_signifie_pour_Moi)

## God, Time, The Universe

Simon Orsini.

Some say that time does not exist, I am convinced of the opposite. Time is certainly not a concrete thing that can be demonstrated by mathematics.

However time can be the sum of two or more factors which often represent something more than the sum of the predictable consequences, we have the example of water (hydrogen plus oxygen) water extinguishes fire.

Space creates movement, time is the duration of movement.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/Dieu_Le_Temps_L_univers)

## Urantia Foundation News Reprint of The Urantia Book.

The 2019 printing (2,200 books) is sold out. A new printing of 2,200 copies is scheduled for September 2021. This edition will be different in its pagination.

**A Little History.**

Originally, in 1992, in order to facilitate the comparison of the revised French translation and the Spanish and Finnish translations with the original English text, it was decided to model their pagination on the original. Thus, the text on page 606 of The Urantia Book corresponded to the same pages 606 of the translations, in order to facilitate work in study groups and to have the same cross-reference for all translations. Given the fact that each translation is more or less long compared to the original, this layout work required resorting to tricks such as playing on the spacing of words and/or lines while respecting the spacing between certain paragraphs, thus ensuring the cohesion of ideas. Indeed, certain spacing between paragraphs underlines the end of a series of ideas, opens a new subject, or highlights a singular or important fact. The same goes for enumerations. All these spaces between paragraphs also give a certain visual airiness to the page and breathing room to the text.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Reimpression_Du_Livre_DUrantia)

G. Michelson Dupont




## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

