---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 96 — December 2021"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2021 Ivan Stol, Georges Michelson Dupont, Dominique Ronfet, Claude Flibotte, Jean Royer, Robert Gallo<br>© 2021 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>


Dear Urantian Readers,

Although our Dear Max has left us, life continues on Urantia as it does in Heaven.

The captivating and controversial topics you are about to read are current. The directions and choices of humanity truly depend on the majority and not on a minority who believe they are leading in the illusion of their pride.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_25)

Ivan

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

## Issue 96 — December 2021

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **MAX is in transit to Maisonia Nº1 De Jerusem**
- **Progress through Education**, _Georges Michelson Dupont_
- **Promise me**, _Dominique Ronfet_
- **A Global Vision**, _Claude Flibotte_
- **Philosophical Break**, _Jean Royer_
- **News from the Foundation**, _Robert Gallo_
- **Long Live the Difference**

## Max is in transit to Maisonia No. 1 in Jerusem.

Max my friend.

It has been a little over a quarter of a century since I had the opportunity to know you, the same spiritual quest has animated you throughout our relationship. I had the time to appreciate your generosity and your humor, first when you participated in our meetings of study of the _Urantia Book_ within the group of Avignon, and even later when you created your own study group in Marseille.

We didn't always agree on all positions, but I always felt in you this spirit of brotherhood that animated you. Now you have undertaken our first great post-mortem journey, on the shores of the worlds of houses you will find our friends Chris, Nicole, Jean, Lulu, Jacques, I am convinced that they are aware of your next visit and they are waiting for you with great interest.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/MAX_est_en_transit_vers_Maisonia_N1_De_Jerusem)

## Progress through Education

Georges Michelson Dupont
Recloses October 2021

**Introduction.**

Urantia is going through a troubled time during which societal difficulties, dangers to the climate and biodiversity, a viral pandemic and ideological conflicts are accumulating, seriously threatening the well-being of our societies.

This world must therefore evolve from barbarism to a civilization based on the Gospel of Jesus, this is the destiny of Urantia because it is the will of God supported by our Creator Son. However, laws, morals, education, theological beliefs and even the reading of The Urantia Book will not do anything if the human being, in his inner life, is not reborn of the Spirit, does not desire with all his heart to do the will of the Father who is in heaven and does not act accordingly in his everyday life.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Le_Progres_par_l_Education)

## Promise me.

Dominique Ronfet

<p style=“text-align=center;”>
Sometimes your hand raised towards the sky<br>
bring down a flame.<br>
Snatched up like a booty.<br>
So you think you found it.<br>
<br>
What?<br>
The truth.<br>
<br>
But immediately the fire turns into a sword<br>
who comes to engrave the stone with a few words,<br>
that you then worship.<br>
<br>
</p>

[Read more](/en/article/Dominique_Ronfet/Promets_moi)

## A Global Vision

**THE ORIGIN OF THIS GLOBAL VISION**

My reflection began while reading the magazine Science \& Vie from August 2021 on pages 14 and 15 where there was a photograph of the heart of our galaxy in the direction of the constellation of Sagittarius taken, initially, by NASA's Chandra satellite equipped with an X-ray telescope. Subsequently, Daniel Wong, astronomer, superimposed another photo of the same region in radio waves taken by the South African radio telescope MeerKAT. The combination of the two wavelengths gives an overview of the high-energy phenomena that reign there. We can distinguish gigantic magnetic bridges distributing its energy from the galactic center to the other regions of the Milky Way. All this reminded me of the work of the Supreme Centers of Power described in booklet 29.

[Read more](/en/article/Claude_Flibotte/Une_Vision_Globale)

Claude Flibotte

Sainte-Julie — Quebec

## Philosophical break

JEAN ROYER

31-01-2000

One day, an old professor from the National School of Public Administration (ENAP) was hired to provide training on effective time planning to a group of about fifteen managers of large North American companies.

This course was one of five workshops in their training day.

The old professor therefore had only one hour to “get through his subject”.

[Read more](/en/article/Jean_Royer/Pause_Philosophique)

## Urantia Foundation News

The latest edition of _The Urantia Book_ (2021) will be available:

Available to read on the foundation's website at the following address:

[Read more](/en/article/Robert_Gallo/Nouvelles_de_la_Fondation)

## Long live the Difference

For a long time I wanted to participate in a course within the framework of the U.B.I.S., this school of the _URANTIA Book_ on the internet. Its pedagogy, based on the maieutics so dear to Socrates and its principle of operation on a 10-week cycle alternating questions and answers followed by a sharing was a formula that suited me perfectly, being able to participate when I had time in the course in question.

So, in September I took the plunge and signed up for a session. Among the three proposed themes I chose “***Religion and Faith in the Human Experience***” based on booklets 99,100 through 103.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Vive_La_Difference)



## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

