---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 98 — June 2022"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2022 Ivan Stol, Mamadou Doudou, Sophie Malicot, Claude Flibotte, Georges Michelson Dupont, Simon Orsini<br>© 2022 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>


## Dear readers,

Questions:
- God has given much to man: what does he do with it?
- Wisdom and worship are the essence of a personality: what does it do with them?
- All our cells were for evolution ([UB 65:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/65#p6_2)): are we helping them?

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_27)

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **A Spiritual Quest: God in Question**, _Mamadou Doudou_
- **From Divine Incompleteness to Human Adventure**, _Sophie Malicot_
- **The Hazards of a Decimal Planet**, _Claude Flibotte_
- **The Foundation Communique: The Future of Urantia: Elements for Reflection**, _Georges Michelson Dupont_
- **The Earth**, _Simon Orsini_

## A Spiritual Quest God In Question

By

Mamadou Doudou

_April 2022_

_Virtual conference given by Mamadou Diagne as part of the conferences organized by the Urantia association of Quebec._

Mamadou Doudou comes from Senegal and currently lives in Marseille where his wife works. He is also the father of 2 daughters. Doudou has been retired since 2012 from his position as a literature and philosophy teacher at the Dakar high school. At a young age, he became interested in spirituality and his meeting with Moussa N'Diaye was beneficial for him.

He received from Moussa a spiritual training based on _The Urantia Book_. Currently with his friends from Dakar he is part of the small group of teachers who provide what is called the teaching in progressive divine wisdom which essentially occupies all his time. Today, his presentation is entitled “A spiritual quest: God in question”. I greet you very much Linne, I thank you for your spiritual friendship, your conduct in inviting me to make a presentation. I thank the Urantia Association of Quebec for its tireless work in promoting the ideas and ideals stemming from the Urantia revelation. I greet and thank from the bottom of my heart my brother Gaétan for our links and our collaboration concerning the defense and manifestation of spiritual truth. I greet each of you and thank you very much for your presence as well as for the questions and contributions that you will not fail to bring in order to enrich the presentation.

[Read more](/en/article/Mamadou_Doudou_Diagne/Une_Quete_Spirituelle_Dieu_En_Question)

## From divine incompleteness to human adventure.

Sophie Malicot

The ever-innovative wind of the Spirit blows where it wills and no being on earth can divert its course. In this sense, it seems that certain founding foundations of our civilization are increasingly being called into question. At the forefront, the concept of original sin is cracking and disintegrating to the point of no longer being part of the pillars of reference present. Do we measure that this progressive dismissal completely changes the view on the place and evolution of man? In order to better understand this evolution, it is good to return to Genesis. The major part of this book was written in the 8th and 7th centuries BC. Although its writing is attributed to Moses, whose dating of existence is not determined, this compilation is now recognized as coming from several authors, having inserted over time episodes relating to different eras, as evidenced by the anachronisms allowing us to affirm the plurality of these sources. This underlines on the one hand that the book is made by the hands of men linked to their time; on the other hand, the staggering of its writing allowed for the adjustments that were necessary to respond to the questions of the times.

[Read more](/en/article/Sophie_Malicot/De_L_incompletude_Divine_A_L_aventure_Humaine)

## The Hazards of a Decimal Planet

Claude Flibotte
Sainte-Julie (Quebec) Canada

We know from the revelators that our dear blue planet is a decimal planet ([UB 58:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/58#p0_1)). This means, as you probably know, that on every tenth planet where the Life Carriers implant life, it is subject to new models of mechanical, chemical and electrical mobilization ([UB 57:8.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/57#p8_8)) that is to say new forms of life in order to develop possible improvements.

**The failures**

Obviously, since we live in an experiential universe that is not yet perfect, failures in attempts to improve life are possible. Among the failures that have occurred on Urantia we may mention certain bacteria and fungi. The former have changed little since the early dawn of life and even exhibit a certain degree of regression in their parasitic behavior. In the case of fungi, many of them exhibit retrograde motion because they have lost their ability to produce chlorophyll and have become parasitic.

[Read more](/en/article/Claude_Flibotte/Les_Aleas_D_une_Planete_Decimale)

## Urantia Foundation Communicates

From June 17 to 19, the 2022 Scientific Symposium organized by the Urantia Foundation will be held by videoconference.

**Science: the interface between evolution and revelation.**

Presentation Schedule and Registration:
https://bit.ly/ScienceSymposium2022
The subjects:

1. A new model of the universe, George Park
2. A unified theory of physical interactions, Philippe Hatt
3. An Explanation of Large Doppler Redshifts without the Big Bang, Philip G Calabrese


[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/La_Fondation_Communique_L_avenir_d_Urantia_Elements_De_ReFlexion)

## The Earth

Simon Orsini (Corsica)

Is there life elsewhere than on earth? There is no doubt that we are not alone, we have had many visits that are written in the religious books of our ancestors. But there is better, we are the proof of the existence of God, God is therefore the proof of our existence. Whoever watches television must know that the waves that navigate the universe are organized, that without electricity we could neither search nor progress, we would be at the level of the animal. It is the only planet where there is so much water, which has become salty, certainly not by chance, the beauty of this earth is unparalleled and I do not know anyone who wants to leave it to go and live on the moon.

Despite the discovery of all the laws of matter, astrophysicists are still at the flat universe, they are at the level of our ancestors who believed that the earth was flat.

[Read more](/en/article/Simon_Orsini/La_Terre_2)





## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

