---
title: "The Urantian Link — Issue 100 — December 2022"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2022 Ivan Stol, Sophie Malicot, Khatukhira Bernard<br>© 2022 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>


As you have noticed, this Link that you have in your hands or in front of your screen bears the number 100. It is, of course, a special issue in which we wanted to relate the events of the life of the French-speaking movement, publish the articles that you were kind enough to send us, but not only that. We also wanted it to be historical by relating certain events from the past so that older readers can remember with perhaps a little nostalgia and that younger readers can learn with interest. It is a bit of a duty of remembrance that we are transmitting in this issue.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_29)

Ivan

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 1, rue du Temple, 13012 Marseille. +33 (0)980 978481
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

## Issue 100 — December 2022

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **AUGUST 21, 2022**, _Sophie Malicot_
- **Dare to God**, _Sophie Malicot_
- **News from French-speaking Groups**, _Various Authors_
- **Lights 2022**, _Sophie Malicot_
- **Relationships Between Material, Mental and Spirit**, _Ivan Stol_
- **Urantia Conference In Uganda 2022**, _Khatukhira Bernard_
- **Minutes of the General Meeting**, _President Ivan Stoll_

## August 21, 2022

Balloons with the words “Happy Birthday” written on them and a sign “Michael” visible to all guided the participants to the August 24 party. There were 11 of us readers, from different groups. We met in the living room because the heat, still very present, did not allow us to stay outside. After a welcome coffee for the time of reunion, the opening words were addressed to the participants and their Thought Adjusters, as well as Jesus. Then we began the study proposed by Sophie, addressing the plural situations in which Jesus came to bestow himself. From Emmanuel's recommendations to the genealogy of Jesus, from the socio-political situation to the evolutions of the Hebrew concept of Yahweh, we approached this space-time, with the difficulties of measuring the differences in morals, customs, situations and mentalities. A good exercise to understand the extent of the work of the Supreme, and its unfailing line of progression more perceptible on a scale of 2500 years.

[Read more](/en/article/Sophie_Malicot/21_AOUT_2022)

_Sophie Malicot_

## Dare God

Dare God, in ordinary life. Without departure but presence. Penetrate the Divine Life; let yourself be penetrated. Touch Christic Love — let yourself be set ablaze. Love so immeasurably overwhelming that the upheaval is barely bearable. It loves everything, overturns everything, armor, feelings, attractions and aversions: nothing stands up to it and no reference remains; poor references! This Love transgresses, pierces and transfigures.

Absolute Love, it dominates, penetrates to the depths of the soul, of being, of self and non-self in Unique unity. With a breath it encompasses, provokes and engenders a burning pain: internal, intense, indescribable, ineffable. Without circumference, reaches everything beyond. And we let go with a full gesture because nothing holds. Transcend the construct so meticulously erected. Nothing keeps: from a quarrel is dismissed.

[Read more](/en/article/Sophie_Malicot/Oser_Dieu)

Sophie Malicot

## News from French-speaking study groups

To commemorate the hundredth issue of Le Lien, we asked French-speaking readers to send us news from study groups demonstrating the liveliness of the French-speaking movement. In the following pages, you will find testimonies from France, Senegal, Quebec and Belgium.

We hope you enjoy reading it. Naturally, your comments are welcome.

**Study Group called “Paris”**

The so-called “Paris” study group has experienced multiple episodes over time.

At first almost confidential, around the personality of Jacques Dupont, this group was maintained with passion, enthusiasm and regularity since the 70s I believe and followed by Georges and Marlène, whom the majority of us know, and who later took over the family torch when Jacques left.

D[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Nouvelles_des_Groupes_Francophones)

_Georges Michelson Dupont_


## LIGHTS 2022

Sophie Malicot

A successful bet to be able to meet again, after all this time of restricted meetings! We were 12 happy future finalists, learning from here below teamwork and the art of human relations. There were some rough edges to show the tip of their noses but we overcame them all with joy.

After the joy of the reunion on Thursday evening, the announced program concerned “***the mind, the personality and the soul with a view to talking about it around us***”.

Friday morning we started with booklet 36, chapter 5, description of the 7 Adjutant Spirits-Minds. Study of the divine circuits that allow us to gradually spiritualize our minds. The continuity of the Adjutant Spirits-Minds continued with the sharing of my research questioning the affiliation of each person to a particular Divine Spirit, in connection with the 7 Master Spirits and their spiritual donations up to the Adjutant Spirits-Minds, integrating the mortals that we are. Attached is a calligraphy illustrating this research.

[Read more](/en/article/Sophie_Malicot/Lumieres_2022)

## Relationships between Material, Mental and Spirit

**Material and Mental**

As the following excerpt tells us:

> “It is the presence of the seven adjutant mind-spirits on the primitive worlds that conditions the course of organic evolution; that explains why evolution is purposeful and not accidental. These adjutants represent that function of the mind ministry of the Infinite Spirit which is extended to the lower orders of intelligent life through the operations of a local universe Mother Spirit. The adjutants are the children of the Universe Mother Spirit and constitute her personal ministry to the material minds of the realms. Wherever and whenever such mind is manifest, these spirits are variously functioning.” ([UB 36:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/36#p5_1))

This clearly determines that the circuits of the adjutant mental spirits have a direct action on organisms and their evolutions. And the Divine Minister is directly associated with these influences because in the same paragraph it is said:

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Relations_Entre_Materiel_Mental_Et_Esprit)

## Urantia Conference Uganda 2022

THE BIRTH OF URANTIA BOOK TEACHING IN UGANDA

Urantia Conference Uganda 2022 was the first ever in Uganda. The conference was supposed to be held in August 2020 but due to the Covid 19 pandemic, limited funds and leadership issues, it could not take place until last August.

_The Urantia Book_ and its teachings have finally arrived in Uganda, the pearl of Africa. It is with great hope and faith that the truth seekers here will greatly appreciate the teachings of the book, which will enrich their ever-growing spirituality, guided by love and the will to serve.

This is just the beginning of a long journey of spiritual adventure to Paradise, but most importantly for all Ugandans, it brings a spiritual enlightenment that will create unity and harmony (brotherhood of man) among Ugandans in their affirmation of God as Father (fatherhood of God) in them. We thank God that it has come to pass that The Urantia Book and its teachings have been publicly initiated in Uganda.

[Read more](/en/article/Khatukhira_Bernard/Conference_Urantia_En_Ouganda_2022)

***Khatukhira Bernard***

***Cosmic Citizens in Uganda***

## Association A.F.L.L.U. — General Assembly Report

29-10-2022

**1: OPENING OF THE ASSEMBLY**

The general meeting began on 10/29/2022 at 3:00 p.m.

The members present at this meeting were as follows:

- Stol Ivan, DUVEAU Jean, PERIER Lucas, CROISE André, MORELLI Patrick, LA SCALA Danielle, MALICOT Sophie, VIRET Marie-José, MAUROY Gilles Patrick, DONNADIEU Georges

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Compte_Rendu_Assemblee_Generale)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)

