---
title: "Le Lien Urantien — Issue 102 — June 2023"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2023 Ivan Stol, Claude Flibotte, Jean Claude Romeuf, Charles de Foucauld<br>© 2023 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>
<br>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-102-juin-2023">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 102 — June 2023</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_31">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



Dear friends and readers, our world is in turmoil. But it is time to be positive and to experiment in order to understand the will of God. Between the efforts of heavenly helpers and the free will of human beings, there are distortions. But are we really capable of discerning the just and the unjust, evolution or regression? Staying positive seems the best solution to help according to one's abilities without trying to do the impossible that only a majority can do together.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_31)

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 30 Chemin Hugues, Quartier Barban 83500 La Seyne sur Mer. +33 (0)7 66 84 17 28
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelson-dupont@wanadoo.fr

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

This LINK is yours, Send us your articles, news and studies to: georges.michelsondupont777@gmail.com

# Issue 102 — June 2023

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **AFLUB Meeting**
- **AFLUB Report**
- **Testimonials**, _Sophie Malicot; Ellisabeth Grosset-Magane; Patrick Morelli_
- **Adjuster, Absoluteness and Fusion**, _Claude Flibotte (Quebec)_
- **The House**, _Jean Claude Romeuf_
- **Prayer of Abandonment**, _Charles de Foucauld_
- **Readers' Heart**



## AFLLU MEETING

JUNE 1-4, 2023

La Neylière (POMEYs — 69590)

The AFFUB national meeting was held at the La Neylière institution in Pomeys, a small town of just over 500 inhabitants, northwest of Lyon, in the hills of Lyonnais, a very hilly area located at an altitude of around 700 m.

La Neylière is a Marist institution managed by religious and lay people under the iqor law. The capacity is 100 people with 55 rooms. The price of full board per person is relatively modest.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Reunion_AFLUB)

## AFLUB General Assembly 03-06-2023

Report

**I Opening of the assembly**

The general meeting began on June 3, 2023 at 5:00 p.m. The members present at this meeting were 13 in number (see attendance sheet appendix).

With three powers:

Stol Ivan had the power of Olivetta Lino and Jean-Christophe CHUINE.

MALICOT Sophie had the power of COZETTE CYRIL

That is, 13 people + 3 delegations of power which makes this general meeting valid according to our Statutes.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Compte_Rendu_AFLUB)



## Testimony of Sophie Malicot

“God in our life” was indeed there! As proof if any were needed: his subtle perfumes were distilled among us: anachronistic time within a strict timing, fraternal unity within a plurality as large as the number of personalities present, approach of his infinite wealth in sincerity without detour. He even made a brief appearance disguised....as a puppet.

We quickly recognized him by his white beard!

A handful of women and men, as paltry as they are sincere, in sharing our living faith, the one that sometimes raises waves because it is so dear to our hearts; then calms down in the light of the fraternity that prevails. We have “come together”, assembling our divergences into convergences towards the One. We have known how to speak, exposing as equals our plural diversities to live the Kingdom. Complex concepts have not left room for the indolent mind.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Temoignages)

## Adjuster, Absoluteness and Fusion!

Claude Flibotte — Sainte-Julie (Quebec)

The origin of this text comes from an exchange of emails between several readers of The Urantia Book. We were wondering whether the Adjuster was an absolute entity before the fusion and whether he remained so after the event. In order to get a better idea of this question, it is interesting to consider the Adjuster before his fusion with his human subject, and then after the fusion.

**THE ADJUSTER BEFORE MERGER**

Let us see together what a Thought Adjuster is. In quote ro7: I. 2 it is written:

[Read more](/en/article/Claude_Flibotte/Ajusteur_Absoluite_et_Fusion_2)

## THE HOUSE

Jean Claude Romeuf
Vinales, Cuba

After leaving the Cow Cave that crosses the mountain and which here is called the mogote, I met a friendly old farmer. At 83 years old, he was still cultivating the land and had seen me coming from afar.

**I saw it too!**

He was waiting for the stranger who was passing through his property, near his house whose roof had flown off to Heaven because of a cyclone.

[Read more](/en/article/Jean_Claude_Romeuf/La_Maison)

## Readers' Letters

Hello everyone,

Following this call I react.

As a kind of 'reflex', a feedback.

What do we try with all our hearts every day? To do His will, willingly or unwillingly.

Like the bee that makes honey which then attracts the bear, like a pot of honey at our level.

We are children of life, stimulated, taken by the hand, from the material to the spiritual. We imitate as parents or lovers of our neighbor, the image of our Father.

[Read more](/en/article/Le_Lien/Coeurrier_des_lecteurs_01)

Alain Coulombe




## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-102-juin-2023">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 102 — June 2023</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_31">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
