---
title: "Le Lien Urantien — Issue 105 — March 2024"
description: "Journal of the French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book"
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2024 Ivan Stol, Sophie Malicot, Georges Michelson Dupont, Patrick Morelli, Richard Zhu<br>© 2024 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-105-mars-2024">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 105 — March 2024</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_34">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>



## Dear readers,

First of all, I wish you all lots of Love and Brotherhood and a happy New Year.

It's decided, the 2025 European meeting will take place in PARIS at the CIS Maurice Ravel hotel, in June, from Friday 6 at 4 p.m. to Monday 9 at 1 p.m.

A press release with a link to a site will be sent to you by email and by post for those who are not computerized.

[Read more](/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_34)

## Imprint

_Le Lien_ is the journal of the French-speaking association of readers of the _Urantia Book_ (AFLUB), a member of the UAI, Urantia Association International.

**Head office**: 320 d rue Sainte Agathe; 69440 Taluyers +33 (0)7 66841728
Cœurriel: afllu@urantia.fr
Site/Forum: http://www.urantia.fr and http://forum.urantia.fr

**Publication Director**: Ivan Stol; ivan.stol@free.fr

**Editor-in-Chief**: Georges Michelson-Dupont; georges.michelsondupont777@gmail.com

**Reading Committee**: Jean Duveau; Ivan Stol & Patrick Morelli.

_The Link_: Published 4 times a year electronically to AFLLU members

Legal deposit: December 1997 — ISSN 1285-1116

_All rights reserved._ Materials from _The Urantia Book_ are used with permission. Any literary or artistic representation(s), interpretation(s), opinion(s) or conclusion(s) implied or stated are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of Urantia Foundation or its affiliates.

## Issue 105 — March 2024

- **Editorial**, _Ivan Stol_
- **Abortion**, _Sophie Malicot_
- **Urantia Foundation News**, _G. Michelson Dupont_
- **Philosophical and historical approach to quantum mechanics**, _Patrick Morelli_
- **The Chinese translation of The Urantia Book**, _G. Michelson Dupont_
- **Differences between Simplified and Traditional Chinese Characters**, _Richard Zhu_

## Abortion

Sophie Malicot

January 2024

Some subjects are taboo in the fifth revelation. Abortion is one of them. Flirting with it in a study group is a guarantee of certain controversies. An elegance sometimes springs forth: to escape dilemmas, some gentlemen conclude: “I am not a woman and cannot talk about it; let them speak.” So I pick it up - this raw speech and only my own. And I underline in the first instance the first shortcoming: abortion concerns men as much as women. Because despite the new customs of having babies in a unisex couple, it remains no less true that to MAKE this baby, a sperm and an egg are necessary. Therefore a man and a woman. And it will always be so because humans will never know how to create life.

[Read more](/en/article/Sophie_Malicot/Avortement)

## Urantia Foundation News

The translation of _The Urantia Book_ into the languages of Urantia is part of the planetary mission of Urantia Foundation, which is described in the <Declaration of Trust,> the document creating the Foundation in 1950 and available at: [urantia.org/en/la-fondation-urantia/declaration-de-fiducie?term=déclaration#arV](urantia.org/en/la-fondation-urantia/declaration-de-fiducie?term=déclaration#arV)

The Urantia Revelation is now available in 27 languages for direct reading on the Urantia Foundation website urantia.org with a search engine allowing students to locate paragraphs easily. All of these translations, the latest being the Chinese translation, are also downloadable from the Foundation website for free in several formats, Word, PDF, and others.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/Nouvelles_de_la_Fondation_Urantia_2)

## Philosophical and historical approach to quantum mechanics

Patrick Morelli

The history of the quantum revolution is certainly difficult to situate, the deductive practice of researchers such as Heisenberg and Schrödinger in the years 1925-1926 can situate the start that they gave by looking at the objects of classical physics which broke into fragments that were difficult to reconcile.

It is only in recent years that a shift has taken place among physicists, at the end of the 1980s and 1990s, with the approach of some of them to a form of supposed metaphysics, to try to bring classical means of experimentation into line with the probabilistic results of quantum mechanics, a sort of global wave function which would be interpreted as representing reality.

[Read more](/en/article/Patrick_Morelli/Approche_philosophique_et_historique_de_la_mecanique_quantique)


## The Chinese translation of The Urantia Воoк

SIMPLIFIED CHARACTER VERSION
VERSION IN TRADITIONAL CHARACTERS.

After 20 years of effort, the Chinese translation into simplified and traditional characters is complete. Each translation has its own story and this one is remarkable in more ways than one.

Like all early versions, these two must be regarded as a first draft, especially since the translation of concepts revealed in the Urantia Papers into sinograms or logograms is complicated by the construction of the characters.

Fortunately, Chinese philosophical thought is rich in wisdom that dates back several thousand years and possesses, in the way of constructing logograms, all the nuances necessary for the full expression of profound meanings.

[Read more](/en/article/Georges_Michelson_Dupont/La_traduction_chinoise_de_The_Urantia_Book)

## DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TRADITIONAL AND SIMPLIFIED CHINESE CHARACTERS

RICHARD ZHU
Translator of the Simplified Character Version of The Urantia Book

Simplified Chinese and Traditional Chinese are two types of written Chinese language, and the spoken Chinese language may be the same, Mandarin. The main differences between these two written Chinese languages are as follows:

Simplified Chinese characters are one of two standardized character sets widely used to write contemporary Chinese languages, the second set being the traditional characters. The development of simplified characters during the 20th century was part of an initiative by the People's Republic of China (PRC) to promote literacy, and their use in ordinary circumstances on the mainland has been encouraged by the Chinese government since the 1950s. The official simplified forms are used in mainland China, Malaysia, and Singapore, while the traditional characters are officially used in Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan.

[Read more](/en/article/Richard_Zhu/Differences_entre_les_caracteres_chinois)

## References

- [Bulletin The Link](http://lien.urantia.fr/)



<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_le_lien#le-lien-urantien-issue-105-mars-2024">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Le Lien Urantien — Issue 105 — March 2024</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Ivan_Stol/Editorial_34">
          <span class="pr-2">Editorial</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
