# “Forbid him not!”

Jesus went over to Gamala to visit John and those who worked with him at that place. That evening, after the session of questions and answers, John said to Jesus: “Master, yesterday I went over to Ashtaroth to see a man who was teaching in your name and even claiming to be able to cast out devils. Now this fellow had never been with us, neither does he follow after us; therefore I forbade him to do such things.” Then said Jesus:

"Forbid him not. Do you not perceive that this gospel of the kingdom shall presently be proclaimed in all the world? How can you expect that all who will believe the gospel shall be subject to your direction? Rejoice that already our teaching has begun to manifest itself beyond the bounds of our personal influence.

“Do you not see, John, that those who profess to do great works in my name must eventually support our cause? They certainly will not be quick to speak evil of me. My son, in matters of this sort it would be better for you to reckon that he who is not against us is for us. In the generations to come many who are not wholly worthy will do many strange things in my name, but I will not forbid them. I tell you that, even when a cup of cold water is given to a thirsty soul, the Father's messengers shall ever make record of such a service of love.”

This instruction greatly perplexed John. Had he not heard the Master say, “He who is not with me is against me”? And he did not perceive that in this case Jesus was referring to man's personal relation to the spiritual teachings of the kingdom, while in the other case reference was made to the outward and far-flung social relations of believers regarding the questions of administrative control and the jurisdiction of one group of believers over the work of other groups which would eventually compose the forthcoming world-wide brotherhood? (1764)

# Where are the Daughters of God?

Marion Steward, Auckland, New Zealand

[Presented at the Australian & New Zealand Conference of Urantia Book readers, Sydney,1997]

Our mission here on this planet is to strive to become Godlike, but the leap from mortal kind like us to God is unimaginably huge, as the authors of The Urantia Book never tire of reminding us ! We are told that the most useful thing any of us could do here on Urantia is to study the life of Jesus.  Christ Michael, in his bestowal mission here, was and is the ultimate role model for all of us ascenders.  He named himself the Son of Man, and the Son of God.

The Universe is teeming with Sons of God, starting with the Eternal Son, then all the descending Sons,  the Paradise Sons of God—Creator Sons, Magisterial Sons, and Trinity Teacher Sons; then the Local Universe Sons of God—Melchizedek Sons, Vorondadek Sons, Lanonandek Sons,  and the Life Carriers; and numerous, unrevealed orders of Trinitized Sons.  Then we have the ascending Sons— Father-fused, Son-fused and Spirit-fused mortals, evolutionary seraphim, ascending Material Sons, Translated Midwayers, personalized Adjusters. 

A reader could easily come to the conclusion, then, that to be Godlike means to become a Son of God,—but for those of us who find it difficult to see ourselves as sons, this poses a certain difficulty. 

Of course, it may merely be a question of language. In the 1930s there was no such thing as being politically correct, and avoiding sexist and racist language. Perhaps the word 'son' was used because there is no word in English for 'adult child.'  A Child of God, the Children of God—in English, the word has definite implications of immaturity, and while we certainly can be so regarded in terms of our entire universe career, nevertheless we do reach maturity at each stage of our lives. On those occasions when we are referred to as children, it is usually then followed by some reference to growing up to become Sons of God.

The authors frequently bemoan the paucity of the English language, and the constraints they suffered in rendering this revelation into print—limitations imposed both by deficiencies in the language, and by the lack of advanced spiritual concepts on Urantia. When we start to learn 'Nebadon-ese' and 'Satanian-ese' as we progress through the mansion worlds, then we will undoubtedly discover a whole new range of useful vocabulary items, which we will need to express our enlarged ideas of the universe.  I look forward to reaching Havona, where “One hour's instruction is the equivalent of 10,000 years of the word-memory methods of Urantia.”(303)

However, I tend to believe that they deliberately used 'son' and other such gender-specific words to represent roles and function, rather than physical descriptions.  In one telling sentence, the Eternal Son is also called the Universal Mother, a statement which clearly goes far beyond issues of sex differentiation.

On reading further, some light is shed upon this. In the papers dealing with seraphim, there is the statement: “...in dealing with sex creatures it is our custom to speak of those beings of more direct descent from the Father and the Son as the sons of God, while referring to the children of the Spirit as the daughters of God.” (419)

This is good news—the universe is revealed as being also teeming with daughters! The lists of all the children of the Spirit are very long—all the Higher Personalities of the spirit, the Universe Power Directors, the Messenger Hosts of space, the Ministering Spirits of the Superuniverses and of the Local Universes—a vast array of beings undertaking an incomprehensible number of vitally important tasks. 

So what are these Daughters of God like?  Do they behave differently to Sons?  Can we mortal daughters learn from them?  How do Daughters of God relate to Sons?

The most notable of all these, as far as we mortals are concerned, the daughter highest in status to whom we can relate, is the Creative Daughter Spirit, that individualization of the Infinite Spirit who comes and works with each Creator Son in the creation of and administration of a local universe.  She is variously named as the Divine Minister, the Holy Spirit of the Local Universe, or the Local Universe Mother Spirit.

On p. 368 we read: “The Spirit ...enacts the role of a mother, always assisting the Son and being everlastingly indispensable to the administration of the universe....no Son could hope for final success without the incessant co-operation of the Divine Minister and her spirit helpers, the daughters of God.” (368)

A study of the sections dealing with the Creator Son and the Daughter Spirit reveals a very close relationship of interdependence.  Michael relies on the Spirit for her omnipresence, and she through him compensates for being bound by time. Together they can transcend both time and space. In the whole creation of the local universe, she is totally indispensable—she provides the mind for each creature, she provides the life spark, she creates the Seven Adjutant Spirits who foster the mind development of all creatures, and she ministers to all human beings through her own Holy Spirit.

This Daughter of God has many attributes which I would dearly love to emulate, but unfortunately, God has not organized the universe like that.  We cannot hope to be omnipresent, useful though it would be, and neither can we ever aspire to be able to bestow mind, physical matter, or the vital life spark on other beings in the same way that she does—though clearly, those of us who are lucky enough to be mothers have some pale experience of this in a human way in the administration of our homes and families.

As far as the relationship between this Daughter and Son is concerned, at the enthronement of Michael as a Master Son, our universe's Creative Daughter Spirit acknowledged her subordination to him, and pledged fidelity and obedience. In return, Michael acknowledged his eternal dependence on her, and declared her to be co-ruler of his universe, and equal with him in personality and divine attributes. (. 369)

This relationship is described as the “high ideal of the family and the human institution of voluntary marriage.” (369). 

What are the issues here for daughters to reflect on?  Publicly declaring one's subordination and vowing loyalty and obedience to one's husband is not a modern attitude, to put it mildly, but then neither is it common, as far as I am aware, for husbands to acknowledge their dependence on their wives, though our society has been grappling with the equality question for some time now, and will continue to do so for the foreseeable future.   

So, what about other Daughters in the Universe?  On a level far closer to ours, there are the Material Daughters, all the Eves.  Though seldom in the Book are any Eves talked about on their own—almost always are they referred to as “the Material Son and Daughter.” On p. 828 we read: “The Material Sons and Daughters always serve together. It is the essence of their service at all times and in all places never to be separated.  They are designed to work in pairs; seldom do they function alone.” Their chief task is “to multiply and uplift the children of time,” and they contribute to the improvement of the races by cultural education, particularly in the physical, scientific and economic realms. They lead very much by example.

Take the command “to multiply.” Our own Eve had 32 daughters and 32 sons before the default, and 42 children after leaving the Garden. It is not specified but it seems clear that the balance of girls to boys is always even. She had already had 50 sons and 50 daughters before coming to Urantia, so when it came to multiplying, she certainly met her responsibilities—206 children! Given our much shorter life span, I don't think we are expected to perform quite up to those standards!

In studying the way of life of Adam and Eve, the theme of working together in equal partnership which we saw between Michael and the Divine Minister, is strongly reinforced. On p. 831, where the arrival of our Material Son and Daughter is described in much detail, The Urantia Book states: “Take note! women as well as men were in this group (a council selected to assume responsibilities in the new administration of world affairs). It was an astounding innovation to behold Eve, a woman, sharing the honors and responsibilities of world affairs with a man.” 

On p. 836, “Adam endeavored to teach the races sex equality. The way Eve worked by the side of her husband made a profound impression upon all dwellers in the Garden. Adam definitely taught them that the woman, equally with the man, contributes those life factors which unite to form a new being.” This was a new idea for humans in those days, and who knows what sort of society we would all be living in now if it had not been for the default. 
The Material Sons and Daughters live permanently, of course, on the system capitals, and there are certainly a lot of them!  At last count, there were 161,432,840 Material Sons and Daughters in Nebadon, and they all play a major part in the administration of those spheres and in the further training of mortal ascenders. They run the probationary nurseries on the finaliters' world and take ascenders to live with them in their homes.  They model “the ideals of the union of man and woman in the bonds of marriage and for the purpose of procreating and rearing offspring.”

So we now have two ideals of marriage, and this study of daughters is becoming also an examination of males and females, and the way they relate to each other.  What does the book have to say about male and female?  On p.931, “Male and female are... two distinct varieties of the same species....Their viewpoints and entire life reactions are essentially different, they are wholly incapable of full and real comprehension of each other.”  This statement would strike a chord with most couples on this planet.

Then on p. 938: “Many orders of universe creatures are created in dual phases of personality manifestation. Among mortals, material sons, and midsoniters, this difference is described as male and female; among seraphim, cherubim and morontia companions, it has been denominated positive or aggressive and negative and retiring.” The key point here is the use of the word 'personality manifestation.' Jesus described this too: “in the kingdom of heaven there is neither rich nor poor, free nor bond, male nor female, all are equally the sons and daughters of God.” (1678)  So even once the male and female part has gone, we are still daughters and sons, and, “the differences in viewpoint...persist...throughout the local and superuniverse ascensions. ”(938)

The question occurs as to why the Universal Father created us male and female—in what way or ways is this better than being, say, hermaphroditic and simply reproducing ourselves? One possible answer may be that in a small, small way, in the experience of working together, the daughters and sons on Urantia can get a slight inkling of how God the Father works together with the Eternal Son and the Infinite Spirit.                 

On p.1221: “Sharing is Godlike—divine. God shares all with the Eternal Son and the Infinite Spirit, while they, in turn, share all things with the divine Sons and spirit Daughters of the universes.”

This may perhaps be stretching the point slightly, but the essential idea is that it is the pattern, the example, that matters. In our own small ways, in our own small spheres of operation and influence, we can attempt to model this pattern of sharing.

On p. 614, “With the Son and in the Spirit did God project eternal Havona, and ever since has there obtained the eternal pattern of co-ordinate participation in creation—sharing. This pattern of sharing is the master design for every one of the Sons and Daughters of God who go out into space to engage in the attempt to duplicate in time the central universe of eternal perfection.”

And Michael himself, our own Creator Son who has worked with our own Creative Daughter Spirit for eons in the creation and administering of our own local universe, encouraged us to follow this example in our lives on Urantia. He stunned and amazed everybody in his advocating of the equality of women and in his equal treatment of them. Time after time the apostles would come across him talking to a woman by a well, or in the street, often a woman of less than desirable reputation, giving words of comfort and encouragement to these daughters of God.  Despite this, they were still utterly astonished when he set up the women's corps of evangelists and issued an emancipation proclamation—so similar to the proclamation of equality with the Universe Mother Spirit which he issued at the termination of his bestowal on Urantia.

In talks about marriage and divorce, he said: “...it is the divine will that men and women should find their highest service and consequent joy in the establishment of homes for the reception and training of children, in the creation of whom these parents become copartners with the Makers of heaven and earth.”  (1838)

And what is possibly the most picturesque moment of all—his little chat to the man he saw berating his wife on the wharf at Tarentum during his return from Rome: “Do you not know that men and women are partners with God in that they co-operate to create beings who grow up to possess themselves of the potential of immortal souls? The Father in heaven treats the Spirit Mother of the children of the universe as one equal to himself. It is Godlike to share your life and all that relates thereto on equal terms with the mother partner who so fully shares with you that divine experience of reproducing yourselves in the lives of your children.”  (1471)

Where, then, are the Daughters of God?  They are everywhere—the spirit beings created by the Infinite Spirit and his children, sometimes working in pairs, sometimes alone. The Spirit Daughters who become Mothers in each Local Universe, and work hard in close co-operation with the Creator Sons, attempting to model the divine pattern of sharing in their own spheres. And the Material Daughters, equal with the Material Sons, show humans the superior achievements possible by a woman and a man working together.  God has made it possible for even we mortals here on Urantia, on the very bottom rung of the ascension ladder, to do this too, and perhaps in so doing, come to a better understanding of what it means to be God-like.

# The Hidden Messages in The Urantia Book - Art

John C. Hyde, U.S.A.

One of my favorite topics is, “the hidden messages in The Urantia Book.” Occasionally when the inspiration hits me, I try to write about these hidden messages, even though they are not really so hidden.  This article deals with the true nature of art from the cosmic perspective, and why art defined in this fashion is so vitally important to us. It also offers up a new way to differentiate the offerings of The Urantia Book from other “religions” and “revelations” in the broad marketplace of ideas.

When asked to explain The Urantia Book, most of us come up short, or, worse yet, draw a complete blank. Many of the rest of us give some convoluted explanation that would only make sense to someone who has nearly finished his/her first reading of the book.  I submit that this is because the book is simply too broad to be summarized, an assessment that I suspect few would disagree with.

The Urantia Book says that Jesus' many-sided teachings were not adequately grasped by any one individual, and that is why the bulk of his teachings were lost so soon after his death (within a generation or two). Or, to explain it differently, each of his followers taught that portion of Jesus' teachings which he or she understood, and the only teachings that have withstood the test of time are those that were universal, those few teachings that were commonly understood by all.

But, if we as individuals focus on that portion of The Urantia Book that we best understand, the risk of the message being largely lost is minimal, since this revelation is in book form.  In any event, it is certainly not appropriate to tell an inquirer (sincere or otherwise) that the book is simply too vast to be summarized, so here, take my loaner copy, and go read it for yourself.  People want TRUTH, not a BOOK, even if that truth is distorted, as long as it comes from your heart.

That, I believe, is the key. How much of that big blue book has made its way into your heart?  For many, the fascination with the revelation as a revelation has eclipsed the more subtle messages.

We readers all know that God is love, hell is not real, everyone who seeks forgiveness is forgiven, and so on.  But these ideas come off as just a bunch of platitudes to an outsider, just another “religion,” probably made up by someone hoping to appeal to yet another segment of the unwary population.

What we need is something MEATY to give our inquirers. Something really different, something unique and highly appealing.  So, turning to the book, what can be found that might fit this bill?

Consider Paper 56, Universal Unity, co-authored by a Mighty Messenger (we will probably become Mighty Messengers some day), and Machiventa Melchizedek, the only other Descending Son of God to incarnate into the likeness of a human being on this planet to date.  Until recently, I have found this one paper to be curiously out of step with most of the rest of the book, comparable in some ways to the papers on the Supreme—interesting, but perhaps a bit irrelevant.

But this paper was written by the the one personality MOST INTERESTED in the welfare of this planet—our soon-to-be Vicegerent Planetary Prince. This convinced me that, in fact, this paper was probably one of the most important papers in the whole book. So, I read it very carefully, and very slowly.

In some ways Paper 56 is a bit like the Foreword—it tends to summarize the whole book. But there are some very interesting and unique perspectives presented in this Paper, entitled Universal Unity.  I will focus on just one of them—ART.

In Section 10, Truth, Beauty, and Goodness, we find the discussion on art.  Our future replacement Planetary Prince, who once (and not too long ago) lived among us, says:

“Philosophy you somewhat grasp, and divinity you comprehend in worship, social service, and personal spiritual experience, but the pursuit of beauty—cosmology—you all too often limit to the study of man's crude artistic endeavors.”

He then goes on to elaborate. I could take up many pages of text expanding upon this elaboration, but instead, let's just focus on one element. Here's his next sentence:

“Beauty, art, is largely a matter of the unification of contrasts.”

Let's assume that Jesus, who exhausted all the potentials for finite expression of spiritual beauty in the local universe of Nebadon, epitomized this concept. How did Jesus express beauty (as art) by unifying contrasts?

I say that Jesus was every bit a man of his day. He could keep up with anyone who displayed the least bit of spiritual receptivity. Now, there are some pretty weird characters in the world today, and I'm sure that in Jesus' day the typical man on the street was much rougher, much weirder, and much more dangerous than today. Two examples (out of many) come to mind, of Jesus' melding of contrasts. One is the time he stopped a man from beating his wife in public, the other is the occasion of Jesus talking to Anaxand in the shipyard.

I'd like to confess here that I attended high school with a boy who was raised by his grandmother, in a very small town. We were very good friends, but as adults, he took a somewhat different path than I did, though we kept in touch for many years. After getting caught in some silly interstate theft thing and doing a few months in the Texas prison system, he returned to his wife and two young children, and made a life for himself.

Now, my friend Arley (not the one who reads The Urantia Book) was a good guy at heart, but his experiences in the Navy and in prison caused him to associate with a very rough crowd—bikers. He'd go to biker bars, and biker weddings. In case anyone doesn't know it, the “code” of the American Old West still lives on in the biker sub-culture. Might very often makes right in these circles. There are plenty of drugs, and plenty of scoundrels. I remember one time when Arley told me that he'd taken his motorcycle to a guy for a major overhaul, and it was over two months later and he hadn't gotten it back.  He told me that he (Arley) was afraid that this guy, this backyard mechanic, might be trying to get into the “Banditos,” a motorcycle gang that requires, as the price of admission to their club, that the bike the candidate is riding be stolen from another biker. Arley summed up his dilemma by saying, “I might have to kill him.” I thought he was speaking figuratively, but when I started making a joke of his comment, he let me know that he didn't appreciate me making light of his very real moral dilemma.

I rather suspect that many of the persons Jesus dealt with in his day were like Arley. I read a lot of Arley in the character of Anaxand, the young man in the shipyard working on the steering paddle alongside Jesus. Here we see Jesus making some kind of series of comments that causes Anaxand to ridicule Jesus, but to do so with a hint of sincerity.

Jesus knew that Anaxand's comment of, “if the gods are so good then how come...” could not be answered directly. A discussion of free will, the real answer to the man's verbalized question, would have been wholly inappropriate. Jesus correctly saw the man's comment as a challenge to the assertions that Jesus had been making over the course of the morning—Jesus' assertions that God is good and that God cares for us.  Jesus also correctly ascertained that such a challenge could only be addressed by a counterchallenge, one that would “one-up” the original challenge issued by the young man, Anaxand.

I'm picturing a bunch of bikers sitting around, one of whom is bragging about his friend. Another biker gets tired of listening to him, and calls his bluff. Now the bragger has to defend himself, or be made a fool.  Imagine if biker #1 manages not only to defend his friend's honor, but at the same time to call his challenger a coward, and to do so in such a way that biker #2 actually agrees! This, I believe is what happened that afternoon in the shipyard as Jesus challenged Anaxand to accept his (Anaxand's) superior vision of justice, and act upon it to save the poor foreman who was drowning in spiritual darkness. Jesus even implied that if Anaxand didn't, he would be a spiritual coward!

If you read the passage on page 1430 you will notice that Jesus “puts down” Anaxand at least three times—twice at the beginning of his brief discourse, and then again at the end, where he challenges him with the following statement:

“Surely you are not the coward who could stand by on the seashore and watch a fellow man who could not swim perish?”

These are mighty strong words to use when dealing with an aggressive young man, one who hangs out in shipyards. But under the circumstances, they were exactly what needed to be said.

But, what does this have to do with art? Simple—it is a unification of contrasts. Jesus accepted this man exactly as he was, and still managed to unify spiritual growth and beauty with the rough and aggressive world of a common shipyard laborer. Truly, a unification of contrasts, creative beauty in the most amazing way.

However, this short passage illustrates a larger issue. Jesus lived a unique, spontaneous, and highly creative (artistic) life. The canvas of Jesus' life was the environs in which he happened to find himself at the moment. Jesus epitomized life in the era of light and life, a time when fashion will cease to dominate the lives of every mortal, when our clothes, our music, our ideas, our vocabularies, our reactions, and our thoughts will be unique expressions of the beauty of God, rather than being dictated by the acceptable norms of society.

In short, I believe that one of the hidden messages in The Urantia Book is the importance of ART.  Not art as in paintings, sculpture, and music, but rather art as in “the art of living,” as Rodan so aptly phrased it.  We are each to become a unique and artistic expression of the infinite personality of the Universal Father. That infinity will not be fully expressed, a portion of it will be lost forever, if we do not fulfill our potential. God depends upon us, in partnership with him, to CREATIVELY work out a new addition to reality as we know it. That, I believe, is the type of ART that our newly appointed Vicegerent Planetary Prince would like us to latch on to as a guiding concept in life.

And that, I submit, could be portrayed as the message that makes The Urantia Book unique among religions. For while all other religions rely on some type of code of ethics and morals (some are good, some are not so good, some are exceptionally good), The Urantia Book challenges us to devise a new and original path, one that will transcend the ethics and morals of this day, and will stand as a living testament to the glory of God the Almighty.

“Only a brave person is able honestly to accept, and fearlessly to face, what a sincere and logical mind discovers.”—Rodan of Alexandria

# Religion, Science, and Outdatedness

Reported in a parish magazine by Mrs.Sheila Kemish (wife of an ordained minister)

At the August Men's Breakfast, Ken Glasziou was the guest speaker and gave a fascinating talk on “Religion, Science, and Outdatedness,” followed by a video of a very modern, youth-oriented worship service. His views on the Church will seem very controversial to some, very helpful to others; these are quoted verbatim from his talk. Because of space limitations, I have had to summarize his scientific introduction as below.

Since the 19th century, the West has embraced a philosophy that 'matter' is all there is: hence our minds are complex but machine-like; ideas of free will or of God are just a delusion.

Ken asserts however that since the 1980's this theory has been blown apart by quantum physicists, indeed by studies that have been going on for most of this century into the bizarre sub-atomic world. An important phenomenon has been called a “non-local effect”—something that happens independently of space and time—and this is something classical physicists say cannot happen.

Yet French physicist, Alaine Aspect, proved beyond doubt that "if two photons have correlated properties and one of them is put through a polaroid lens, it will become either horizontally or vertically polarized. Its twin will instantaneously do the same, even without being put through a polarizer and even though it could be miles away.

It seems something “out there” is interacting with material objects and also with the minds of observers. Some great physicists call this “The Central Order of Things;” or “Universal Consciousness.” Others call it the “Ground of all Being” or simply “God.”

Ken sees God as “back in business” in much of current related scientific work at the highest level—and he believes more and more people will be looking for answers now that materialistic determinism is a 'dead duck' philosophy.

So, a wonderful opportunity for the Christian Church? Yes...but the problem Ken sees is that young people are becoming more educated, more critical, more sophisticated (and communicating more through the Internet) and that the Christian Churches are unlikely, as they are, to appeal. How then can we equate the “Central Order of Things” of the quantum physicists with the God of Christianity. He goes on:

"Presently most Christian denominations have some glaring anomalies and logical inconsistencies within their doctrines. Going along with the apostle, John, the concept that God is Love is preached universally—indeed a God whose love for his created children is infinitely greater than anything conceivable by us.

"The parables of Jesus including the lost coin, the good shepherd, and the prodigal son, teach us about a God who actually goes out in search of sinners not even waiting for them to beg for forgiveness before welcoming them to the fold. Then there is a comment by Jesus about the earthly fathers who would not give their sons a stone if they asked for bread—so how much more will the heavenly Father know how to give good things to those who ask Him. In so commenting, was not Jesus inviting us to utilize our concept of the best possible earthly father that we could imagine and then to use that as some kind of guide to how we might expect our heavenly Father to react, even though we would still know that any evaluation of ours would seriously underestimate God's love for us?

“I can find no evidence in the gospels that Jesus had a vengeful side to his character. Just the opposite—his teaching appears to indicate that God requires only our sincere repentance as the price of forgiveness for our misdemeanors. And I take Jesus' life as the best revelation there is of both the nature of God and his will for his earthly children. During Jesus' life, he freely forgave sin while displaying no desire for retributive justice or vengeance. Even on the cross, his words about his persecutors were, ”Father, forgive them for they know not what they do."

"At least some of the new generation of highly educated young people are sure to construe Jesus' behavior as indicative of a God whose infinite mercy, compassion, and love, as our heavenly Father, will always transcend his righteousness as our judge. How can such a concept be reconciled with that of a God of retribution who demands that his only begotten Son should die an agonizing death on the cross as the penalty for sins that he did not even commit?

“Christianity must also take a good look at the problem of exclusivity, the doctrine that only those who accept Jesus as their Lord and Savior are eligible for salvation. This concept is deeply entrenched with some denominations, less so with others. I remember that, during my youth, there were notices displayed in the trams and trains of Sydney announcing, ”He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him." (John 3:36). Pretty intimidating, especially as it was presented as if it was the authoritative and infallible word of God rather than being the actual words of an eccentric, locust-eating man of the desert named John the Baptist.

“Mind you, John, the apostle, does present Jesus as saying, ”I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.“ (John 14, 6) But this is set in a discussion where Jesus also says, ”In my Father's house there are many mansions, if it were not so I would have told you." (John 14, 2) And surely the parable of the good Samaritan indicates that Jesus considered exclusivity to be inappropriate.

"The youth of tomorrow (today even) will not accept exclusivity simply because it is inconsistent with a teaching that says God is perfect Love. They will ask whether this God of Love would condemn out-of-hand, those of his children who had never even heard the name of Jesus. And they will expect realistic answers. And if they receive an affirmative answer, they will respond that no decent earthly father would be guilty of such a despicable act.

"Realistic answers will also be required about the status of the Old and New Testaments. It can't be swept out of sight forever. I noticed that the Catholic Study edition of their Good News Bible (1979) abandoned the divine dictation theory and accepted that the Bible is the word of God in the words of men (p.xii). It also had the courage to state that John's gospel appears to have been worked over during a period of several years and re-edited by John's own community (p.xl). Surely also the presentation of Paul's letters of encouragement to his congregations as being the infallible word of God needs re-assessment. I wonder what Paul would have thought about it?

"Inevitably there will be a lot of mixed up people seeking for answers as the general community becomes aware that our quantum physicists have shown that materialistic determinism is a dead duck philosophy, and that maybe there is a God after all.

"What can be done? My own belief is that by the time most of us attain adulthood, our ingrained attitudes are already set in concrete. Hence trying to change our church congregations, or its hierarchy, via any form of confrontation is likely to be disastrous. But neither do I believe that the logical and doctrinal inconsistencies within our Christian churches are so serious that those who hold them are in jeopardy of losing their ticket to eternity. However, it is already obvious that even the present generations of young people have little interest in the Christian religion as it now is.

"An example of a possibly fruitful approach came up during the 1970's when the new prayer book was introduced. There was such division among the congregation at the church I attended (Christ Church, St. Lucia) that its minister decided to hold two services, one using the old prayer book, the other the new. Then when the people who were unable to change died out, the church was able to re-unite with a minimum of damage. So could the church set up a similar situation with a different routine for those who desired something different? But perhaps there should be a minimum set of statements defining a basic Christian belief system devoid of inconsistencies, and let it evolve from there?
"As an example, a minimum  Nicene-style declaration of beliefs might be:

I believe in one God, the heavenly Father of Jesus of Nazareth.
I believe in the dual nature of Jesus, and that his life is a revelation of the perfect nature of God and of   perfected man.
I believe that Jesus commanded me personally to love my fellows as He loved them—which .may be quite different from the old adage of loving our neighbors as we love ourselves.
I believe in the Fatherhood of God over all men and women, regardless of race and religion.
I believe that all men and women are brothers and sisters in the one family of God.
I believe that, at my behest, the spirits of the Father and the Son dwell within me as my personal spiritual guides. (John 14:16,23; Gal 4: 6; Rom 8: 11)

Everything outside of the minimal creed could be personal. Something of this nature might just work, whereas confrontation has little hope of doing so.

[Note: the video shown at the breakfast was made by a popular English T.V. program, “Songs of Praise,” and was about a church in England that is trying out the idea of running concurrent services. This particular church had three such services. Ushers at the door helped people to select the one most suited to their needs. It started as a desperation measure because of a diminishing congregation, approaching zero. Rather than close the church, this idea was tried with quite astonishing results.

My first reaction was that the young people attending were simply there to enjoy themselves because of the music. Careful observation revealed that what I initially thought were kids fantasizing about their current boy or girl friend was, in most cases, genuine worship. There is hope. Ken Glasziou]

# Listening to Your Dreams

Dick Bain, Ga., USA

Our song titles are full of dreams: Beautiful Dreamer, Dream Lover, I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas, etc.  Dreams often announced important events to people in the Bible. Two prominent psychologists, Carl Jung and Sigmund Freud, found great, though different, psychological import in dreams. The discoverer of the structure of the benzene ring was led to that discovery by a dream picturing a ring of snakes. Martin Luther King said, “I have a dream...”

Researchers tell us that we spend as much as six years of our lives dreaming.  But what is the dream state?  Why do we dream? Are there any messages for us in our dreams?   If so, can we read the messages?  Where do the messages come from?

Researchers have found that dreams occur during a period known as REM or Rapid Eye Movement sleep.  About every 90 minutes, we leave so-called S (synchronized) sleep and enter an altered state of consciousness known as dreaming. We are generally unaware that we are in a dream state, though some people occasionally have a dream in which they are aware they are dreaming. This is known as lucid dreaming. Our voluntary muscles are usually nonfunctional while we're dreaming, though some people may have episodes of walking or talking in their sleep. While researchers can measure our physiological responses and study the content of our dreams, there is no consensus on what causes dreams or the purpose of dreaming.

Sleep researchers have noted that the primitive part of our brains periodically sends impulses to the higher part of our brain (cortical areas.) They feel that these impulses randomly stimulate the cortex, and that dreams are the result.1 This may be the cause of dreams, but what is their purpose?  Sleep researchers have a number of theories about the purpose of dreaming: dreaming may encourage development of the brain; it may have a restorative function, a vigilance function, an erasure function, or it may enhance memory storage and reorganization.1

Dream content has been the subject of speculation ever since people first pondered the meaning of life.  The ancients used to place a standard interpretation on dreams, and some moderns still try to do the same. Dreams about snakes, for instance, are supposed to have a sexual connotation. Dreams about water are supposed to be spiritual messages. Sigmond Freud felt that dreams are the expression of repressed sexual urges. Carl Jung thought that archetypes or universal symbols appeared in our dreams. These universal archetypes supposedly have origin in the collective subconscious, which is an unconscious reservoir containing the experience of all people, present and past.

The authors of The Urantia Book take a rather dim view of dream interpretation. They tell us, “The great danger in all these psychic speculations is that visions and other so-called mystic experiences, along with extraordinary dreams, may be regarded as divine communications to the human mind. In times past, divine beings have revealed themselves to certain God-knowing persons, not because of their mystic trances or morbid visions, but in spite of all these phenomena.”(1099)

And, “All down through the ages men have stood in awe of the apparitions of the night season, and the Hebrews were no exception. They truly believed that God spoke to them in dreams, despite the injunctions of Moses against this idea. And Moses was right, for ordinary dreams are not the methods employed by the personalities of the spiritual world when they seek to communicate with material beings.” (1054)

Also from a talk on “Magic and Superstition” by Jesus to his apostles: “The interpretation of dreams is largely a superstitious and groundless system of ignorant and fantastic speculation. The gospel of the kingdom must have nothing in common with the soothsayer priests of primitive religion.” (1680)

It is evident that the authors of The Urantia Book and Jesus seem to frown on dream interpretation, no doubt because of the danger of reading meanings into dreams that are incorrect. Does this mean that there are no spiritual messages in dreams?

The Urantia Book lists a number of important dreams. Zoroaster had a dream at Ur that convinced him to return home to his homeland to remodel the religion of his people. (1049) Zacharias, father of John the Baptist, was not convinced that his wife would give birth to a “son of destiny” until he had an impressive dream. (1345) Likewise, Joseph, Jesus' father, did not become reconciled to the idea that Mary was to have an “extraordinary child” until he had a dream in which a “brilliant celestial messenger appeared to him...”(1347) The so-called “Three Wise Men” went to seek “the light of life” because of the dream of a “strange religious teacher” of their country. (1352) And finally, Pilate's wife told him of a disturbing dream she had the evening before Pilate gave in to the crowd and sentenced Jesus to be crucified. (1994) There certainly were spiritual messages in these dreams, but what of our dreams today?  Do they have spiritual messages for us, and if so, where do these messages originate?

The authors of The Urantia Book inform us that dreams were the source for primitive peoples' idea of the soul. “The concept of a supermaterial phase of mortal personality was born of the unconscious and purely accidental association of the occurrences of everyday life plus the ghost dream. The simultaneous dreaming about a departed chief by several members of his tribe seemed to constitute convincing evidence that the old chief had really returned in some form.” (952) Ancient man, “... knew the breath could leave the body, and his dreams of doing all sorts of queer things while asleep convinced him that there was something immaterial about a human being. The most primitive idea of the human soul, the ghost, was derived from the breath-dream idea-system.” (953) Ironically, these earliest interpretations of dreams, though faulty, gave our ancestors the initial concept of a soul and some sort of spiritual existence.

The papers on the Thought Adjuster confirm that our dreams may have spiritual content, and the origin of that content may be from the Adjuster. But on page 1208, the authors point out that it may be difficult to discern that spiritual content: “While their hosts are asleep, the Adjusters try to register their creations in the higher levels of the material mind, and some of your grotesque dreams indicate their failure to make efficient contact....Your own passions, urges, and other innate tendencies translate themselves into the picture and substitute their unexpressed desires for the divine messages which the indwellers are endeavoring to put into the psychic records during unconscious sleep.” And they admonish us to be very careful in trying to find spiritual content in our dreams: “It is extremely dangerous to postulate as to the Adjuster content of the dream life. The Adjusters do work during sleep, but your ordinary dream experiences are purely physiologic and psychologic phenomena. Likewise, it is hazardous to attempt the differentiation of the Adjusters' concept registry from the more or less continuous and conscious reception of the dictations of mortal conscience.”

Nevertheless, the authors realize that we probably will try to find spiritual messages in our dreams: “These are problems which will have to be solved through individual discrimination and personal decision.” They go on to say that it would be better to think the content of a dream had not come from our Thought Adjuster even if it has: “But a human being would do better to err in rejecting an Adjuster's expression through believing it to be a purely human experience than to blunder into exalting a reaction of the mortal mind to the sphere of divine dignity.” The message seems to be that it's okay to look for spiritual content, but don't assume that it is from our Thought Adjuster. Even if it is from this source, it may be so changed that the meaning is distorted or lost.

Bearing the admonitions in mind, I think we can cautiously look at our dream content for messages or spiritual content, knowing it may be just us talking to ourselves. As an example of this, I cite a recent dream I had. I was looking at a street scene filled with Asian people busily doing various things, some just walking, others tending booths selling items. Superimposed on this scene was a similar street scene of Asian people doing various things.  The superimposed scene was insubstantial, like the reflection you would see of a scene behind you if you were looking through a glass window. I noticed that if I concentrated on the more substantial scene, the other one would disappear. The interpretation that came to mind is that I concentrate too much on the material and lose sight of the spiritual. I suspect that the people in my dream are Asian because there are Chinese, Vietnamese, and Japanese folks in my work area. It seems that the message is more likely from me to myself than from my Thought Adjuster. I may have misinterpreted the message, but I feel the meaning I see is appropriate for me, so I choose to see this as the real meaning.

As far as I'm concerned, I will continue to look for spiritual meaning in my dreams, but I'll remember that it's strictly my interpretation and probably not an input from my Thought Adjuster, no matter how impressive the dream may be. After all, I probably have some important things to tell myself, and when I'm sleeping may be the only time I'm really listening. And who knows, my Thought Adjuster might just be able to slip in something of value between the lines.  So dream on!

1. Grolier's Encyclopedia on CD-ROM

# Desiderata

Found in Old Saint Paul's Church, Baltimore, dated 1692

Go placidly amid the noise and haste, and remember what peace there may be in silence. As far as possible, without surrender, be on good terms with all persons.

Speak your truth quietly and clearly; listen to others, even the dull and ignorant; they too, have a story.

Avoid loud and aggressive persons, they are vexations to the spirit. If you compare yourself with others, you may become vain and bitter; for always there will be greater and lesser persons than yourself.

Enjoy your achievements as well as your plans. Keep interested in your own career, however humble; it is a real possession in the changing fortunes of time.

Exercise caution in your business affairs; for the world is full of trickery. But let this not blind you to what virtue there is; many persons strive for high ideals; and everywhere life is full of heroism.

Be yourself. Especially, do not feign affection. Neither be cynical about love; for in the face of all aridity and disenchantment, it is perennial as the grass.

Take kindly the counsel of the years, gracefully surrendering the things of youth. Nurture strength of spirit to shield you in sudden misfortune. But do not distress yourself with imaginings. Many fears are born of fatigue and loneliness.

Beyond a wholesome discipline, be gentle with yourself. You are a child of the universe, no less than the trees and the stars, you have a right to be here. And whether or not it is clear to you, never doubt the universe is unfolding as it should.

Therefore be at peace with God, whatever you conceive Him to be; and whatever your labors and aspirations, in the noisy confusion of life keep peace with your soul. With all its sham, drudgery, and broken dreams, it is still a beautiful world.

Be careful. Strive to be happy.

# Dare to be Godlike

“The secret of survival is wrapped up in the supreme human desire to be Godlike and in the associated willingness to do and be any and all things essential to the final attainment of that overmastering desire.” (1206)   

The theme for the recent annual meeting of Australian and New Zealand Urantia Book readers in Sydney was “Dare to be Godlike.” During the course of the three day meeting, this theme was to be the catalyst that would give birth to many significant thoughts and comments from participants. Later, these were brought together in a session ably chaired by Neil Francey whose diplomatic skills were instrumental in moderating potential un-Godlike behavior where apostasy threatened. At this session, Neil asked individuals to voice their ideas on how the principle of daring to be Godlike could be put into effect. Since no notes were kept on who said what, this report will simply attempt to recall some of those ideas with no attempt to attach names to them—for, in any case, many such ideas were a synthesis of group contributions.

One of the suggestions was that we should become entirely reliant upon the incomparable teachings of Jesus as recorded for us in The Urantia Book. The book informs us that: “Human survival is, in great measure, dependent on consecrating the human will to the choosing of those values selected by this spirit-value sorter—the indwelling interpreter and unifier. Personal religious experience consists in two phases: discovery in the human mind and revelation by the indwelling divine spirit.” (2095)

So if we are to become reliant upon the incomparable teachings of Jesus, first we need to be familiar with them so that we can recover (discover) them from our memory banks, then we need the guidance of our indwelling interpreters, the Thought Adjuster and the Spirit of Truth, to help us select the right teaching and the right action in a specific circumstance.

A new problem arose. Most of us have difficulty in placing sufficient reliance upon the spirit guidance available to us. One suggestion to keep us on the Godlike track was to introspect on recent performance and let ourselves know if our actions fell short of being “Godlike”—but also to permit ourselves a self-administered pat on the back if we felt that they met that standard. Another suggestion was to find ourselves a beeper device that would beep on the hour and half-hour to remind us of the book's exhortation that, “The great challenge to modern man is to achieve better communication with the divine Monitor that dwells within the human mind.” (2097) These thoughts conjured up the remark from another reader on the urgent need for many of us to enhance our own self-discipline.

At this point it appeared to one participant that too much introspection is not necessarily a good thing, and maybe the practical way to become Godlike was to lose ourselves in service. So what does The Urantia Book have to say about the two thousand year old topic of the relative merits of faith and works. On this topic, James, the brother of Jesus, had this to say, “Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead?” (James 2:18,20)

At first sight The Urantia Book may appear to contradict James: “Heretofore it had been believed that salvation could be secured only by works...salvation, favor with God, is to be had by faith.” (1020) and “He (Jesus) taught...faith was the only requisite to entering the Father's kingdom.” (1545) Furthermore, “Salvation is the reward of faith, not merely of works.” (1801) However, Jesus also says, “Faith alone will pass you through its portals (i.e. doors to the kingdom), but you must bring forth the fruits of my Father's spirit if you would continue...” (1569) Finally, after a listing of the fruits of the spirit, Jesus states, "If professed believers bear not these fruits of the divine spirit, they are dead;...(2054)

So faith without works is dead and works without faith are also dead. Note though that the fruits of the spirit that Jesus refers to are the fruits of the Father's spirit, and not good works (fruits) selected by ourselves. Our fruit must be the result of spirit-leading and, in daring to be Godlike, we must be responding to the urgings of our indwelling spirit presences. Hence we must learn to communicate with those spirit presences.

How do we learn to communicate with spirit forces that appear not to have mouths to speak nor ears to hear? For most of us, it seems probable that the best way is that used by Jesus as a child, to speak to God as we would to the “alter ego” of our childhood behavior (Paper 91, Section 3). In other words, speak to our indwelling spirits, and believe they hear us. We then leave it to them to find the way to respond. “Prayer, even as a purely human practice, a dialogue with one's alter ego, constitutes a technique of the most efficient approach to the realization of those reserve powers of human nature which are stored and conserved in the unconscious realms of the human mind.”  (999)

From this point, the discussion took a right angle turn to a topic discoursed upon in The Urantia Book. How can our daring to be Godlike help (or hinder) others towards a knowledge of the God revealed by Jesus? And what is it really like to dare to be Godlike? Many Christians have looked upon the task of following Jesus as living a life of self-denial and self-sacrifice. Thus, some come to view as unfair, the parable of the laborers in the vineyard in which the men hired at the beginning of the day receive only the same reward as those hired at the last hour. Is a life spent in daring to be Godlike one of self denial and self sacrifice; or does a life, spent serving as we pass by,  bring its own rewards?

One way of answering this question is to take at face value the statement in the book that, “the existence of God cannot be proved by scientific experiment or by the pure reason of logical deduction.” (24) So what if we are wrong? What if there is no God and the promise of our Paradise career is mythical? How would that affect our decision to dare to be Godlike—which, for a Urantia Book reader, means to dare to be like Jesus? It takes time to ponder this question.

If, after doing so, we can answer that yes, we would still continue to attempt to be like Jesus and continue to live so as to serve him as we pass by, then surely we have discovered that such a life is truly its own reward. But if we cannot answer yes, maybe we have a problem to resolve. So thought some.

“And then last, but greatest of all, we attain the level of spirit insight and spiritual interpretation which impels us to recognize in this rule of life the divine command to treat all men as we conceive that God would treat them. This is the universal ideal of human relationships.” (1651)