---
title: "The fundamental principles of teaching"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-9-16T10:55:6Z
tags: Education, IUA, Journal, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-9-16T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1999 Jeffrey Wattles<br>© 1999 Association Internationale Urantia (IUA)</p>
<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Travis_Binion/Decisions_The_Human_Process">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Decisions — The Human Process</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_iua_journal#journal-may-1999">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Journal — May 1999 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


Jeffrey Wattles
Ohio, United States

As members of our Father's family, it is a great privilege to be able to teach the truth through what we say and do. We thankfully pray for guidance, for those with whom we associate, for our teaching colleagues, and for the furtherance of the family of God.

The fundamental principles set forth below are derived, for the most part, from a study of revealed **teaching models**. This paper includes commentary and page references, as well as questions and exercises to help the reader gain new and original insight from the study of the Eternal Son, the Infinite Spirit, and other universe beings, including Jesus of Nazareth (<a id="a38_369"></a>[UB 7:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/7#p4_7), <a id="a38_410"></a>[UB 8:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/8#p4_1)—<a id="a38_450"></a>[UB 8:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/8#p4_8), <a id="a38_491"></a>[UB 9:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/9#p0_2), <a id="a38_532"></a>[UB 20:1.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/20#p1_12), <a id="a38_577"></a>[UB 32:3.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/32#p3_12), <a id="a38_622"></a>[UB 35:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p1_2), <a id="a38_665"></a>[UB 35:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/35#p2_3), <a id="a38_708"></a>[UB 39:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/39#p2_7), <a id="a38_751"></a>[UB 50:4.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/50#p4_11)). Of course, the study of models raises the question of knowing when to imitate the models as much as possible and when to adapt them.

Certainly, the study of models opens the question of when to imitate the models, to the extent possible, and when to adapt them.

## I. What to teach?

1. **Be clear about your project**, the context of your teaching—for example, if you preach a gospel message, you should limit your comments on social, economic, and political issues. **There are topics that should be avoided in gospel teaching**: the established church and the second coming of Jesus Christ, and the tangled controversies about genetics, society, economics, politics, and epochal revelation (<a id="a44_410"></a>[UB 170:5.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p5_19)).
2. **Avoid excessive intellectualism** (<a id="a45_40"></a>[UB 99:5.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/99#p5_9), <a id="a45_83"></a>[UB 98:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/98#p1_6), <a id="a45_126"></a>[UB 98:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/98#p2_5)). To be free from dogmatism, teaching must originate in the soul rather than in the intellect (<a id="a45_263"></a>[UB 92:7.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/92#p7_3)). The gospel is not a cosmological, philosophical, or theological discourse.
3. **Don't Let the Scriptures Direct Your Teachings** (<a id="a46_55"></a>[UB 98:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/98#p2_7) — enjoy the irony of quoting a scripture to support this point).
4. **Point to God and Jesus rather than to yourself.** We do not share our experience for the sake of evangelism, but for the mutual satisfaction and edification of other believers (<a id="a47_182"></a>[UB 1:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p6_6), cf. <a id="a47_227"></a>[UB 8:1.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/8#p1_8), <a id="a47_268"></a>[UB 129:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/129#p3_5), <a id="a47_313"></a>[UB 114:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/114#p7_5)).

## II. The people you want to teach

5. **Become well acquainted with all types of people.** Jesus gained _an intimate knowledge of all races and types of human beings and sought to learn their reactions to the life they lived in the flesh,_ <a id="a51_205"></a>[[UB 132:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_1)]. He made _personal contacts and intimate associations_ <a id="a51_306"></a>[[UB 130:0.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p0_5)] and said: “_In the experience of meeting the Father in heaven you discover that all men are your brothers, and what is so strange about rejoicing in the meeting of a new-found brother? To know our brothers and sisters, to understand their problems, and to learn to love them, is the supreme experience of life._” <a id="a51_665"></a>[[UB 130:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p6_1)]
6. **Be on the lookout for persons in special trouble.** Divine love reaches farthest where the trouble is most severe. Jesus called upon his disciples to aid the discouraged, the anxious, the distressed. When the apostles began more specifically to _carry out Jesus' instructions to minister to the sick_ <a id="a52_306"></a>[[UB 141:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p8_1)] by visiting every home in Jericho and seeking to comfort every afflicted person, they then discovered that _the good news of the kingdom greatly comforted the sick; that its message brought healing to the afflicted_ <a id="a52_568"></a>[[UB 141:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p8_2), cf. <a id="a52_618"></a>[UB 158:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/158#p6_3), <a id="a52_663"></a>[UB 163:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/163#p4_15), <a id="a52_710"></a>[UB 164:3.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/164#p3_15)]. Learn to detect the nonobvious need. Sometimes the Master responded to an unspoken request, as, for example, to that of Fortunato (<a id="a52_889"></a>[UB 130:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p6_1)-<a id="a52_933"></a>[UB 130:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p6_6)). Cleverly avoiding being misled by Fortunato's superficial words, the Master observed: "_It is easy for one who loves his fellows to see an eloquent plea for help in your attitude of discouragement and despair._" <a id="a52_1191"></a>[[UB 130:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p6_2)].
7. **Interpret what you observe with mercy.** Consider the effect of taking a long view of the menacing primitive man of cave times (<a id="a53_133"></a>[UB 100:4.4-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/100#p4_4)), as demonstrated by Jesus' attitude toward the prostitutes rejected by Ganid (<a id="a53_258"></a>[UB 133:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/133#p3_7)). Note that an attitude of mercy does not involve closing one's eyes to error and evil. Jesus was pondering the bondage of ignorance in which the Romans were mired as he gazed upon the magnificent temple dedicated to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva. <a id="a53_547"></a>[[UB 132:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p0_2)]
8. **Choose the right level for your audience.** Give advanced teachings to those who are ready. **It is a good idea to first make sure the other person is in the temple before attempting to reveal the beauty within—the advanced teachings.** (<a id="a54_243"></a>[UB 141:6.2-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p6_2)). **This implies that it will normally be inappropriate to use _The Urantia Book_ in an early phase of ministry.** However, those who seek out those who are receptive to the book may be able to discern their receptiveness by observing how candidates respond to gospel truth. It takes patience to resist the temptation to take shortcuts (<a id="a54_626"></a>[UB 75:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/75#p1_6), <a id="a54_669"></a>[UB 75:8.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/75#p8_5), <a id="a54_712"></a>[UB 92:6.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/92#p6_19), <a id="a54_757"></a>[UB 95:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/95#p5_1) — <a id="a54_801"></a>[UB 95:5.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/95#p5_15)). Jesus might speak with a person twenty times, gradually preparing him for a revelation of truth that would come years later. (<a id="a54_973"></a>[UB 133:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/133#p3_2)).

## III. The way of teaching

9. **Stimulate the appetites** (<a id="a58_32"></a>[UB 48:7.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p7_16)).

10. **Relate to the other person's experiences**.

11. **Promote discovery.**

12. **Be artistic.** Arouse attention by appealing to the emotions or the imagination. Then appeal to the mind as the gateway to the final appeal to the spirit (<a id="a64_161"></a>[UB 152:6.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/152#p6_3), <a id="a64_208"></a>[UB 159:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p3_2), <a id="a64_253"></a>[UB 149:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/149#p3_3)). _As the days pass, every true believer becomes more skillful in alluring his fellows into the love of eternal truth. Are you more resourceful in revealing goodness to humanity today than you were yesterday? Are you a better righteousness recommender this year than you were last year? Are you becoming increasingly artistic in your technique of leading hungry souls into the spiritual kingdom?_ <a id="a64_694"></a>[[UB 156:5.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/156#p5_15)] Be **flexible** in your language. Be **lively**, e.g., in your use of **parables**. **Lively** does not mean **showy**. _In all his teaching Jesus unfailingly avoided distracting details. He shunned flowery language and avoided the mere poetic imagery of a play upon words. He habitually put large meanings into small expressions. For purposes of illustration Jesus reversed the current meanings of many terms, such as salt, leaven, fishing, and little children. He most effectively employed the antithesis, comparing the minute to the infinite and so on. His pictures were striking, such as, “The blind leading the blind.” But the greatest strength to be found in his illustrative teaching was its naturalness. Jesus brought the philosophy of religion from heaven down to earth. He portrayed the elemental needs of the soul with a new insight and a new bestowal of affection._ <a id="a64_1620"></a>[[UB 159:5.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p5_17)]. **Religion Needs New Slogans** (<a id="a64_1701"></a>[UB 195:6.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p6_10)) ; **suggest some that may be used**.

13. **Trust in God and the Spirit of Truth.** _In the gospel of the kingdom there resides the mighty Spirit of Truth... The fruits of the spirit, your sincere and loving service, are the mighty social lever to uplift the races of darkness, and this Spirit of Truth will become your power-multiplying fulcrum._ <a id="a66_310"></a>[[UB 178:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/178#p1_6)]

14. **Don't show too much**. (<a id="a68_30"></a>[UB 66:6.6-7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/66#p6_6), <a id="a68_75"></a>[UB 93:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/93#p3_6), [UB 137:7.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/137 #p7_14))

15. **Be as wise as a serpent and as harmless as a dove.** (<a id="a70_60"></a>[UB 140:8.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/140#p8_13)). Be prepared for struggles because of the enmity of the world, the allure of sophistry, and attitudes that spring from rebellion (<a id="a70_237"></a>[UB 191:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/191#p1_2), <a id="a70_282"></a>[UB 180:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/180#p3_1), <a id="a70_327"></a>[UB 180:3.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/180#p3_10), <a id="a70_374"></a>[UB 138:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/138#p7_3)). Make wise compromises. One of the big questions in teaching is what compromises am I willing to make, and which should I avoid? Some continuity with previous tradition is normal (<a id="a70_599"></a>[UB 144:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/144#p7_1), <a id="a70_644"></a>[UB 159:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p5_7)). The need to compromise within the limits of the listener is inevitable (<a id="a70_762"></a>[UB 96:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/96#p4_7), <a id="a70_805"></a>[UB 96:5.5-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/96#p5_5), <a id="a70_850"></a>[UB 154:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/154#p1_3)). Jesus instructed his disciples to adapt their methods to the different races and tribes of mankind (<a id="a70_996"></a>[UB 191:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/191#p4_4)). Moses was notably distinguished for his ability to compromise (<a id="a70_1105"></a>[UB 96:1.14-15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/96#p1_14)); and Jesus also made significant compromises (<a id="a70_1199"></a>[UB 137:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/137#p5_3), <a id="a70_1244"></a>[UB 157:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/157#p5_2)).

16. **Set into motion progressive attitudes in response to challenges** (<a id="a72_73"></a>[UB 26:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p5_3), <a id="a72_116"></a>[UB 91:9.1-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/91#p9_1), <a id="a72_161"></a>[UB 194:3.11-12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/194#p3_11)). Dynamic service _calls for initiative, requiring vigorous, active, and courageous expression of the believer’s personality. <a id="a72_336"></a>[[UB 159:5.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p5_9)]. Jesus exhorted his disciples to _assume the full measure of their human responsibility and divine privileges with energy and enthusiasm in the kingdom of God_ <a id="a72_542"></a>[[UB 159:5.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p5_10)]. The dynamism of true religion, the religion of the spirit (<a id="a72_650"></a>[UB 155:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/155#p4_1)), is not the timid politeness that sometimes passes for religion today. Dynamism can be realized **without fanaticism**. _Jesus' indomitable and passionate spiritual faith never verged on fanaticism because his faith never affected his balanced intellectual judgment as to the proportionate values ​​of the current social, economic, and moral practices of life_ <a id="a72_1056"></a>[[UB 196:0.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/196#p0_7)].

17. In general, when associating with members of other religions, emphasize the **truths you have in common** (<a id="a74_111"></a>[UB 92:5.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/92#p5_16)). Future phases of this project of keeping pace with the evangelical movement include the study of the particular religions—Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, and all other religions. For example, a balance must be achieved in the attitude toward Christianity, which is defined at the same time as a cocoon and a larva of the kingdom destined to emerge as a beautiful butterfly, and as a hindrance and a tradition that Jesus has fostered (<a id="a74_593"></a>[UB 170:5.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/170#p5_18), <a id="a74_640"></a>[UB 195:10.9-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_9)).

18. **Make judicious use of resources that are familiar to your audience.** Notice how Jesus judiciously used the scriptures in His teaching and training (<a id="a76_155"></a>[UB 130:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p1_2), <a id="a76_200"></a>[UB 130:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p8_2)). In His first four months of training with the apostles, they carefully studied and discussed the scriptures (<a id="a76_355"></a>[UB 137:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/137#p7_1), <a id="a76_400"></a>[UB 137:7.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/137#p7_14)). Jesus was an artist at selecting and sequencing the readings when teaching in the synagogue (<a id="a76_541"></a>[UB 127:3.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/127#p3_8)). He never gave advanced, critical teachings on the scriptures in public (<a id="a76_659"></a>[UB 159:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p4_1), <a id="a76_704"></a>[UB 159:5.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/159#p5_17)). One question to consider is whether it would be appropriate to build on that example today **with some groups**, since scriptural criticism is widespread in many places today.

19. We teach, ideally, **by living revelation**. As a teacher, Jesus **was focused, attentive, positive, alive, sensitive, courageous, and confident**. See section 7, “As Jesus Passed By” on page (<a id="a78_197"></a>[UB 171:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/171#p6_2)). Jesus was not a systematic teacher, but rather taught as occasion arose** (<a id="a78_318"></a>[UB 149:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/149#p4_1)-<a id="a78_362"></a>[UB 149:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/149#p4_6)). To follow Him, **the branch must remain on the vine** (<a id="a78_463"></a>[UB 180:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/180#p2_1), <a id="a78_508"></a>[UB 180:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/180#p2_6)). _Jesus endeavored to make clear that he desired his disciples, having tasted of the good spirit realities of the kingdom, so to live in the world that men, by seeing their lives, would become kingdom conscious and hence be led to inquire of believers concerning the ways of the kingdom_ <a id="a78_841"></a>[[UB 141:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p7_3)]. _The world needs to see Jesus living again on earth in the experience of spirit-born mortals who effectively reveal the Master to all men._ <a id="a78_1028"></a>[[UB 195:10.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/195#p10_1)]. _You can cultivate gracefulness, but graciousness is the aroma of friendliness which emanates from a love-saturated soul._ <a id="a78_1200"></a>[[UB 171:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/171#p7_1)]. The supreme motive in teaching is _to let the overflow of eternal goodness that overflows your own soul refresh and ennoble your fellowmen_ <a id="a78_1387"></a>[[UB 102:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/102#p3_4)]. Even **your gestures, behavior, and expression manifest your quality of dignity and love**. The Emperor Tiberius commented of Jesus, “If I had that fellow’s royal bearing and elegant manner, I should be quite an emperor, wouldn’t I?” <a id="a78_1668"></a>[[UB 132:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p0_1)]. To what extent is this one of the things we can deliberately do or cultivate?

## IV. Teaching techniques

The readiness to adopt either alternative—the **saying** or the **doing**—is the mark of a Jesuit teacher. The Master had in mind to say or do something that would enrich their lives, make them more worth living. <a id="a82_213"></a>[[UB 132:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_1)]. He would impart some spiritually ennobling teaching, in well-chosen words or in accommodating service. <a id="a82_363"></a>[[UB 132:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_4)].

## I WILL SAY

20. **Ask Questions and Listen.** In the section on Jesus’ personal ministry (<a id="a86_78"></a>[UB 132:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_1)-<a id="a86_122"></a>[UB 132:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_8)) the following points are made: _Jesus’ usual technique of social contact was to draw people out and into talking with him by asking them questions._ <a id="a86_316"></a>[[UB 132:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_2)]. His usual practice was to approach a person in a conversation that would lead naturally to a discussion of spiritual matters (<a id="a86_489"></a>[UB 132:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p7_1)). What are the advantages of beginning with questions? Can you recall ever hearing someone draw out another person's answers well when asking questions? Jesus **listened** to the overburdened, anxious, and discouraged people—the very people who derived the most benefit from his personal service. Jesus gave them the opportunity to unburden their souls to a sympathetic, understanding listener. _As a rule, those he taught the most, he said the least_ <a id="a86_985"></a>[[UB 132:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_2)]. It has been observed that many people get to the heart of what they have in mind only at the end of what they say. The authors of Part IV note what happened when someone interrupted the Master: While Jesus was talking to someone, it seemed as if that particular person mattered more to him than any other person in the world. What is there in human personality that is worth so much?

21. **Say three kinds of helpful things.** <a id="a88_43"></a>[[UB 132:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_2)]. _When these misfit humans told Jesus their problems_ <a id="a88_143"></a>[[UB 132:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_2)], he could always offer:
	1. _Practical and immediately helpful suggestions for correcting actual problems_ <a id="a89_83"></a>[[UB 132:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_2)]. (How does this differ from unsolicited advice?)
	2. _Words of immediate comfort and consolation_ <a id="a90_49"></a>[[UB 132:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_2)] Practice creating your own examples; perhaps you can adapt thoughts similar to those in the Beatitudes (<a id="a90_199"></a>[UB 140:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/140#p5_1)-<a id="a90_243"></a>[UB 140:5.24](/en/The_Urantia_Book/140#p5_24)).
	3. _And invariably would he tell these distressed mortals about the love of God and impart the information, by various and sundry methods, that they were the children of this loving Father in heaven._ <a id="a91_202"></a>[[UB 132:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_2)]. _Always the burden of his message was: the fact of the heavenly Father’s love and the truth of his mercy, coupled with the good news that man is a faith-son of this same God of love._ <a id="a91_433"></a>[[UB 132:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_2)] What growth is lacking in us to experience the love of God--to receive the love of God, to love God in return, and to feel the love of God for another--so that we can communicate it to another? What various and varied ways can we imagine, ranging from direct proclamation to indirect methods?

22. **Answer the Questions.** Jesus was equally adept at teaching by asking questions himself or by answering them. <a id="a93_116"></a>[[UB 132:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_2)]. The conversation began with Jesus asking the questions, and ended with the interlocutors asking Jesus questions. <a id="a93_276"></a>[[UB 132:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_2)]. Be ready for questions concerning evil (<a id="a93_363"></a>[UB 130:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p1_5), <a id="a93_408"></a>[UB 130:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p2_4), <a id="a93_453"></a>[UB 132:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p2_1)-<a id="a93_497"></a>[UB 132:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p2_10), <a id="a93_544"></a>[UB 130:4.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p4_11)-<a id="a93_590"></a>[UB 130:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p4_15)). With contentious questioners in public, Jesus’ answers were always enlightening, dignified, and definitive <a id="a93_745"></a>[[UB 149:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/149#p4_5)]. **It is acceptable and responsible to avoid comment on certain subjects.** Jesus avoided commenting on Buddhism — until Gonod asked him a direct question (<a id="a93_947"></a>[UB 132:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p7_3)-<a id="a93_991"></a>[UB 132:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p7_5)) — and he avoided discussing the relations between the sexes.

23. Build upon the truth contained in what the other person says. Jesus, when conversing with the more advanced Roman teachers, used this method: _Never once did he attack their errors or even mention the flaws in their teachings. In each case he would select the truth in what they taught and then proceed so to embellish and illuminate this truth in their minds that in a very short time this enhancement of the truth effectively crowded out the associated error._ <a id="a95_467"></a>[[UB 132:0.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p0_4)]. To embellish means to expand what has been said by adding attractive details. To illuminate suggests to place the best ideas of another in the context of spiritual truth. Exercise: Think of some ideas of another person that you can build upon, and how to do so.

24. **Do not try to** _take_ something out of another's heart.** Jesus explained Simon Zealot's failure to impart the gospel to a Persian whose religion he had misunderstood. _When Simon Zealot and Jesus were alone, Simon asked the Master: “Why is it that I could not persuade him? Why did he so resist me and so readily lend an ear to you?” Jesus answered: “Simon, Simon, how many times have I instructed you to refrain from all efforts to take something out of the hearts of those who seek salvation? How often have I told you to labor only to put something into these hungry souls? Lead men into the kingdom, and the great and living truths of the kingdom will presently drive out all serious error_” <a id="a97_704"></a>[[UB 141:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/141#p6_2)]

Particularly, **do not undermine that person's faith in the scriptures that motivate his life.** When Jesus answered Gadiah's question about Jonah, he could use the story of Jonah as a parable expressing spiritual truth (<a id="a99_221"></a>[UB 130:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p1_2)). This episode demonstrates the value of thoughtful, comprehensive study of the scriptures, seeking spiritual possibilities even in those stories that we might otherwise reject.

**Take as your model an attitude of openness in discussions.** Ganid in his mind _was deeply touched by Jesus' liberality, fairness, and tolerance. In all their conversations on philosophy and religion this young man never experienced feelings of resentment or reactions of antagonism._ <a id="a101_287"></a>[[UB 132:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p7_8)]

25. **Respond with unconventional words in conventional situations.** Jesus, who had a keen social sense of tact and appropriateness, did not allow convention to block truth. He would drop words in the shop to **whet the appetites** of his fellow workers (<a id="a103_256"></a>[UB 130:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p2_4)). Consider Jesus’ comment to the young fruit seller as he was leaving (<a id="a103_371"></a>[UB 130:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p8_3)). Exercise: Think of conventional situations and unconventional comments that can be rehearsed.

26. **Develop the ability to make advanced responses.** Some of Jesus' victories in conversation were the result of bold exercises of spiritual power. Are we to say that we could never—or should never—attempt such things on our own? If you are ready to let the Spirit of Truth speak for and through you, prepare wisely to grow to a level where you can **directly exhort**, as Jesus did the Roman soldier (<a id="a105_405"></a>[UB 132:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_6)), and challenge, as Jesus did the speaker in the Forum (<a id="a105_505"></a>[UB 132:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_7)). In what type of situation might it be wise to risk such a challenge?

## THE DOING

_Jesus was loving in doing things—even small things—for all kinds of people_ <a id="a109_77"></a>[[UB 132:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_4)]. How can we, merely by the manner in which we do anything, impart a spiritually ennobling thought? _When Ganid inquired what one could do to make friends, having noticed that the majority of persons whom they chanced to meet were attracted to Jesus, his teacher said: “Become interested in your fellows; learn how to love them and watch for the opportunity to do something for them which you are sure they want done,”_ <a id="a109_542"></a>[[UB 130:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p7_2)]. Salvation from spiritual blindness involves the awareness of the existence of the universal family—the discovery of spiritual reality **through service** and **the revelation** of the goodness of **spiritual values ​​through ministry** (<a id="a109_826"></a>[UB 101:6.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/101#p6_11) ; cf. <a id="a109_878"></a>[UB 191:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/191#p5_3), <a id="a109_923"></a>[UB 94:8.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/94#p8_19), <a id="a109_968"></a>[UB 94:4.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/94#p4_10)). To the landlady of the Greek inn He said: “_To the mistress of the Greek inn he said: “Minister your hospitality as one who entertains the children of the Most High. Elevate the drudgery of your daily toil to the high levels of a fine art through the increasing realization that you minister to God in the persons whom he indwells by his spirit which has descended to live within the hearts of men, thereby seeking to transform their minds and lead their souls to the knowledge of the Paradise Father of all these bestowed gifts of the divine spirit._” <a id="a109_1567"></a>[[UB 133:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/133#p4_8)]

27. **Engage in social service when needed.** Jesus' gospel of the fatherhood of God and the sonship and consequent brotherhood of all is _personally worked out in loving ministry and social service_ <a id="a111_200"></a>[[UB 94:4.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/94#p4_10)]. _[B]otherhood and service are the mainstay of the gospel of the kingdom. ...these material-minded sons in darkness will never know of your spiritual light of truth unless you draw very near them with that unselfish social service which is the natural outgrowth of the bearing of the fruits of the spirit in the life experience of each individual believer._ <a id="a111_604"></a>[[UB 178:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/178#p1_4)]. A gospel is weak when it does not produce a religion of social service.

Consider some of the things Jesus did and expand the list by remembering what you have already done, and imagining what you could do.

- Returning lost children to their parents (<a id="a115_44"></a>[UB 132:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p6_1)).

- Visiting the lonely (as Jesus visited the woman whose husband recently died <a id="a117_78"></a>[UB 132:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p6_2))

- Giving alms and otherwise helping the poor (<a id="a119_46"></a>[UB 130:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p8_4))

- Assisting the unemployed in finding work (<a id="a121_44"></a>[UB 132:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p6_2)).

- Helping those who are going astray (e.g., prostitutes) to find a new life (<a id="a123_77"></a>[UB 133:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/133#p2_5)).

- Intervening to defend someone who is being attacked (<a id="a125_55"></a>[UB 132:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_8), <a id="a125_100"></a>[UB 133:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/133#p1_1) — <a id="a125_146"></a>[UB 133:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/133#p2_5)). Study the example of Jesus’ response to the man who was beating his wife. Ponder His gentle, considerate approach to the description of what the man was doing, as well as His expression of appreciation before questioning him, offering a kind look, a sympathetic smile . . . and a parting speech.

**There are exceptions.** Jesus did not attempt to minister to a man who did not have a normal mind (<a id="a127_101"></a>[UB 130:8.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p8_4), 1468.9), nor to the man who did not hunger for spiritual truth (<a id="a127_210"></a>[UB 132:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p7_2)). Jesus was not sociable when his mind was full of things to meditate on, e.g., at the end of the tour in Rome, in Antioch, approaching Palestine (<a id="a127_401"></a>[UB 133:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/133#p8_2)). Jesus did not go to places of promiscuity (<a id="a127_490"></a>[UB 132:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/132#p4_5), <a id="a127_535"></a>[UB 133:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/133#p8_1)).

28. **Be ready to pray with and for the other person.** In Jesus' friendship with Gadiah, after a long evening discourse, the two prayed together and for each other. <a id="a129_166"></a>[[UB 130:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/130#p6_6)]. Exercise: Take a half hour to pray for someone with whom you are in a relationship. Jesus spent entire nights praying for the apostles—on the average, he prayed at least a half hour for each apostle.

29. **Smile.** Jesus, the _gentle and joyful worker_ <a id="a131_53"></a>[[UB 136:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/136#p0_1)], emphasized the proverb, “_a merry heart beautifies the countenance and is a constant celebration_” <a id="a131_199"></a>[[UB 149:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/149#p5_2)]. When Jesus _smiled at a man, that man experienced an increased ability to solve his various problems_ <a id="a131_348"></a>[[UB 171:7.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/171#p7_6), e.g. <a id="a131_399"></a>[UB 127:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/127#p1_2), 14701.2, <a id="a131_453"></a>[UB 167:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/167#p1_4), <a id="a131_498"></a>[UB 171:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/171#p6_2), <a id="a131_543"></a>[UB 92:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/92#p5_7)]. Smiling was something others could learn from the Master. Jesus and Ganid, while in Neapolis, went throughout the city, distributing _good wishes and smiles to hundreds of men, women, and children_ <a id="a131_785"></a>[[UB 156:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/156#p2_8), <a id="a131_831"></a>[UB 143:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/143#p7_3)]. What attitude must have been expressed in such a smile? A sense of humor must be maintained (1736:5, 1616:5). What truths about God, what attitudes toward challenges, and what perspectives on the past, present, and future (<a id="a131_1100"></a>[UB 138:10.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/138#p10_8), <a id="a131_1147"></a>[UB 48:3.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/48#p3_9)) foster a sense of humor?

30. **Will we ask the Master to help us become better teachers?**

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/article/Travis_Binion/Decisions_The_Human_Process">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Decisions — The Human Process</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/index/articles_iua_journal#journal-may-1999">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Journal — May 1999 — Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>
