---
title: "Latin Infancy Gospel (ms. lat. 11867)"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span> It happened at a certain time that many children followed Jesus to have fun in his company. But there was a father of a family who, angry when he saw that his son was leaving with Jesus, locked him up, so that he would no longer follow him, in a very strong and solid tower, where there was no hole or any entrance outside the door. and a very narrow window that barely let in a little light, and the door was hidden and well barred. And it happened to that father of the family that one day Jesus came over there with his companions to play. When the imprisoned boy heard them, he began to shout next to the window in this way: «Jesus, dearest companion, when I heard your voice my soul applauded and I felt full of relief. Why are you leaving me locked up here? Jesus turned to him and said, “Reach me a hand or a finger through the hole.” And, having done this, Jesus took that child by the hand and led him out through that very narrow window. And the boy left in his company. Jesus said to him: “Recognize the power of God and tell in your old age what God has done to you in your childhood.” When the father of the family realized what had happened, the first thing he did was go to the door. And finding it all intact, he screamed and said that he was a ghost. And his eyes were closed so that he would not recognize the divine power.

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> This same householder, who was the greatest among the magistrates of the synagogue and the Pharisees and the scribes and the doctors, went to Joseph complaining about Jesus, who had worked new wonders among the people, so that he was now venerated as God; And, getting excited, he said: “See that our boys, among whom is my son, are following Jesus to the field of Sychar.” And, full of anger, he took a stick with the intention of hitting Jesus, and followed him to the mountain at the foot of which a meadow [planted] with beans extends on one side. But Jesus mocked his anger by jumping from the top of the mountain to a point about a bowshot away. And, the other boys wanting to follow him in the jump, they fell over the precipice, breaking their legs, arms and neck. And for this reason a strong protest was raised before Mary and Joseph; but Jesus healed them all and made them even healthier [than before]. When the archisinagogue, who was the father of the imprisoned boy, saw this, and all the other bystanders, they worshiped God Adonai at the same time. And the place where Jesus made the leap is called the “Lord's Leap” to this day.

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span> And it came to pass, as it was the seed season, that Joseph went out to sow wheat. And Jesus followed him. After Joseph had begun his work, Jesus stretched out his hand and took a handful of wheat in it, which he scattered along the edge of the farm. Joseph later came to reap at harvest time. And Jesus also came to gather the fruit that he had sown, and his harvest was one hundred modios of very rich wheat, an amount that three or four fields together did not produce. And he said to Joseph: “Call the poor, orphans and widows, and distribute to them the wheat of my harvest.” And so it was done. But, upon distributing it, an extraordinary and unexpected increase occurred. The poor who were relieved with him blessed the Lord with all their hearts, saying that the Lord God of Israel had visited his people.

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span> It happened again one day in the field that Jesus was crossing Asia and saw a farmer sowing a certain type of vegetables. , called chickpeas, on a farm that is called the one near Rachel's tomb, between Jerusalem and Bethlehem, Jesus said to him: “Man, what are you sowing?” But he, resentful and mocking that a boy of that age should ask him this question, replied: “Stones.” And Jesus said to him in turn: “You are right, because they are indeed stones.” And all those chickpeas became very hard stones, which still retain the shape of chickpeas, the color and even the eyelet on the head. And in this way all those grains, both those already planted and those that were going to be sown, became stones. And until today, if you look for them carefully, you can find these stones in the aforementioned field.

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> Another morning, when the spray was still softening the [heat of the] sun, José and María went up from the leaves Tire and Sidon towards Nazareth. And, as the sun rose, Mary felt more suffocated, until she sat on the ground full of fatigue. And she said to Joseph: «[This temperature] is increasing and it overwhelms me; what could i do? There is no shade here to shelter me. And she, raising her hands to heaven, she prayed saying: «O Virtue of the Most High!, according to that sweet word that I once heard coming from you, shelter me with your shadow; May my soul live and give me your refreshment. And Jesus, upon hearing these words, was glad and stuck the dry stick that he was carrying in his hand as a staff into the ground, saying in an imperious voice: “Provide a pleasant shade for my mother at once.” And immediately that rod became a bushy and leafy tree, which provided them with sweet refreshment in their rest.

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> One winter day there was a splendid sun, and a ray of sunlight lengthened and came to filter through the window until the [front] wall in Joseph's house. And, finding the neighborhood boys, Jesus' companions, running around the house, Jesus climbed onto a ray of sunlight and, putting his clothes on, sat there as if he were sitting on a very firm beam. When their peers saw this, they thought they were capable of doing the same. And they tried to go up to sit with Jesus, imitating him in the game. [But they collapsed to the ground shouting:] we are shattering. But Jesus, at the request of Mary and Joseph, began to heal the injuries of all the wounded by blowing lightly on the injured place, and said: “The Spirit blows where he wants and restores health to whom he pleases.” And they were all healed. And they narrated all these things to our fathers, the fact being known in Jerusalem and in the remote borders of Judah. With which the fame of Jesus spread throughout all the provinces. And they came to bless him and be blessed in turn by him. And they said to him: “Blessed is the womb that carried you and the breasts that nursed you.” Joseph and Mary thanked God for all the things they had seen and heard.

[...]

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span> On another occasion Mary said to her son: «Look, son, go to the fountain of Gabriel, draw water from there and bring it in this jar. And submissive [to the command of] such a mother, she departed. And boys his age followed to see him, each one carrying his pitcher in turn. And on his way back, Jesus violently threw his pitcher against a rock that was on the road, without it breaking or rumbling too much. When the others saw this, they did the same with their own, each one breaking his pitcher and spilling the water they had come for. Then a tumult ensued and complaints were raised, but Jesus collected the fragments, reassembled the vessels and then gave each one his own filled with water. And he raised his eyes to heaven, saying: “Father, in this same way the disordered men who perished must be reformed.” Everyone was stupefied by that fact and by that word and blessed [him]: «Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Amen".