---
title: "Workbook VIII — Worship and Wisdom — Part I: The Central And Superuniverses"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Worship, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1959 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_8_Worship_and_Wisdom/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_8_Worship_and_Wisdom/2">Part II: The Local Universe</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

## 1. Urantia's place in the cosmos

> “Your world, Urantia, is one of many similar inhabited planets which comprise the local universe of Nebadon. This universe, together with similar creations, makes up the superuniverse of Orvonton, from whose capital, Uversa, our commission hails. Orvonton is one of the seven evolutionary superuniverses of time and space which circle the never-beginning, never-ending creation of divine perfection—the central universe of Havona. At the heart of this eternal and central universe is the stationary Isle of Paradise, the geographic center of infinity and the dwelling place of the eternal God.” [UB 0:0.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p0_5)

## 2. Soul and personality defined

> “The soul of man is an experiential acquirement. As a mortal creature chooses to ‘do the will of the Father in heaven,' so the indwelling spirit becomes the father of a new reality in human experience. The mortal and material mind is the mother of this same emerging reality. The substance of this new reality is neither material nor spiritual—it is morontial. This is the emerging and immortal soul which is destined to survive mortal death and begin the Paradise ascension.
> 
> “Personality. The personality of mortal man is neither body, mind, nor spirit; neither is it the soul. Personality is the one changeless reality in an otherwise ever-changing creature experience; and it unifies all other associated factors of individuality. The personality is the unique bestowal which the Universal Father makes upon the living and associated energies of matter, mind, and spirit, and which survives with the survival of the morontial soul.

> “Morontia is a term designating a vast level intervening between the material and the spiritual. It may designate personal or impersonal realities, living or nonliving energies. The warp of morontia is spiritual; its woof is physical.” [UB 0:5.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p5_10)

## 3. Man's spiritual endowment

> “We are fully cognizant of the difficulties of our assignment; we recognize the impossibility of fully translating the language of the concepts of divinity and eternity into the symbols of the language of the finite concepts of the mortal mind. But we know that there dwells within the human mind a fragment of God, and that there sojourns with the human soul the Spirit of Truth; and we further know that these spirit forces conspire to enable material man to grasp the reality of spiritual values and to comprehend the philosophy of universe meanings. But even more certainly we know that these spirits of the Divine Presence are able to assist man in the spiritual appropriation of all truth contributory to the enhancement of the ever-progressing reality of personal religious experience—God-consciousness.” [UB 0:12.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/0#p12_13)

## 4. Worlds created to be inhabited

> “The myriads of planetary systems were all made to be eventually inhabited by many different types of intelligent creatures, beings who could know God, receive the divine affection, and love him in return. The universe of universes is the work of God and the dwelling place of his diverse creatures. ‘God created the heavens and formed the earth; he established the universe and created this world not in vain; he formed it to be inhabited.' ” [UB 1:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p0_2) [Isa 45:18](/en/Bible/Isaiah/45#v18)

## 5. God's supreme mandate: “be you perfect”

> “The enlightened worlds all recognize and worship the Universal Father, the eternal maker and infinite upholder of all creation. The will creatures of universe upon universe have embarked upon the long, long Paradise journey, the fascinating struggle of the eternal adventure of attaining God the Father. The transcendent goal of the children of time is to find the eternal God, to comprehend the divine nature, to recognize the Universal Father. God-knowing creatures have only one supreme ambition, just one consuming desire, and that is to become, as they are in their spheres, like him as he is in his Paradise perfection of personality and in his universal sphere of righteous supremacy. From the Universal Father who inhabits eternity there has gone forth the supreme mandate, ‘Be you perfect, even as I am perfect.' In love and mercy the messengers of Paradise have carried this divine exhortation down through the ages and out through the universes, even to such lowly animal-origin creatures as the human races of Urantia.
> 
> “This magnificent and universal injunction to strive for the attainment of the perfection of divinity is the first duty, and should be the highest ambition, of all the struggling creature creation of the God of perfection. This possibility of the attainment of divine perfection is the final and certain destiny of all man's eternal spiritual progress.” [UB 1:0.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p0_3) [Matt 5:48](/en/Bible/Matthew/5#v48)

## 6. Portrait of the reality of God

> “God is primal reality in the spirit world; God is the source of truth in the mind spheres; God overshadows all throughout the material realms. To all created intelligences God is a personality, and to the universe of universes he is the First Source and Center of eternal reality. God is neither manlike nor machine-like. The First Father is universal spirit, eternal truth, infinite reality, and father personality.
> 
> “The eternal God is infinitely more than reality idealized or the universe personalized. God is not simply the supreme desire of man, the mortal quest objectified. Neither is God merely a concept, the power-potential of righteousness. The Universal Father is not a synonym for nature, neither is he natural law personified. God is a transcendent reality, not merely man's traditional concept of supreme values. God is not a psychological focalization of spiritual meanings, neither is he ‘the noblest work of man.' God may be any or all of these concepts in the minds of men, but he is more. He is a saving person and a loving Father to all who enjoy spiritual peace on earth, and who crave to experience personality survival in death.” [UB 1:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p2_1)

## 7. Mystery of the divine indwelling

> “The infinity of the perfection of God is such that it eternally constitutes him mystery. And the greatest of all the unfathomable mysteries of God is the phenomenon of the divine indwelling of mortal minds. The manner in which the Universal Father sojourns with the creatures of time is the most profound of all universe mysteries; the divine presence in the mind of man is the mystery of mysteries.” [UB 1:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p4_1)

> “When you are through down here, when your course has been run in temporary form on earth, when your trial trip in the flesh is finished, when the dust that composes the mortal tabernacle ‘returns to the earth whence it came'; then, it is revealed, the indwelling ‘Spirit shall return to God who gave it.' There sojourns within each moral being of this planet a fragment of God, a part and parcel of divinity. It is not yet yours by right of possession, but it is designedly intended to be one with you if you survive the mortal existence.” [UB 1:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p4_3) [Eccl 12:7](/en/Bible/Ecclesiastes/12#v7)

## 8. The personality of God

> “Do not permit the magnitude of God, his infinity, either to obscure or eclipse his personality. ‘He who planned the ear, shall he not hear? He who formed the eye, shall he not see?'The Universal Father is the acme of divine personality; he is the origin and destiny of personality throughout all creation. God is both infinite and personal; he is an infinite personality. The Father is truly a personality, notwithstanding that the infinity of his person places him forever beyond the full comprehension of material and finite beings.” [UB 1:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p5_1)

> “Even though material mortals cannot see the person of God, they should rejoice in the assurance that he is a person; by faith accept the truth which portrays that the Universal Father so loved the world as to provide for the eternal spiritual progression of its lowly inhabitants; that he ‘delights in his children.' God is lacking in none of those superhuman and divine attributes which constitute a perfect, eternal, loving, and infinite Creator personality.” [UB 1:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p5_4) [Prov 8:31](/en/Bible/Proverbs/8#v31) [Isa 62:4](/en/Bible/Isaiah/62#v4)

## 9. Differing views of God

> “God is to science a cause, to philosophy an idea, to religion a person, even the loving heavenly Father. God is to the scientist a primal force, to the philosopher a hypothesis of unity, to the religionist a living spiritual experience. Man's inadequate concept of the personality of the Universal Father can be improved only by man's spiritual progress in the universe and will become truly adequate only when the pilgrims of time and space finally attain the divine embrace of the living God on Paradise.” [UB 1:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p6_2)

## 10. The experience of knowing God

> “The more completely man understands himself and appreciates the personality values of his fellows, the more he will crave to know the Original Personality, and the more earnestly such a God-knowing human will strive to become like the Original Personality. You can argue over opinions about God, but experience with him and in him exists above and beyond all human controversy and mere intellectual logic. The God-knowing man describes his spiritual experiences, not to convince unbelievers, but for the edification and mutual satisfaction of believers.” [UB 1:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p6_6)

> “God is spirit—spirit personality; man is also a spirit—potential spirit personality. Jesus of Nazareth attained the full realization of this potential of spirit personality in human experience; therefore his life of achieving the Father's will becomes man's most real and ideal revelation of the personality of God. Even though the personality of the Universal Father can be grasped only in actual religious experience, in Jesus' earth life we are inspired by the perfect demonstration of such a realization and revelation of the personality of God in a truly human experience.” [UB 1:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p6_8) [John 4:24](/en/Bible/John/4#v24)

## 11. Reality of man's identity

> “Man does not achieve union with God as a drop of water might find unity with the ocean. Man attains divine union by progressive reciprocal spiritual communion, by personality intercourse with the personal God, by increasingly attaining the divine nature through wholehearted and intelligent conformity to the divine will. Such a sublime relationship can exist only between personalities.” [UB 1:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p7_2)

## 12. The only way to know God

> “Ultimate universe reality cannot be grasped by mathematics, logic, or philosophy, only by personal experience in progressive conformity to the divine will of a personal God. Neither science, philosophy, nor theology can validate the personality of God. Only the personal experience of the faith sons of the heavenly Father can effect the actual spiritual realization of the personality of God.” [UB 1:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/1#p7_5)

## 13. The eternal purpose of God

> “The reactions of a changeless God, in the execution of his eternal purpose, may seem to vary in accordance with the changing attitude and the shifting minds of his created intelligences; that is, they may apparently and superficially vary; but underneath the surface and beneath all outward manifestations, there is still present the changeless purpose, the everlasting plan, of the eternal God.” [UB 2:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/2#p2_3) [Eph 3:11](/en/Bible/Ephesians/3#v11)

## 14. The divine mercy

> “Mercy is simply justice tempered by that wisdom which grows out of perfection of knowledge and the full recognition of the natural weaknesses and environmental handicaps of finite creatures. ‘Our God is full of compassion, gracious, long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy.' Therefore ‘whosoever calls upon the Lord shall be saved,' ‘for he will abundantly pardon.' ‘The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting'; yes, ‘his mercy endures forever.' ‘I am the Lord who executes loving-kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth, for in these things I delight.' ‘I do not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men,' for I am ‘the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort.'” [UB 2:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/2#p4_1) [Ps 86:15](/en/Bible/Psalms/86#v15) [Rom 10:13](/en/Bible/Romans/10#v13) [Isa 55:7](/en/Bible/Isaiah/55#v7) [Ps 103:17](/en/Bible/Psalms/103#v17) [1 Chron 16:34](/en/Bible/1_Chronicles/16#v34) [Jer 9:24](/en/Bible/Jeremiah/9#v24) [Lam 3:33](/en/Bible/Lamentations/3#v33) [2 Cor 1:3](/en/Bible/2_Corinthians/1#v3)

## 15. The Father's affection

> “It is wrong to think of God as being coaxed into loving his children because of the sacrifices of his Sons or the intercession of his subordinate creatures, ‘for the Father himself loves you.' It is in response to this paternal affection that God sends the marvelous Adjusters to indwell the minds of men. God's love is universal; ‘whosoever will may come.' He would ‘have all men be saved by coming into the knowledge of the truth.' He is ‘not willing that any should perish.'
> 
> “The Creators are the very first to attempt to save man from the disastrous results of his foolish transgression of the divine laws. God's love is by nature a fatherly affection; therefore does he sometimes ‘chasten us for our own profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness.' Even during your fiery trials remember that ‘in all our afflictions he is afflicted with us.'” [UB 2:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/2#p5_2) [John 16:27](/en/Bible/John/16#v27). [Rev 22:17](/en/Bible/Revelation/22#v17). [1 Tim 2:4](/en/Bible/1_Timothy/2#v4). [2 Peter 3:9](/en/Bible/2_Peter/3#v9). [Heb 12:9, 10](/en/Bible/Hebrews/12#v9) [Isa 63:9](/en/Bible/Isaiah/63#v9).

## 16. The forgiving heavenly Father

> “God is divinely kind to sinners. When rebels return to righteousness, they are mercifully received, ‘for our God will abundantly pardon.' ‘I am he who blots out your transgressions for my own sake, and I will not remember your sins.' ‘Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us that we should be called the sons of God.' ” [UB 2:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/2#p5_4) [Isa 55:7.](/en/Bible/Isaiah/55#v7) [43:25](/en/Bible/Isaiah/43#v25) [John 3:1](/en/Bible/1_John/3#v1)

## 17. Faithful guidance by the indwelling spirit

> “After all, the greatest evidence of the goodness of God and the supreme reason for loving him is the indwelling gift of the Father—the Adjuster who so patiently awaits the hour when you both shall be eternally made one. Though you cannot find God by searching, if you will submit to the leading of the indwelling spirit, you will be unerringly guided, step by step, life by life, through universe upon universe, and age by age, until you finally stand in the presence of the Paradise personality of the Universal Father.” [UB 2:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/2#p5_5) [Job 11:7](/en/Bible/Job/11#v7).

## 18. God's goodness to erring man

> “The ‘richness of the goodness of God leads erring man to repentance.' ‘Every good gift and every perfect gift comes down from the Father of lights.' ‘God is good; he is the eternal refuge of the souls of men.' ‘The Lord God is merciful and gracious. He is long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth.' ‘Taste and see that the Lord is good! Blessed is the man who trusts him.' ‘The Lord is gracious and full of compassion. He is the God of salvation.' ‘He heals the brokenhearted and binds up the wounds of the soul. He is man's all-powerful benefactor.'” [UB 2:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/2#p6_3) [Rom 2:4](/en/Bible/Romans/2#v4). [Jas 1:17](/en/Bible/James/1#v17). [Ps 73:1](/en/Bible/Psalms/73#v1). [Deut 33:27](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/33#v27). [Ps 103:8](/en/Bible/Psalms/103#v8). [Ex 34:6](/en/Bible/Exodus/34#v6). [Ps 34:8](/en/Bible/Psalms/34#v8); [111:4](/en/Bible/Psalms/111#v4). [Ps 68:20](/en/Bible/Psalms/68#v20). [Isa 61:1](/en/Bible/Isaiah/61#v1).

## 19. God not a divided personality

> “The affectionate heavenly Father, whose spirit indwells his children on earth, is not a divided personality—one of justice and one of mercy—neither does it require a mediator to secure the Father's favor or forgiveness. Divine righteousness is not dominated by strict retributive justice; God as a father transcends God as a judge.” [UB 2:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/2#p6_6)

## 20. The new philosophy of God

> “The religious challenge of this age is to those farseeing and forward-looking men and women of spiritual insight who will dare to construct a new and appealing philosophy of living out of the enlarged and exquisitely integrated modern concepts of cosmic truth, universe beauty, and divine goodness. Such a new and righteous vision of morality will attract all that is good in the mind of man and challenge that which is best in the human soul. Truth, beauty, and goodness are divine realities, and as man ascends the scale of spiritual living, these supreme qualities of the Eternal become increasingly co-ordinated and unified in God, who is love.” [UB 2:7.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/2#p7_10) [1 John 4:8](/en/Bible/1_John/4#v8).

## 21. God's unfailing overcare

> “The Universal Father is not a transient force, a shifting power, or a fluctuating energy. The power and wisdom of the Father are wholly adequate to cope with any and all universe exigencies. As the emergencies of human experience arise, he has foreseen them all, and therefore he does not react to the affairs of the universe in a detached way but rather in accordance with the dictates of eternal wisdom and in consonance with the mandates of infinite judgment. Regardless of appearances, the power of God is not functioning in the universe as a blind force” [UB 3:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p2_6)

## 22. The Father knows all about us

> “The Universal Father is the only personality in all the universe who does actually know the number of the stars and planets of space. All the worlds of every universe are constantly within the consciousness of God. He also says: ‘I have surely seen the affliction of my people, I have heard their cry, and I know their sorrows.' For ‘the Lord looks from heaven; he beholds all the sons of men; from the place of his habitation he looks upon all the inhabitants of the earth.' Every creature child may truly say: ‘He knows the way I take, and when he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.' ‘God knows our downsittings and our uprisings; he understands our thoughts afar off and is acquainted with all our ways.' ‘All things are naked and open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do.' And it should be a real comfort to every human being to understand that ‘he knows your frame; he remembers that you are dust.' Jesus, speaking of the living God, said, ‘Your Father knows what you have need of even before you ask him.'” [UB 3:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p3_2) [Ex 3:7](/en/Bible/Exodus/3#v7). [Ps 33:13, 14](/en/Bible/Psalms/33#v13); [139:2, 3](/en/Bible/Psalms/139#v2). [Heb 4:13](/en/Bible/Hebrews/4#v13). [Ps 103:14](/en/Bible/Psalms/103#v14). [Matt 6:8](/en/Bible/Matthew/6#v8).

## 23. We can feel God's unknowable love

> “Mortal man cannot possibly know the infinitude of the heavenly Father. Finite mind cannot think through such an absolute truth or fact. But this same finite human being can actually feel—literally experience—the full and undiminished impact of such an infinite Father's LOVE. Such a love can be truly experienced, albeit while quality of experience is unlimited, quantity of such an experience is strictly limited by the human capacity for spiritual receptivity and by the associated capacity to love the Father in return.” [UB 3:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p4_6)

## 24. The amazing inevitabilities

> “The uncertainties of life and the vicissitudes of existence do not in any manner contradict the concept of the universal sovereignty of God. All evolutionary creature life is beset by certain inevitabilities. Consider the following:
> 
> “1. Is courage—strength of character—desirable? Then must man be reared in an environment which necessitates grappling with hardships and reacting to disappointments.
> 
> “2. Is altruism—service of one's fellows—desirable? Then must life experience provide for encountering situations of social inequality.
> 
> “3. Is hope—the grandeur of trust—desirable? Then human existence must constantly be confronted with insecurities and recurrent uncertainties.
> 
> “4. Is faith—the supreme assertion of human thought—desirable? Then must the mind of man find itself in that troublesome predicament where it ever knows less than it can believe.
> 
> “5. Is the love of truth and the willingness to go wherever it leads, desirable? Then must man grow up in a world where error is present and falsehood always possible.
> 
> “6. Is idealism—the approaching concept of the divine—desirable? Then must man struggle in an environment of relative goodness and beauty, surroundings stimulative of the irrepressible reach for better things.
> 
> “7. Is loyalty—devotion to highest duty—desirable? Then must man carry on amid the possibilities of betrayal and desertion. The valor of devotion to duty consists in the implied danger of default.
> 
> “8. Is unselfishness—the spirit of self-forgetfulness—desirable? Then must mortal man live face to face with the incessant clamoring of an inescapable self for recognition and honor. Man could not dynamically choose the divine life if there were no self-life to forsake. Man could never lay saving hold on righteousness if there were no potential evil to exalt and differentiate the good by contrast.
> 
> “9. Is pleasure—the satisfaction of happiness—desirable? Then must man live in a world where the alternative of pain and the likelihood of suffering are ever-present experiential possibilities.” [UB 3:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p5_5)

## 25. Contrastive experience on Havona

> “The creatures of Havona are naturally brave, but they are not courageous in the human sense. They are innately kind and considerate, but hardly altruistic in the human way. They are expectant of a pleasant future, but not hopeful in the exquisite manner of the trusting mortal of the uncertain evolutionary spheres. They have faith in the stability of the universe, but they are utter strangers to that saving faith whereby mortal man climbs from the status of an animal up to the portals of Paradise. They love the truth, but they know nothing of its soul-saving qualities. They are idealists, but they were born that way; they are wholly ignorant of the ecstasy of becoming such by exhilarating choice. They are loyal, but they have never experienced the thrill of whole-hearted and intelligent devotion to duty in the face of temptation to default. They are unselfish, but they never gained such levels of experience by the magnificent conquest of a belligerent self. They enjoy pleasure, but they do not comprehend the sweetness of the pleasure escape from the pain potential.” [UB 3:5.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p5_17)

## 26. Don't humanize or mechanize God

> “It is a great blunder to humanize God, except in the concept of the indwelling Thought Adjuster, but even that is not so stupid as completely to _mechanize,_ the idea of the First Great Source and Center.” [UB 3:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p6_5)

## 27. The Father shares our afflictions

> “Does the Paradise Father suffer? I do not know. The Creator Sons most certainly can and sometimes do, even as do mortals. The Eternal Son and the Infinite Spirit suffer in a modified sense. I think the Universal Father does, but I cannot understand how; perhaps through the personality circuit or through the individuality of the Thought Adjusters and other bestowals of his eternal nature. He has said of the mortal races, ‘In all your afflictions I am afflicted.' He unquestionably experiences a fatherly and sympathetic understanding; he may truly suffer, but I do not comprehend the nature thereof.” [UB 3:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p6_6) [Isa 63:9](/en/Bible/Isaiah/63#v9).

## 28. God is all this — and much more

> “The infinite and eternal Ruler of the universe of universes is power, form, energy, process, pattern, principle, presence, and idealized reality. But he is more; he is personal; he exercises a sovereign will, experiences self-consciousness of divinity, executes the mandates of a creative mind, pursues the satisfaction of the realization of an eternal purpose, and manifests a Father's love and affection for his universe children. And all these more personal traits of the Father can be better understood by observing them as they were revealed in the bestowal life of Michael, your Creator Son, while he was incarnated on Urantia.” [UB 3:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p6_7)

## 29. The Urantia benediction

> “God the Father loves men; God the Son serves men; God the Spirit inspires the children of the universe to the ever-ascending adventure of finding God the Father by the ways ordained by God the Sons through the ministry of the grace of God the Spirit.” [UB 3:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/3#p6_8)

## 30. Unlimited forces of survival

> “There is no limitation of the forces and personalities which the Father may use to uphold his purpose and sustain his creatures. ‘The eternal God is our refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms.' ‘He who dwells in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.' ‘Behold, he who keeps us shall neither slumber nor sleep.' ‘We know that all things work together for good to those who love God,' ‘for the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers.' ” [UB 4:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p1_4) [Deut 33:27](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/33#v27). [Ps 91:1](/en/Bible/Psalms/91#v1); [121:4](/en/Bible/Psalms/121#v4). [Rom 8:28](/en/Bible/Romans/8#v28). [Ps 34:15](/en/Bible/Psalms/34#v15).

## 31. God grieves over our failures

> “The Universal Father never does anything that causes subsequent sorrow or regret, but the will creatures of the planning and making of his Creator personalities in the outlying universes, by their unfortunate choosing, sometimes occasion emotions of divine sorrow in the personalities of their Creator parents. But though the Father neither makes mistakes, harbors regrets, nor experiences sorrows, he is a being with a father's affection, and his heart is undoubtedly grieved when his children fail to attain the spiritual levels they are capable of reaching with the assistance which has been so freely provided by the spiritual-attainment plans and the mortal-ascension policies of the universes.” [UB 4:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p3_5) [Eph 4:30](/en/Bible/Ephesians/4#v30). [Heb 3:10, 17](/en/Bible/Hebrews/3#v10).

## 32. God is always a loving Father

> “In God the Father freewill performances are not ruled by power, nor are they guided by intellect alone; the divine personality is defined as consisting in spirit and manifesting himself to the universes as love. Therefore, in all his personal relations with the creature personalities of the universes, the First Source and Center is always and consistently a loving Father. God is a Father in the highest sense of the term. He is eternally motivated by the perfect idealism of divine love, and that tender nature finds its strongest expression and greatest satisfaction in loving and being loved.” [UB 4:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p4_6)

## 33. Revelation presents a God of salvation

> “In science, God is the First Cause; in religion, the universal and loving Father; in philosophy, the one being who exists by himself, not dependent on any other being for existence but beneficently conferring reality of existence on all things and upon all other beings. But it requires revelation to show that the First Cause of science and the self-existent Unity of philosophy are the God of religion, full of mercy and goodness and pledged to effect the eternal survival of his children on earth.” [UB 4:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/4#p4_7)

## 34. God is not in hiding

> “Our Father is not in hiding; he is not in arbitrary seclusion. He has mobilized the resources of divine wisdom in a never-ending effort to reveal himself to the children of his universal domains. There is an infinite grandeur and an inexpressible generosity connected with the majesty of his love which causes him to yearn for the association of every created being who can comprehend, love, or approach him; and it is, therefore, the limitations inherent in you, inseparable from your finite personality and material existence, that determine the time and place and circumstances in which you may achieve the goal of the journey of mortal ascension and stand in the presence of the Father at the center of all things.” [UB 5:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p1_2)

## 35. God's spirit indwells us

> “Although the approach to the Paradise presence of the Father must await your attainment of the highest finite levels of spirit progression, you should rejoice in the recognition of the ever-present possibility of immediate communion with the bestowal spirit of the Father so intimately associated with your inner soul and your spiritualizing self.” [UB 5:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p1_3)

> “However Urantia mortals may differ in their intellectual, social, economic, and even moral opportunities and endowments, forget not that their spiritual endowment is uniform and unique. They all enjoy the same divine presence of the gift from the Father, and they are all equally privileged to seek intimate personal communion with this indwelling spirit of divine origin, while they may all equally choose to accept the uniform spiritual leading of these Mystery Monitors.” [UB 5:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p1_5)

> “Man is spiritually indwelt by a surviving Thought Adjuster. If such a human mind is sincerely and spiritually motivated, if such a human soul desires to know God and become like him, honestly wants to do the Father's will, there exists no negative influence of mortal deprivation nor positive power of possible interference which can prevent such a divinely motivated soul from securely ascending to the portals of Paradise.” [UB 5:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p1_7) [Rom 8:35, 38, 39](/en/Bible/Romans/8#v35).

## 36. The Father wants to see us on Paradise

> “The Father desires all his creatures to be in personal communion with him. He has on Paradise a place to receive all those whose survival status and spiritual nature make possible such attainment. Therefore settle in your philosophy now and forever: To each of you and to all of us, God is approachable, the Father is attainable, the way is open; the forces of divine love and the ways and means of divine administration are all interlocked in an effort to facilitate the advancement of every worthy intelligence of every universe to the Paradise presence of the Universal Father.” [UB 5:1.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p1_8)

## 37. The dynamic religion of love

> “The morality of the religions of evolution drives men forward in the God quest by the motive power of fear. The religions of revelation allure men to seek for a God of love because they crave to become like him. But religion is not merely a passive feeling of ‘absolute dependence' and ‘surety of survival'; it is a living and dynamic experience of divinity attainment predicated on humanity service.” [UB 5:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p4_1) [Rom 2:4](/en/Bible/Romans/2#v4).

## 38. Diverse views of God

> “The fact-seeking scientist conceives of God as the First Cause, a God of force. The emotional artist sees God as the ideal of beauty, a God of aesthetics. The reasoning philosopher is sometimes inclined to posit a God of universal unity, even a pantheistic Deity. The religionist of faith believes in a God who fosters survival, the Father in heaven, the God of love. ” [UB 5:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p5_3) 

## 39. Satisfactions of religious experience

> “Mortal man secures three great satisfactions from religious experience, even in the days of his temporal sojourn on earth:
> 
> “1. Intellectually he acquires the satisfactions of a more unified human consciousness.
> 
> “2. Philosophically he enjoys the substantiation of his ideals of moral values.
> 
> “3. Spiritually he thrives in the experience of divine companionship, in the spiritual satisfactions of true worship.” [UB 5:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p5_7)

## 40. Human limitations do not prevent survival

> “Eternal survival of personality is wholly dependent on the choosing of the mortal mind, whose decisions determine the survival potential of the immortal soul. When the mind believes God and the soul knows God, and when, with the fostering Adjuster, they all desire God, then is survival assured. Limitations of intellect, curtailment of education, deprivation of culture, impoverishment of social status, even inferiority of the human standards of morality resulting from the unfortunate lack of educational, cultural, and social advantages, cannot invalidate the presence of the divine spirit in such unfortunate and humanly handicapped but believing individuals. The indwelling of the Mystery Monitor constitutes the inception and insures the possibility of the potential of growth and survival of the immortal soul.” [UB 5:5.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p5_13)

## 41. Man's will is sovereign as regards survival

> “Having thus provided for the growth of the immortal soul and having liberated man's inner self from the fetters of absolute dependence on antecedent causation, the Father stands aside. Now, man having thus been liberated from the fetters of causation response, at least as pertains to eternal destiny, and provision having been made for the growth of the immortal self, the soul, it remains for man himself to will the creation or to inhibit the creation of this surviving and eternal self which is his for the choosing. No other being, force, creator, or agency in all the wide universe of universes can interfere to any degree with the absolute sovereignty of the mortal free will, as it operates within the realms of choice, regarding the eternal destiny of the personality of the choosing mortal. As pertains to eternal survival, God has decreed the sovereignty of the material and mortal will, and that decree is absolute.” [UB 5:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p6_8)

## 42. Worship can go direct to the Father

> “As all gravity is circuited in the Isle of Paradise, as all mind is circuited in the Conjoint Actor and all spirit in the Eternal Son, so is all personality circuited in the personal presence of the Universal Father, and this circuit unerringly transmits the worship of all personalities to the Original and Eternal Personality.” [UB 5:6.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p6_11)

## 43. Mandates of eternal son keyed in tones of mercy

> “The Eternal Son is the great mercy minister to all creation. Mercy is the essence of the Son's spiritual character. The mandates of the Eternal Son, as they go forth over the spirit circuits of the Second Source and Center, are keyed in tones of mercy.” [UB 6:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/6#p3_2)

## 44. The spiritual gravity circuit

> “The spiritual-gravity pull of the Eternal Son constitutes the inherent secret of the Paradise ascension of surviving human souls. All genuine spirit values and all bona fide spiritualized individuals are held within the unfailing grasp of the spiritual gravity of the Eternal Son. The mortal mind, for example, initiates its career as a material mechanism and is eventually mustered into the Corps of the Finality as a well-nigh perfected spirit existence, becoming progressively less subject to material gravity and correspondingly more responsive to the inward pulling urge of spirit gravity during this entire experience. The spirit-gravity circuit literally pulls the soul of man Paradiseward.
> 
> “The spirit-gravity circuit is the basic channel for transmitting the genuine prayers of the believing human heart from the level of human consciousness to the actual consciousness of Deity. That which represents true spiritual value in your petitions will be seized by the universal circuit of spirit gravity and will pass immediately and simultaneously to all divine personalities concerned. Each will occupy himself with that which belongs to his personal province.
> 
> Therefore, in your practical religious experience, it is immaterial whether, in addressing your supplications, you visualize the Creator Son of your local universe or the Eternal Son at the center of all things.” [UB 7:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/7#p3_2)

> “But how much more perfect is the superb technique of the spiritual world: If anything originates in your consciousness that is fraught with supreme spiritual value, when once you give it expression, no power in the universe can prevent its flashing directly to the Absolute Spirit Personality of all creation.” [UB 7:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/7#p3_5)

## 45. The divine perfection plans

> “This divine plan of perfection attainment embraces three unique, though marvelously correlated, enterprises of universal adventure:
> 
> “1. The Plan of Progressive Attainment. This is the Universal Father's plan of evolutionary ascension, a program unreservedly accepted by the Eternal Son when he concurred in the Father's proposal, ‘Let us make mortal creatures in our own image.' This provision for upstepping the creatures of time involves the Father's bestowal of the Thought Adjusters and the endowing of material creatures with the prerogatives of personality.
> 
> “2. The Bestowal Plan. The next universal plan is the great Father-revelation enterprise of the Eternal Son and his co-ordinate Sons. This is the proposal of the Eternal Son and consists of his bestowal of the Sons of God upon the evolutionary creations, there to personalize and factualize, to incarnate and make real, the love of the Father and the mercy of the Son to the creatures of all universes. Inherent in the bestowal plan, and as a provisional feature of this ministration of love, the Paradise Sons act as rehabilitators of that which misguided creature will has placed in spiritual jeopardy. Whenever and wherever there occurs a delay in the functioning of the attainment plan, if rebellion, perchance, should mar or complicate this enterprise, then do the emergency provisions of the bestowal plan become active forthwith. The Paradise Sons stand pledged and ready to function as retrievers, to go into the very realms of rebellion and there restore the spiritual status of the spheres. And such a heroic service a co-ordinate Creator Son did perform on Urantia in connection with his experiential bestowal career of sovereignty acquirement.
> 
> “3. The Plan of Mercy Ministry. When the attainment plan and the bestowal plan had been formulated and proclaimed, alone and of himself, the Infinite Spirit projected and put in operation the tremendous and universal enterprise of mercy ministry. This is the service so essential to the practical and effective operation of both the attainment and the bestowal undertakings, and the spiritual personalities of the Third Source and Center all partake of the spirit of mercy ministry which is so much a part of the nature of the Third Person of Deity. Not only in creation but also in administration, the Infinite Spirit functions truly and literally as the conjoint executive of the Father and the Son.” [UB 7:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/7#p4_3) [Gen 1:26, 27](/en/Bible/Genesis/1#v26).

## 46. When the God of action functioned

> “The God of Action functions and the dead vaults of space are astir. One billion perfect spheres flash into existence. Prior to this hypothetical eternity moment the space-energies inherent in Paradise are existent and potentially operative, but they have no actuality of being; neither can physical gravity be measured except by the reaction of material realities to its incessant pull. There is no material universe at this (assumed) eternally distant moment, but the very instant that one billion worlds materialize, there is in evidence gravity sufficient and adequate to hold them in the everlasting grasp of Paradise.
> 
> “There now flashes through the creation of the Gods the second form of energy and this outflowing spirit is instantly grasped by the spiritual gravity of the Eternal Son. Thus the twofold gravity-embraced universe is touched with the energy of infinity and immersed in the spirit of divinity. In this way is the soil of life prepared for the consciousness of mind made manifest in the associated intelligence circuits of the Infinite Spirit.
> 
> “Upon these seeds of potential existence, diffused throughout the central creation of the Gods, the Father acts, and creature personality appears. Then does the presence of the Paradise Deities fill all organized space and begin effectively to draw all things and beings Paradiseward.” [UB 8:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/8#p1_4)

## 47. The love, mercy, and ministry of Deity

> “God is love, the Son is mercy, the Spirit is ministry—the ministry of divine love and endless mercy to all intelligent creation. The Spirit is the personification of the Father's love and the Son's mercy; in him are they eternally united for universal service. The Spirit is love applied to the creature creation, the combined love of the Father and the Son.” [UB 8:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/8#p4_2)

## 48. The anxiety of animal fear

> “Too often, all too often, you mar your minds by insincerity and sear them with unrighteousness; you subject them to animal fear and distort them by useless anxiety. Therefore, though the source of mind is divine, mind as you know it on your world of ascension can hardly become the object of great admiration, much less of adoration or worship. The contemplation of the immature and inactive human intellect should lead only to reactions of humility.” [UB 9:5.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/9#p5_7)

## 49. The living ladder from chaos to glory

> “The spirit personalities of the vast family of the Divine and Infinite Spirit are forever dedicated to the service of the ministry of the love of God and the mercy of the Son to all the intelligent creatures of the evolutionary worlds of time and space. These spirit beings constitute the living ladder whereby mortal man climbs from chaos to glory.” [UB 9:8.25](/en/The_Urantia_Book/9#p8_25) 

## 50. God's self-distribution

> “It would seem that the Father, back in eternity, inaugurated a policy of profound self-distribution. There is inherent in the selfless, loving, and lovable nature of the Universal Father something which causes him to reserve to himself the exercise of only those powers and that authority which he apparently finds it impossible to delegate or to bestow.” [UB 10:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/10#p1_1)

## 51. How all things work together for good

> “The mortal mind can immediately think of a thousand and one things— catastrophic physical events, appalling accidents, horrific disasters, painful illnesses, and world-wide scourges—and ask whether such visitations are correlated in the unknown maneuvering of this probable functioning of the Supreme Being. Frankly, we do not know; we are not really sure. But we do observe that, as time passes, all these difficult and more or less mysterious situations always work out for the welfare and progress of the universes. It may be that the circumstances of existence and the inexplicable vicissitudes of living are all interwoven into a meaningful pattern of high value by the function of the Supreme and the over-control of the Trinity. ” [UB 10:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/10#p7_5) [Rom 8:28](/en/Bible/Romans/8#v28).

## 52. The omnipotent gravity pull

> “The inescapable pull of gravity effectively grips all the worlds of all the universes of all space. Gravity is the all-powerful grasp of the physical presence of Paradise. Gravity is the omnipotent strand on which are strung the gleaming stars, blazing suns, and whirling spheres which constitute the universal physical adornment of the eternal God, who is all things, fills all things, and in whom all things consist. ” [UB 11:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p8_1) [Col 1:17](/en/Bible/Colossians/1#v17).

## 53. Paradise destiny of the sons of God

> “After all, to mortals the most important thing about eternal Paradise is the fact that this perfect abode of the Universal Father is the real and far-distant destiny of the immortal souls of the mortal and material sons of God, the ascending creatures of the evolutionary worlds of time and space. Every God-knowing mortal who has espoused the career of doing the Father's will has already embarked upon the long, long Paradise trail of divinity pursuit and perfection attainment. And when such an animal-origin being does stand, as countless numbers now do, before the Gods on Paradise, having ascended from the lowly spheres of space, such an achievement represents the reality of a spiritual transformation bordering on the limits of supremacy.” [UB 11:9.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/11#p9_8)

## 54. Undiscovered galaxies of space

> “In the not-distant future, new telescopes will reveal to the wondering gaze of Urantian astronomers no less than 375 million new galaxies in the remote stretches of outer space. At the same time these more powerful telescopes will disclose that many island universes formerly believed to be in outer space are really a part of the galactic system of Orvonton. The seven superuniverses are still growing; the periphery of each is gradually expanding; new nebulae are constantly being stabilized and organized; and some of the nebulae which Urantian astronomers regard as extragalactic are actually on the fringe of Orvonton and are traveling along with us.” [UB 12:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p2_3)

## 55. God is a freewill personality

> “And all this steadfastness of conduct and uniformity of action is personal, conscious, and highly volitional, for the great God is not a helpless slave to his own perfection and infinity. God is not a self-acting automatic force; he is not a slavish law-bound power. God is neither a mathematical equation nor a chemical formula. He is a freewill and primal personality. He is the Universal Father, a being surcharged with personality and the universal fount of all creature personality.” [UB 12:7.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_6)

## 56. God's love is individualized

> “The love of the Father absolutely individualizes each personality as a unique child of the Universal Father, a child without duplicate in infinity, a will creature irreplaceable in all eternity. The Father's love glorifies each child of God, illuminating each member of the celestial family, sharply silhouetting the unique nature of each personal being against the impersonal levels that lie outside the fraternal circuit of the Father of all. The love of God strikingly portrays the transcendent value of each will creature, unmistakably reveals the high value which the Universal Father has placed upon each and every one of his children from the highest creator personality of Paradise status to the lowest personality of will dignity among the savage tribes of men in the dawn of the human species on some evolutionary world of time and space.” [UB 12:7.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_9) [John 16:27](/en/Bible/John/16#v27).

## 57. God is always with us

> “It is a mystery that God is a highly personal self-conscious being with residential headquarters, and at the same time personally present in such a vast universe and personally in contact with such a well-nigh infinite number of beings. That such a phenomenon is a mystery beyond human comprehension should not in the least lessen your faith. Do not allow the magnitude of the infinity, the immensity of the eternity, and the grandeur and glory of the matchless character of God to overawe, stagger, or discourage you; for the Father is not very far from any one of you; he dwells within you, and in him do we all literally move, actually live, and veritably have our being.
> 
> “Even though the Paradise Father functions through his divine creators and his creature children, he also enjoys the most intimate inner contact with you, so sublime, so highly personal, that it is even beyond my comprehension— that mysterious communion of the Father fragment with the human soul and with the mortal mind of its actual indwelling. Knowing what you do of these gifts of God, you therefore know that the Father is in intimate touch, not only with his divine associates, but also with his evolutionary mortal children of time. The Father indeed abides on Paradise, but his divine presence also dwells in the minds of men.
> 
> “Even though the spirit of a Son be poured out upon all flesh, even though a Son once dwelt with you in the likeness of mortal flesh, even though the seraphim personally guard and guide you, how can any of these divine beings of the Second and Third Centers ever hope to come as near to you or to understand you as fully as the Father, who has given a part of himself to be in you, to be your real and divine, even your eternal, self?” [UB 12:7.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_12)

## 58. Matter is the shadow of spirit reality

> “In cosmic evolution matter becomes a philosophic shadow cast by mind in the presence of spirit luminosity of divine enlightenment, but this does not invalidate the reality of matter-energy. Mind, matter, and spirit are equally real, but they are not of equal value to personality in the attainment of divinity. Consciousness of divinity is a progressive spiritual experience. ” [UB 12:8.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p8_15) 

## 59. Love is the secret of personal relations

> “Love is the secret of beneficial association between personalities. You cannot really know a person as the result of a single contact. You cannot appreciatingly know music through mathematical deduction, even though music is a form of mathematical rhythm. The number assigned to a telephone subscriber does not in any manner identify the personality of that subscriber or signify anything concerning his character.” [UB 12:9.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p9_2)

## 60. Science does not explain everything

> “Technical analysis does not reveal what a person or a thing can do. For example: Water is used effectively to extinguish fire. That water will put out fire is a fact of everyday experience, but no analysis of water could ever be made to disclose such a property. Analysis determines that water is composed of hydrogen and oxygen; a further study of these elements discloses that oxygen is the real supporter of combustion and that hydrogen will itself freely burn.
> 
> “Your religion is becoming real because it is emerging from the slavery of fear and the bondage of superstition, Your philosophy struggles for emancipation from dogma and tradition. Your science is engaged in the agelong contest between truth and error while it fights for deliverance from the bondage of abstraction, the slavery of mathematics, and the relative blindness of mechanistic materialism.” [UB 12:9.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p9_4)

## 61. Death starts the eternal voyage of discovery

> “Love of adventure, curiosity, and dread of monotony—these traits inherent in evolving human nature—were not put there just to aggravate and annoy you during your short sojourn on earth, but rather to suggest to you that death is only the beginning of an endless career of adventure, an everlasting life of anticipation, an eternal voyage of discovery.” [UB 14:5.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p5_10)
> 
> “Curiosity—the spirit of investigation, the urge of discovery, the drive of exploration—is a part of the inborn and divine endowment of evolutionary space creatures. These natural impulses were not given you merely to be frustrated and repressed. True, these ambitious urges must frequently be restrained during your short life on earth, disappointment must be often experienced, but they are to be fully realized and gloriously gratified during the long ages to come.” [UB 14:5.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p5_11) 

## 62. Autocracy and democracy meet on Uversa

> “It is on such worlds as Uversa that the beings representative of the autocracy of perfection and the democracy of evolution meet face to face. The executive branch of the supergovernment originates in the realms of perfection; the legislative branch springs from the flowering of the evolutionary universes.” [UB 15:11.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p11_1)

## 63. We never escape the badge of our nativity

> “Through this personal influence of the Seven Master Spirits every creature of every order of intelligent beings, outside of Paradise and Havona, must bear the characteristic stamp of individuality indicative of the ancestral nature of some one of these Seven Paradise Spirits. As concerns the seven superuniverses, each native creature, man or angel, will forever bear this badge of natal identification.” [UB 16:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p5_2)

## 64. Innate responses of the cosmic mind

> “The cosmic mind unfailingly responds (recognizes response) on three levels of universe reality. These responses are self-evident to clear-reasoning and deep-thinking minds. These levels of reality are:
> 
> “1. Causation—the reality domain of the physical senses, the scientific realms of logical uniformity, the differentiation of the factual and the nonfactual, reflective conclusions based on cosmic response. This is the mathematical form of the cosmic discrimination.
> 
> “2. Duty—the reality domain of morals in the philosophic realm, the arena of reason, the recognition of relative right and wrong. This is the judicial form of the cosmic discrimination.
> 
> “3. Worship—the spiritual domain of the reality of religious experience, the personal realization of divine fellowship, the recognition of spirit values, the assurance of eternal survival, the ascent from the status of servants of God to the joy and liberty of the sons of God. This is the highest insight of the cosmic mind, the reverential and worshipful form of the cosmic discrimination.” [UB 16:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p6_5)

## 65. Personality can look before it leaps

> “The selective response of an animal is limited to the motor level of behavior. The supposed insight of the higher animals is on a motor level and usually appears only after the experience of motor trial and error. Man is able to exercise scientific, moral, and spiritual insight prior to all exploration or experimentation.
> 
> “Only a personality can know what it is doing before it does it; only personalities possess insight in advance of experience. A personality can look before it leaps and can therefore learn from looking as well as from leaping. A nonpersonal animal ordinarily learns only by leaping.” [UB 16:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p7_2)

## 66. Innate scope of the cosmic mind

> “The cosmic-mind-endowed, Adjuster-indwelt, personal creature possesses innate recognition-realization of energy reality, mind reality, and spirit reality. The will creature is thus equipped to discern the fact, the law, and the love of God. Aside from these three inalienables of human consciousness, all human experience is really subjective except that intuitive realization of validity attaches to the unification of these three universe reality responses of cosmic recognition.
> 
> “The God-discerning mortal is able to sense the unification value of these three cosmic qualities in the evolution of the surviving soul, man's supreme undertaking in the physical tabernacle where the moral mind collaborates with the indwelling divine spirit to dualize the immortal soul. From its earliest inception the soul is real; it has cosmic survival qualities.” [UB 16:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/16#p9_1)

## 67. The creation of Majeston

> “The creation of Majeston signalized the first supreme creative act of the Supreme Being. This will to action was volitional in the Supreme Being, but the stupendous reaction of the Deity Absolute was not foreknown. Not since the eternity-appearance of Havona had the universe witnessed such a tremendous factualization of such a gigantic and far-flung alignment of power and co-ordination of functional spirit activities. The Deity response to the creative wills of the Supreme Being and his associates was vastly beyond their purposeful intent and greatly in excess of their conceptual forecasts.
> 
> “We stand in awe of the possibility of what the future ages, wherein the Supreme and the Ultimate may attain new levels of divinity and ascend to new domains of personality function, may witness in the realms of the deitization of still other unexpected and undreamed of beings who will possess unimagined powers of enhanced universe co-ordination. There would seem to be no limit to the Deity Absolute's potential of response to such unification of relationships between experiential Deity and the existential Paradise Trinity.” [UB 17:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p2_5)

## 68. Only-begotten Sons

> “Each Creator Son is the only-begotten and only-begettable offspring of the perfect union of the original concepts of the two infinite and eternal and perfect minds of the ever-existent Creators of the universe of universes. There never can be another such Son because each Creator Son is the unqualified, finished, and final expression and embodiment of all of every phase of every feature of every possibility of every divine reality that could, throughout all eternity, ever be found in, expressed by, or evolved from, those divine creative potentials which united to bring this Michael Son into existence. Each Creator Son is the absolute of the united deity concepts which constitute his divine origin.” [UB 21:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p1_2) [John 3:16](/en/Bible/John/3#v16).

## 69. Rebellion-tested mortals — Mighty Messengers

> “Mighty Messengers belong to the ascendant group of the Trinitized Sons. They are a class of perfected mortals who have been rebellion tested or otherwise equally proved as to their personal loyalty; all have passed through some definite test of universe allegiance. At some time in their Paradise ascent they stood firm and loyal in the face of the disloyalty of their superiors, and some did actively and loyally function in the places of such unfaithful leaders.” [UB 22:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/22#p2_1)

> “Every ascendant mortal of insurrectionary experience who functions loyally in the face of rebellion is eventually destined to become a Mighty Messenger of the superuniverse service. Likewise is any ascendant creature who effectively prevents such upheavals of error, evil, or sin; for action designed to prevent rebellion or to effect higher types of loyalty in a universe crisis is regarded as of even greater value than loyalty in the face of actual rebellion.” [UB 22:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/22#p2_3)

> “I am a Mighty Messenger, and it may interest Urantians to know that the companion and associate of my mortal experience was also triumphant in the great test, and that, though we were many times and for long periods separated in the agelong inward ascent to Havona, we were embraced in the same seven-hundred thousand group, and that we spent our time passing through Vicegerington in close and loving association. We were finally commissioned and together assigned to Uversa of Orvonton, and we are often dispatched in company for the execution of assignments requiring the services of two Messengers.” [UB 22:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/22#p2_6)

> “You mortals who read this message may yourselves ascend to Paradise, attain the Trinity embrace, and in remote future ages be attached to the service of the Ancients of Days in one of the seven superuniverses, and sometime be assigned to enlarge the revelation of truth to some evolving inhabited planet, even as I am now functioning on Urantia.” [UB 22:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/22#p4_7)

## 70. Purpose of trials and troubles

> “The confusion and turmoil of Urantia do not signify that the Paradise Rulers lack either interest or ability to manage affairs differently. The Creators are possessed of full power to make Urantia a veritable paradise, but such an Eden would not contribute to the development of those strong, noble, and experienced characters which the Gods are so surely forging out on your world between the anvils of necessity and the hammers of anguish. Your anxieties and sorrows, your trials and disappointments, are just as much a part of the divine plan on your sphere as are the exquisite perfection and infinite adaptation of all things to their supreme purpose on the worlds of the central and perfect universe.” [UB 23:2.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/23#p2_12) [John 16:33](/en/Bible/John/16#v33). [Acts 14:22](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/14#v22). [Rom 12:12](/en/Bible/Romans/12#v12). [2 Cor 1:4](/en/Bible/2_Corinthians/1#v4). [Rev 7:14](/en/Bible/Revelation/7#v14).

## 71. How a Census Director functions

> “The Census Directors are concerned with human beings—as with other will creatures—only to the extent of recording the fact of will function. They are not concerned with the records of your life and its doings; they are not in any sense recording personalities. The Census Director of Nebadon, number 81, 412 of Orvonton, now stationed on Salvington, is at this very moment personally conscious and aware of your living presence here on Urantia; and he will afford the records confirmation of your death the moment you cease to function as a will creature.” [UB 24:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/24#p2_7)

## 72. Grandfanda discovers Havona

> “The name of this pilgrim discoverer of Havona is _Grandfanda_, and he hailed from planet 341 of system 84 in constellation 62 of local universe 1, 131 situated in superuniverse number one. His arrival was the signal for the establishment of the broadcast service of the universe of universes. Theretofore only the broadcasts of the superuniverses and the local universes had been in operation, but the announcement of the arrival of Grandfanda at the portals of Havona signalized the inauguration of the ‘space reports of glory,' so named because the initial universe broadcast reported the Havona arrival of the first of the evolutionary beings to attain entrance upon the goal of ascendant existence.” [UB 24:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/24#p6_8)

## 73. Affection for our Morontia Companions

> “These Morontia Companions are such friendly associates that, when you finally leave the last phase of the morontia experience, as you prepare to embark upon the superuniverse spirit adventure, you will truly regret that these companionable creatures cannot accompany you, but they serve exclusively in the local universes. At every stage of the ascending career all contactable personalities will be friendly and companionable, but not until you meet the Paradise Companions will you find another group so devoted to friendship and companionship.” [UB 25:7.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/25#p7_3)

## 74. Pilgrim arrivals in Havona

> “When, through and by the ministry of all the helper hosts of the universal scheme of survival, you are finally deposited on the receiving world of Havona, you arrive with only one sort of perfection—_perfection of purpose_. Your purpose has been thoroughly proved; your faith has been tested. You are known to be disappointment proof. Not even the failure to discern the Universal Father can shake the faith or seriously disturb the trust of an ascendant mortal who has passed through the experience that all must traverse in order to attain the perfect spheres of Havona. By the time you reach Havona, your sincerity has become sublime. Perfection of purpose and divinity of desire, with steadfastness of faith, have secured your entrance to the settled abodes of eternity; your deliverance from the uncertainties of time is full and complete; and now must you come face to face with the problems of Havona and the immensities of Paradise, to meet which you have so long been in training in the experiential epochs of time on the world schools of space.
> 
> “Faith has won for the ascendant pilgrim a perfection of purpose which admits the children of time to the portals of eternity. Now must the pilgrim helpers begin the work of developing that perfection of under standing and that technique of comprehension which are so indispensable to Paradise perfection of personality.
> 
> “Ability to comprehend is the mortal passport to Paradise. Willingness to believe is the key to Havona. The acceptance of sonship, co-operation with the indwelling Adjuster, is the price of evolutionary survival.” [UB 26:4.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p4_13)

## 75. Battle cry of Havona pilgrims

> “That, then, is the primary or elementary course which confronts the faith tested and much-traveled pilgrims of space. But long before reaching Havona, these ascendant children of time have learned to feast upon uncertainty, to fatten upon disappointment, to enthuse over apparent defeat, to invigorate in the presence of difficulties, to exhibit indomitable courage in the face of immensity, and to exercise unconquerable faith when confronted with the challenge of the inexplicable. Long since, the battle cry of these pilgrims became: ‘In liaison with God, nothing—absolutely nothing—is impossible.'” [UB 26:5.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p5_3) [Matt 19:26](/en/Bible/Matthew/19#v26). [Luke 1:37](/en/Bible/Luke/1#v37); [18:27](/en/Bible/Luke/18#v27). [Mark 10:27](/en/Bible/Mark/10#v27).

## 76. Finding God on Paradise

> “The attainment of the Universal Father is the passport to eternity, notwithstanding the remaining circuits to be traversed. It is therefore a momentous occasion on the pilot world of circle number three when the transit trio announce that the last venture of time is about to ensue; that another creature of space seeks entry to Paradise through the portals of eternity.
> 
> “The test of time is almost over; the race for eternity has been all but run. The days of uncertainty are ending; the temptation to doubt is vanishing; the injunction to be perfect has been obeyed. From the very bottom of intelligent existence the creature of time and material personality has ascended the evolutionary spheres of space, thus proving the feasibility of the ascension plan while forever demonstrating the justice and righteousness of the command of the Universal Father to his lowly creatures of the worlds: 'Be you perfect, even as I am perfect.'
> 
> “Step by step, life by life, world by world, the ascendant career has been mastered, and the goal of Deity has been attained. Survival is complete in perfection, and perfection is replete in the supremacy of divinity. Time is lost in eternity; space is swallowed up in worshipful identity and harmony with the Universal Father. The broadcasts of Havona flash forth the space reports of glory, the good news that in very truth the conscientious creatures of animal nature and material origin have, through evolutionary ascension, become in reality and eternally the perfected sons of God.” [UB 26:9.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p9_2) [Matt 5:48](/en/Bible/Matthew/5#v48).

## 77. Graduation from Havona

> “And now, at the culmination of the Havona career, as you mortals go to sleep on the pilot world of the inner circuit, you go to alone to your rest as you did on the worlds of your origin when you closed your eyes in the natural sleep of mortal death, nor as you did when you entered the long transit trance preparatory for the journey to Havona. Now, as you prepare for the attainment rest, there moves over by your side your long-time associate of the first circle, the majestic complement of rest, who prepares to enter the rest as one with you, as the pledge of Havona that your transition is complete, and that you await only the final touches of perfection.
> 
> “Your first transition was indeed death, the second an ideal sleep, and now the third metamorphosis is the true rest, the relaxation of the ages.” [UB 26:11.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p11_7)

## 78. Last resurrection on Paradise

> “You enter the rest on the final Havona circuit and are eternally resurrected on Paradise. And as you there spiritually repersonalize, you will immediately recognize the instigator of rest who welcomes you to the eternal shores as the very primary supernaphim who produced the final sleep on the innermost circuit of Havona; and you will recall the last grand stretch of faith as you once again made ready to commend the keeping of your identity into the hands of the Universal Father.
> 
> “The last rest of time has been enjoyed; the last transition sleep has been experienced; now you awake to life everlasting on the shores of the eternal abode. ‘And there shall be no more sleep. The presence of God and his Son are before you, and you are eternally his servants; you have seen his face, and his name is your spirit. There shall be no light there; and they need no light of the sun, for the Great Source and Center gives them light; they shall live forever and ever. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things have passed away.'” [UB 27:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/27#p1_4) [Rev 22:4, 5](/en/Bible/Revelation/22#v4).

## 79. Learning how to worship

> “It is the task of the conductors of worship so to teach the ascendant creatures how to worship that they may be enabled to gain this satisfaction of self expression and at the same time be able to give attention to the essential activities of the Paradise regime. Without improvement in the technique of worship it would require hundreds of years for the average mortal who reaches Paradise to give full and satisfactory expression to his emotions of intelligent appreciation and ascendant gratitude. The conductors of worship open up new and hitherto unknown avenues of expression so that these wonderful children of the womb of space and the travail of time are enabled to gain the full satisfactions of worship in much less time.” [UB 27:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/27#p7_4)

## 80. The mercy trial balance

> “The Memory of Mercy is a living trial balance, a current statement of your account with the supernatural forces of the realms. These are the living records of mercy ministration which are read into the testimony of the courts of Uversa when each individual's right to unending life comes up for adjudication, when ‘thrones are cast up and the Ancients of Days are seated. The broadcasts of Uversa issue and come forth from before them; thousands upon thousands minister to them, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand before them. The judgment is set, and the books are opened.' And the books which are opened on such a momentous occasion are the living records of the tertiary seconaphim of the superuniverses. The formal records are on file to corroborate the testimony of the Memories of Mercy if they are required.” [UB 28:6.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/28#p6_6) [Dan 7:9, 10](/en/Bible/Daniel/7#v9).

## 81. The celestial vocation guides

> “On Urantia, you grotesquely essay to read character and to estimate specific abilities, but on Uversa we actually do these things in perfection. These seconaphim weigh trustworthiness in the living scales of unerring character appraisal, and when they have looked at you, we have only to look at them to know the limitations of your ability to discharge responsibility, execute trust, and fulfill missions. Your assets of trustworthiness are clearly set forth alongside your liabilities of possible default or betrayal.
> 
> “It is the plan of your superiors to advance you by augmented trusts just as fast as your character is sufficiently developed to gracefully bear these added responsibilities, but to overload the individual only courts disaster and insures disappointment. And the mistake of placing responsibility prematurely upon either man or angel may be avoided by utilizing the ministry of these infallible estimators of the trust capacity of the individuals of time and space. These seconaphim ever accompany Those High in Authority, and never do these executives make assignments until their candidates have been weighed in the secoraphic balances and pronounced ‘not wanting.'” [UB 28:6.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/28#p6_14)

## 82. Power Centers never play

> “Having no ascendant past to revert to in memory, power centers and physical controllers never play; they are thoroughly businesslike in all their actions. They are always on duty; there is no provision in the universal scheme for the interruption of the physical lines of energy; never for a fraction of a second can these beings relinquish their direct supervision of the energy circuits of time and space.” [UB 29:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p3_5)

## 83. The Master Force Organizers

> “Primary Master Force Organizers are the manipulators of the primordial or basic space forces of the Unqualified Absolute; they are nebulae creators. They are the living instigators of the energy cyclones of space and the early organizers and directionizers of these gigantic manifestations. These force organizers transmute _primordial force_ (pre-energy not responsive to direct Paradise gravity) into primary or _puissant energy_, energy transmuting from the exclusive grasp of the Unqualified Absolute to the gravity grasp of the Isle of Paradise. They are thereupon succeeded by the associate force organizers, who continue the process of energy transmutation from the primary through the secondary or _gravity-energy_ stage.” [UB 29:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/29#p5_5)

## 84. Diverse functions of God

> “God, as a superperson, eventuates; God, as a person, creates; God, as a pre-person, fragments; and such an Adjuster fragment of himself evolves the spirit soul upon the material and mortal mind in accordance with the freewill choosing of the personality which has been bestowed upon such a mortal creature by the parental act of God as a Father.” [UB 30:1.99](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p1_99)

## 85. Our status from death to resurrection

> “The passing of time is of no moment to sleeping mortals; they are wholly unconscious and oblivious to the length of their rest. On reassembly of personality at the end of an age, those who have slept five thousand years will react no differently than those who have rested five days. Aside from this time delay these survivors pass on through the ascension regime identically with those who avoid the longer or shorter sleep of death.” [UB 30:4.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p4_12)

> “The physical body of mortal flesh is not a part of the reassembly of the sleeping survivor; the physical body has returned to dust. The seraphim of assignment sponsors the new body, the morontia form, as the new life vehicle for the immortal soul and for the indwelling of the returned Adjuster. The Adjuster is the custodian of the spirit transcript of the mind of the sleeping survivor. The assigned seraphim is the keeper of the surviving identity— the immortal soul—as far as it has evolved. And when these two, the Adjuster and the seraphim, reunite their personality trusts, the new individual constitutes the resurrection of the old personality, the survival of the evolving morontia identity of the soul. Such a reassociation of soul and Adjuster is quite properly called a resurrection, a reassembly of personality factors; but even this does not entirely explain the reappearance of the surviving personality. Though you will probably never understand the fact of such an inexplicable transaction, you will sometime experientially know the truth of it if you do not reject the plan of mortal survival.” [UB 30:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p4_15)

## 86. Arriving in Havona

> “The first act of your Havona career will be to recognize and thank your transport seconaphim for the long and safe journey. Then you are presented to those beings who will sponsor your early Havona activities. Next you go to register your arrival and prepare your message of thanksgiving and adoration for dispatch to the Creator Son of your local universe, the universe Father who made possible your sonship career. This concludes the formalities of the Havona arrival; whereupon you are accorded a long period of leisure for free observation, and this affords opportunity for looking up your friends, fellows, and associates of the long ascension experience. You may also consult the broadcasts to ascertain who of your fellow pilgrims have departed for Havona since the time of your leaving Uversa.” [UB 30:4.28](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p4_28)

## 87. Composition of mortal corps of the finality

> “The inhabitants of the central universe are received into the corps in the ratio of one in a thousand—a finaliter company. The corps is organized for temporary service in companies of one thousand, the ascendant creatures numbering 997 to one Havona native and one Gravity Messenger. Finaliters are thus mobilized in companies, but the finality oath is administered individually. It is an oath of sweeping implications and eternal import. The Havona native takes the same oath and becomes forever attached to the corps.” [UB 31:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p1_3)

## 88. The Master Architects

> “These seven groups of Master Architects total 28, 011 universe planners. On Paradise there is a tradition that far back in eternity there was attempted the eventuation of the 28, 012th Master Architect, but that this being failed to absonitize, experiencing personality seizure by the Universal Absolute. It is possible that the ascending series of the Master Architects attained the limit of absonity in the 28, 011th Architect, and that the 28, 012th attempt encountered the mathematical level of the presence of the Absolute. In other words, at the 28, 012th eventuation level the quality of absonity equivalated to the level of the Universal and attained the value of the Absolute.” [UB 31:9.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p9_10)

## 89. The mortal finality corps

> “The gathering together of these seven finaliter corps signifies reality mobilization of potentials, personalities, minds, spirits, absonites, and experiential actualities that probably transcend even the future master universe functions of the Supreme Being. These seven finaliter corps probably signify the present activity of the Ultimate Trinity engaged in mustering the forces of the finite and the absonite in preparation for inconceivable developments in the universes of outer space. Nothing like this mobilization has taken place since the near times of eternity when the Paradise Trinity similarly mobilized the then existing personalities of Paradise and Havona and commissioned them as administrators and rulers of the projected seven superuniverses of time and space. The seven finaliter corps represent the divinity response of the grand universe to the future needs of the undeveloped potentials in the outer universes of future- eternal activities.” [UB 31:10.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p10_10)

> “Evolutionary mortals are born on the planets of space, pass through the morontia worlds, ascend the spirit universes, traverse the Havona spheres, find God, attain Paradise, and are mustered into the primary Corps of the Finality, therein to await the next assignment of universe service. There are six other assembling finality corps, but Grandfanda, the first mortal ascender, presides as Paradise chief of all orders of finaliters. And as we view this sublime spectacle, we all exclaim: What a glorious destiny for the animal-origin children of time, the material sons of space!” [UB 31:10.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p10_20)


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_8_Worship_and_Wisdom/Index">Index</a></td>
			<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_8_Worship_and_Wisdom/2">Part II: The Local Universe</a></td>
		</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>