---
title: "A Family Day in Los Angeles"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-9-16T10:55:6Z
tags: Family, IUA, Journal, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-9-16T10:55:6Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1999 James Woodward<br>© 1999 International Urantia Association (IUA)</p>

James Woodward
California, United States

A most pleasant occasion recently marked the refreshing transition in our progress toward improved relations between the two _Urantia Book_ organizations. This continued growth has its origins in a pivotal meeting held six months ago. In April 1998 the leaders of the IUA and the Brotherhood met in Chicago to discuss openly the issues at hand. There was an air of anticipation among the participants, tempered by commitments to philosophies, but fueled by the desire to restore the fabric of human cooperation in the work of the two groups. The main meeting featured statements of vision and organizational structure, which highlighted the marked differences in approach to the agenda. However, a Brotherhood speaker provided a touchstone of common purpose, which found immediate and supportive general agreement. Sara Blackstock, an active grandmother, teacher, and elementary school administrator, spoke about a project she chairs, the Family Life Committee. The leadership of both organizations dedicated to presenting the Fifth Revelation to the world could find no room for disagreement as Sara read her statement.

Jesus said: “_The people of another age will better understand the gospel of the kingdom when it is presented in terms expressive of the family relationship—when man understands religion as the teaching of the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man, sonship with God._” [[UB 142:7.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/142#p7_4)]

As “people of another age,” we accept Jesus' challenge to present the gospel “in terms of family relationships,” and to do this we need to commit ourselves to strengthening the ideal of “the family” by fostering the spiritual culture of the family and empowering parents to reveal God's love to their children, through accumulated resources, offering the family targeted programs and services to the FAMILY on all levels.

The Chicago meeting concluded with the renewal of individual relationships and a sincere commitment to confront organizational differences through honest effort. It thus formally endorsed many areas of joint cooperation and positive interaction. One of the first results of this new policy was the large participation of Fraternity members at the 1998 USUA conference in Glen Ivy. The genuine atmosphere of mutual respect and worship of identical religious ideals gave credence to this theme of spiritual unity.

The first joint effort between the Fellowship and the IUA took place in October 1998, and was the result of the warm reception given by the Chicago Family Life Committee. The First Society of Los Angeles, under the leadership of Robert Burns, invited Sara Blackstock to organize a meeting in Southern California. Robert then contacted Sioux Harvey, a member of the IUA local association, the Southwest Urantia Family of Readers. SURF was invited to co-sponsor this event, as was the School of Meanings and Values. Months of planning and preparation were employed, including SURF's generous offer to pay for Sara's airfare from Northern California. FSLA paid the rent for the hall, and volunteers from all three groups worked together, sharing a wonderful spirit.

A sunny autumn day greeted over fifty participants, young and old, who arrived with arms full of delicious food, drinks, desserts, and “play materials.” Robert gave the gathering a no-nonsense introduction, then introduced the keynote speaker who presented, “Family Relationships from Cradle to Eternity.” The passion and insight that Sara brought to her talk became apparent as she spoke about the little ones in her care. She used this experience to captivate the audience with her enthusiasm for the concept of family spiritual culture. Once again, a group with different organizational methods found themselves in agreement with her call for a unified strategy for the development of seminars, work and scholarship groups, and other worthy means of advancing the ideals of The Urantia Book regarding the family. Sara Blackstock's academic knowledge coupled with a large heart and familiarity with revealed wisdom is an impressive asset - she offers our community the energy to develop and implement family programs. We had better take advantage of this opportunity to catalyze truth into valuable service to us, as well as to future generations of Urantia.

As Sara says, “Of all the areas, the family seems to be the one that could be most affected if we do NOT work together.” It would be so sad to have a lack of unity in and between families as the generations pass, simply because we could not find ways to work together. If thousands of readers could see the two organizations able to embrace the kingdom of the family, it would increase the “family” feeling among all of us who are dedicated to fulfilling the truths of our revelation.

After such an inspiring speech, and discussion of children, it was time for play! One of the important aspects of these family events is the gentle soul-stimulation of creative retrospection. Jane Ploetz, SURF’s president, was our guide in creating expressive posters. Groups formed to draw and create collages inspired by quotes gleaned from a children’s book on Chinese characters for human emotions. Each team chose a symbol with its corresponding attribute according to their hearts, and illustrated that quote. Sara made sure that balloons were released into the lobby during this exercise, so that no one took themselves too seriously! The finished products were very artistic and reflected a wide range of inner wisdom.

Our faithful friend Dorothy Elder was involved as program chair for this event, and spoke next. With her usual visual projections, she reminded the audience of how our human families should reflect the divine pattern. As always, her kind nature and gentle persuasion captured the attention of a very receptive audience. After Dorothy, a play interlude took place—this time the audience became actors and volunteers performed skits. Several teams retired for a quick rehearsal under the direction of Marilyn Alexander. They presented short plays with roles emphasizing the value of family in decision-making, custody matters, sibling relationships, and other contemporary situations. Adults played the children’s parts and children played the parents’ parts, resolving dilemmas with religious insight. The actors had a great time, and everyone enjoyed the serious and humorous drama. Musical entertainment was also part of the celebration, with a presentation of original and inspired tunes performed by Larry Neff, Jane Ploetz and your reporter.

A festive meal was followed by a keynote address by John Ploetz. He offered an interesting perspective that shed light on the subject of the interchangeability and complementarity of the functions of our parental deities. It was a fascinating trigger, considering the image of the Father as gentle and nurturing and that of the Mother as a powerful teacher.

The final activity was another exercise in hands-on creativity, this time with T-shirts. Samples of historical family crests were passed around as templates with instructions to draw original symbols that incorporated and showed their family’s unique vision. Permanent markers were provided so everyone could make a colorful, spiritual crest and wear it home. The results were clever, beautiful, and expressive, and the energy put into this project gave the room an air of buzzing excitement.

This event demonstrates all that is good about readers of The Urantia Book and serves as an inspired model for those involved in this ongoing volunteer service. It confirms that personalities, when they truly desire to evolve in grace, find it possible to rise above preordained programs. Motivated groups everywhere could seek ways to promote mutual involvement in positive activities; and the family aspect is one which offers great promise. This is a blessed time to consider the future of the unified movement in its far-reaching spiritual endeavors.

> _This very love of God for the individual brings into being the divine family of all individuals, the universal brotherhood of the freewill children of the Paradise Father._ [[UB 12:7.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/12#p7_10)]