---
title: "1. Letter from Pontius Pilate to Tiberius"
description: "Complementary Writings to the Acts of Pilate"
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Gospel_of_Nicodemus_B#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Gospel_of_Nicodemus_B/2">
          <span class="pr-2">2. Letter from Tiberius to Pilate</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## LETTER OF PONTIUS PILATE ADDRESSED TO THE ROMAN EMPEROR CONCERNING OUR LORD JESUS ​​CHRIST

Pontius Pilate greets Emperor Tiberius Caesar.

Jesus Christ, whom I clearly presented to you in my last accounts, has finally been handed over to a harsh punishment at the behest of the people, whose instigations I followed reluctantly and out of fear. A man, as pious and austere as this man, by the life of Hercules, neither existed nor will ever exist in any age. But a strange determination on the part of the people themselves, and on the other, the conspiracy of all the scribes, leaders, and elders, against the warnings given them by their prophets and, in our way of speaking, the sibyls, conspired to bring about the crucifixion of this legacy of truth. And while he was hanging on the cross, signs appeared that surpassed natural forces and, according to the judgment of physicists, foreshadowed the destruction of the entire world. His disciples still live, who do not scorn the Master in their works or in the moderation of their lives; indeed, they continue to do much good in his name. Had it not been for the fear of a sedition among the people (which was already in a state of ferment), perhaps that illustrious man would still be alive. Therefore, attribute it more to my desire for fidelity toward you than to my own whim that I did not resist with all my might that the blood of a just man, immune from all guilt, but a victim of human malice, should be unjustly sold and suffer the passion; considering, moreover, that, as your scriptures say, this was bound to result in your own ruin. Farewell. March 28th.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Gospel_of_Nicodemus_B#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Gospel_of_Nicodemus_B/2">
          <span class="pr-2">2. Letter from Tiberius to Pilate</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>