---
title: "9. Pilate's Sentence"
description: "Complementary Writings to the Acts of Pilate"
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Gospel_of_Nicodemus_B/8">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">8. Revenge of the Savior</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Gospel_of_Nicodemus_B#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## SENTENCE GIVEN BY PONTIUS PILATE AGAINST OUR LORD JESUS ​​CHRIST

«Copy found in the City of Laquila, Kingdom of Naples, of the sentence given by Pontius Pilate, President of Judea in the year 18 [sic] of Tiberius Caesar, Emperor of Rome, against Jesus Christ, Son of God, and of the Virgin Mary, sentencing him to death on the Cross between two thieves on March 25; miraculously found inside a very beautiful stone, in which were two small boxes, one of iron, and inside it another of very fine ivory, where the undersigned sentence was included in Hebrew letters in a sin letter as follows:

The 18th year [sic] of Tiberius Caesar, Roman Emperor, and of the entire World, invincible Monarch, in the Olymdiada c.XXI., in the Cliade XXIV., and in the Creation of the World, according to the number. and I compute from the Hebrews four times MC LXXXVII., and from the propaganda of the Roman Empire L. XXIII., from the liberation of the Babylonian servitude M. CC. XI.: being Consuls of the Roman People Lucio Pisano and Mauricio Pisarico; Proconsuls Lucio Balesna, published by the Government. of Judea, and Quintus Flavius, under the regiment and Government of Jerusalem, President Pontius Pilate, regent of the lower Galilee, and Herod Antipa, Pontiffs of the High Priesthood Annas, Cayphas, Alit Almael the Magr. of the Temple, Roboan Ancabel, Franchinus Centurion, and Consuls Rom.^OS^ and of the City of Jerusalem Quintus Cornelius Sublima, and Sextus Ponphilius Rufus; in the month of March and on the 25th day of it.

I, Pontius Pilate, here Roman President within the Palace of the Archresidence, judge, condemn and sentence to death Jesus called of the Plebs _Christo Nazareno_, and of Patria Galileo, seditious man of the Moysene Law, contrary to the great Emp.^OR^ Tiberius Caesar; and I determine, and pronounce by this, that his death be on the Cross, and fixed with nails according to the custom of criminals, because here gathering and joining many rich men, and poor, he has not ceased to stir up riots throughout Judea, making himself the son of God, and King of Jerusalem, threatening them with the ruin of this City, and of its Holy Temple, denying the Tribute to Caesar, and having even had the audacity to enter with branches, and triumph, and with part of the Plebs into the City of Jerusalem, and into the Holy Temple. And I command my first Centurion Quintus Cornelius to publicly carry Jesus Christ bound and scourged through the City, and to be dressed in purple and crowned with thorns, with the Cross itself on his shoulders as an example to all evildoers: and with him I want two murderous Thieves to be taken, and they will come out by the sacred Place, now Antoniana, and to take Jesus to the public Mount of Justice called Calvary, where crucified and dead, the body will remain on the Cross, as a spectacle to all wicked people; and that on the Cross the title be placed in three languages, and in all three (Hebrew, Greek, and Latin) it should say JESUS ​​NAZAR. REX JUDAEORUM.

We also command that no one of any state or quality dare recklessly impede such Justice as I have commanded, administered, and executed with all rigor according to the Roman and Hebrew decrees and laws, under penalty of rebellion against the Roman Empire. - Witnesses of the nra. Sentence: by the 12 Tribes of Israel Rabbi Daniel, Rabbi sec., Joannin Bonicar, Barbasu, Sabi Potuculam. By the Pharisees Bulius, Simeon, Ronol, Rabani, Mondagul, Boncurfosu. By the High Priesthood Rabban, Nidos, Boncasado. Notaries of this publication: by the Hebrews Nitanbarta; By the Court and President of Rome Lucius Sextilius, Amasius Chlio.

(Copies taken from the ms. entitled _Book of various news and notes_, which DN Guerra, Bishop of Segovia, left written in Latin, Spanish, French and Italian. Copied from the original in M. DCC. LXXXVI)».

<br>


<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Gospel_of_Nicodemus_B/8">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">8. Revenge of the Savior</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Gospel_of_Nicodemus_B#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>