---
title: "Workbook I — Foreword and Part I — Paper 13. The Sacred Spheres of Paradise"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: theology, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/12">Paper 12. The Universe of Universes</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/14">Paper 14. The Central and Divine Universe</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1961 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

## INTRODUCTION

### I. UB 13:0.1 — “Between the central Isle...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p0_1) — “Between the central Isle...”

**COMMENT**

Between Paradise and Havona we find the three circuits of the secret spheres of the Deities.

### II. UB 13:0.2 — “These three seven-world circuits...

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p0_2) — “These three seven-world circuits...

**COMMENT**

1. These worlds are unique in their grandeur. They are all different, except the worlds of the Son, which are alike.
2. Like Paradise they are eternal—they always have been.

### III. UB 13:0.3 — “The seven secret spheres...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:0.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p0_3) — “The seven secret spheres...”

**COMMENT**

The seven worlds of the Father are reflective of spiritual luminosity—illuminating all of Paradise and Havona.

## DISCUSSION OF LIGHT

1. **Physical Light**
	- A. Light with heat—sunlight.
	- B. Light without heat. (Firefly?)
2. **Intellectual Light**—Understanding
	- **[Dan 5:14](/en/Bible/Daniel/5#v14)**. “I have heard of you that the spirit of the holy gods is in you, and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom is found in you.”
	- **[Ps 119:105](/en/Bible/Psalms/119#v105)**. “Thy word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path.”
3. **Human Leadership**
	- **[Eph 5:8](/en/Bible/Ephesians/5#v8)**. “For once you were darkness, but now you are light in the Lord.”
	- **[Matt 5:14, 16](/en/Bible/Matthew/5#v14)**. “You are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hid.” “Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father who is in heaven.”
4. **Spiritual Light**—Spirit Illumination
	- **[John 1:9](/en/Bible/John/1#v9)**. “The true light that enlightens every man was coming into the world.”
	- **[John 8:12](/en/Bible/John/8#v12)**. “Again Jesus spoke to them, saying, ‘I am the light of the world; he who follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.’”
5. **Salvation**—Survival
	- **[John 9:41](/en/Bible/John/9#v41)**. “Jesus said to them, ‘If you were blind, you would have no guilt; but now that you say, “We see,” your guilt remains.’”
	- **[John 15:22](/en/Bible/John/15#v22)**. “If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin.”
	- **[Ps 27:1](/en/Bible/Psalms/27#v1)**. “The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear?”
	- **[Job 33:27, 28](/en/Bible/Job/33#v27)**. “‘I have sinned and perverted that which was right, and it was not requited to me. He has redeemed my soul from going down into the Pit, and my life shall see the light.’”
	- **[Ps 36:9](/en/Bible/Psalms/36#v9)**. “For with thee is the fountain of life; in thy light do we see light.”
6. **Light and Life**—Universe Status
	- **[John 1:4](/en/Bible/John/1#v4)**. “In him was life, and the life was the light of men.”
	- **[John 8:12](/en/Bible/John/8#v12)**. “He who follows me...will have the light of life.”
7. **Deity Luminosity**
	- *[1 John 1:5](/en/Bible/1_John/1#v5)**. “That God is light and in him is no darkness at all.”
	- **[1 Tim 6:16](/en/Bible/1_Timothy/6#v16)**. “Who alone has immortality and dwells in unapproachable light, whom no man has ever seen or can see.”
	- **[Ps 104:2](/en/Bible/Psalms/104#v2)**. “Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment.”
	- **[Rev 22:5](/en/Bible/Revelation/22#v5)**. “They need no light of lamp or sun, for the Lord God will be their light.”

### IV. UB 13:0.4 — “On the seven sacred...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:0.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p0_4) — “On the seven sacred...”

**COMMENT**

1. On the worlds of the Son, the energies of impersonal spirit luminosity take origin—light without heat.
2. No personal beings sojourn on these seven worlds.

### V. UB 13:0.5 — “The seven worlds...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:0.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p0_5) — “The seven worlds...”

**COMMENT**

1. The seven worlds of the Infinite Spirit are the headquarters of the Seven Master Spirits.
2. All the grand universe, but not Paradise, is bathed in the spiritualizing influences of the Third Person of Deity.

### VI. UB 13:0.6 — “Although the worlds...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:0.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p0_6) — “Although the worlds...”

**COMMENT**

1. While the Father’s worlds are personal status spheres, many entities other than personal sojourn thereon.
2. Each of these Father and Spirit worlds has a special type of permanent citizenship.
3. The Son’s worlds harbor uniform types of other-than-personal beings.

### VII. UB 13:0.7 — “The twenty-one Paradise...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:0.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p0_7) — “The twenty-one Paradise...”

**COMMENT**

1. On these twenty-one Paradise satellites thousands of unrevealed activities are going on.
2. These spheres embrace the potentials of the master universe.
3. The Urantia papers present but a fleeting glimpse of these worlds as pertaining to the present age of the grand universe.

## 1. THE SEVEN SACRED WORLDS OF THE FATHER

### I. UB 13:1.1 — “The Father’s circuit...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_1) — “The Father’s circuit...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Father’s sacred worlds contain the universe secrets of personality and certain parts are closed to personalities.
2. The only other realms closed to personality are nether Paradise and the sacred worlds of the Son.
3. One Bible reference bears out the idea of secrecy. **[Deut 29:29](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/29#v29)**. “‘The secret things belong to the Lord our God; but the things that are revealed belong to us and to our children forever.’”

## II. UB 13:1.2 — “The Paradise worlds...”

**REFERENCE:**: [UB 13:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_2) — “The Paradise worlds...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Father’s worlds are ruled by the highest order of Trinity Sons—the Trinitized Secrets of Supremacy.
2. In another age will they be “Secrets of Ultimacy”? Yes—probably.

### III. UB 13:1.3 — “One of the reasons...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_3) — “One of the reasons...”

**COMMENT**

1. One reason for secrecy on these worlds is the presence of specialized Deity manifestations.
2. The Secrets of Supremacy are the special agents of these impersonal specialized presences of Divinity.

### IV. UB 13:1.4 — “1. DIVININGTON...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_4) — “1. DIVININGTON...”

**COMMENT**

1. This is the personal-communion sphere of the Father—the “bosom of the Father.” See **[John 1:18](/en/Bible/John/1#v18)**. “No one has ever seen God; the only Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has made him known.”
2. Many other beings, unrevealed, created by the Father, dwell on Divinington.
3. Divinington is the rendezvous of the Thought Adjusters.

## DISCUSSION OF GOD INDWELLING MAN

- **[Job 32:8](/en/Bible/Job/32#v8)**. “But it is the spirit in a man, the breath of the Almighty, that makes him understand.”
- **[Prov 20:27](/en/Bible/Proverbs/20#v27)**. “The spirit of man is the lamp of the Lord, searching all his innermost parts.”
- **[Eccl 12:7](/en/Bible/Ecclesiastes/12#v7)**. “And the spirit returns to God who gave it.”
- **[Eze 36:27](/en/Bible/Ezekiel/36#v27)**. “And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes.”
- **[Zech 12:1](/en/Bible/Zechariah/12#v1)**. “Thus says the Lord, who...formed the spirit of man within him.”
- **[Rom 8:16](/en/Bible/Romans/8#v16)**. “It is the Spirit himself bearing witness with our spirit that we are the children of God.”
*- *[1 Cor 2:11](/en/Bible/1_Corinthians/2#v11)**. “What person knows a man’s thoughts except the spirit of the
- **[1 John 3:24](/en/Bible/1_John/3#v24)**. “And by this we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us.”

### V. UB 13:1.5 — “**The secrets of...**”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_5) — “**The secrets of...**”

**COMMENT**

1. Among the secrets of Divinington is that of the bestowal of the Thought Adjusters.
2. Various orders of personality have innate secrets which are withheld from all other orders of personality.

### VI. UB 13:1.6 — “This sphere also holds...”

**REFERENCE**:[UB 13:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_6) — “This sphere also holds...”

**COMMENT**

1. Divinington holds the secrets of other Father fragments and of the Gravity Messengers.
2. Probably the secrets of these spheres would not be understood by those from whom they are withheld.

### VII. UB 13:1.7 — “2. SONARINGTON...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_7) — “2. SONARINGTON...”

**COMMENT**

1. This world is the “bosom of the Son”—the headquarters of the ascending and descending Sons.
2. Many unrevealed orders of Sons make this sphere their home.

### VIII. UB 13:1.8 — “**The secrets of**...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_8) — “**The secrets of**...”

**COMMENT**

1. Among the secrets of Sonarington are those of the bestowal of the incarnated Paradise Sons.
2. Only incarnated Sons penetrate that sector relating to the incarnation of the Divine Sons.
3. But there are many other mysteries hidden on this world.

### IX. UB 13:1.9 — “3. SPIRITINGTON...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_9) — “3. SPIRITINGTON...”

**COMMENT**

1. This world is the “bosom of the Spirit,” home for the Seven Master Spirits and many of their offspring.
2. This is home for many unrevealed orders of spirit beings.

### X. UB 13:1.10 — “**The secrets of**...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_10) — “**The secrets of**...”

**COMMENT**

1. Reflectivity is the secret of Spiritington. Reflectivity concerns many activities not revealed.
2. And there are other secrets of this sacred world.

### XI. UB 13:1.11 — “4. VICEGERINGTON...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_11) — “4. VICEGERINGTON...”

**COMMENT**
This world is the “bosom of the Father and the Son.” Many unrevealed beings forgather on this sphere.

### XII. UB 13:1.12 — “**The secrets of**...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_12) — “**The secrets of**...”

**COMMENT**

1. This world holds the secrets of trinitization.
2. This is home for numerous beings trinitized or eventuated by both Deity and other orders of personality.

### XIII. UB 13:1.13 — “Nontrinitized beings...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_13) — “Nontrinitized beings...”

**COMMENT**

All sectors of Vicegerington are open to all orders of trinitized beings.

### XIV. UB 13:1.14 — “There are still other...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.14](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_14) — “There are still other...”

**COMMENT**

There are many forms of trinitization which have not been revealed to us.

### XV. UB 13:1.15 — “5. SOLITARINGTON...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_15) — “5. SOLITARINGTON...”

**COMMENT**

This world is the “bosom of the Father and the Spirit,” and the home of many unrevealed orders.

### XVI. UB 13:1.16 — “This is also...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_16) — “This is also...”

**COMMENT**

This is the home of many orders, including Solitary Messengers and the Power Directors.

### XVII. UB 13:1.17 — “There are numerous...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.17](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_17) — “There are numerous...”

**COMMENT**

Many orders of spirit beings not connected with the ascension plan make their home on Solitarington.

### XVIII. UB 13:1.18 — “_The secrets of_...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_18) — “_The secrets of_...”

**COMMENT**

Secrets belonging to many orders of Deity-fathered personalities are held on this world—even of beings of origin in the Trinity, the Supreme, and the Ultimate.

### XIX. UB 13:1.19 — “6. SERAPHINGTON...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_19) — “6. SERAPHINGTON...”

**COMMENT**

1. This world is the “bosom of the Son and the Spirit.”
2. It is the home of all ministering spirits and a host of unrevealed beings created by the Son and the Spirit.

### XX. UB 13:1.20 — “_The secrets of_...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.20](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_20) — “_The secrets of_...”

**COMMENT**

1. Of the threefold mystery of Seraphington, only one—the mystery of seraphic transport—is noted.
2. The other mysteries pertain to unrevealed orders of beings.

### XXI. UB 13:1.21 — “7. ASCENDINGTON...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.21](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_21) — “7. ASCENDINGTON...”

**COMMENT**

1. Ascendington is the “bosom of the Father, Son, and Spirit.” It is the home of ascenders before attaining Paradise status.
2. Havona ascenders spend most of their “vacations” on Ascendington.

### XXII. UB 13:1.22 — “_The secrets of_...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:1.22](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_22) — “_The secrets of_...”

**COMMENT**

The great secret of Ascendington pertains to the mystery of the evolution of the immortal soul within the mortal mind.

### XXIII. UB 13:1.23 — “You will never fully...”

**REFERENCE****:**[UB 13:1.23](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_23) — “You will never fully...”

**COMMENT**

1. The mystery of the soul’s evolution will not be understood by mortals until they reach Ascendington.
2. Even after the mortal comprehends this mystery, he never reveals it to other orders of personality.

## 2. FATHER-WORLD RELATIONSHIPS

### I. UB 13:2.1 — “These home worlds...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p2_1) — “These home worlds...”

**COMMENT**

1. These Paradise worlds are reunion spheres and serve as permanent cosmic addresses.
2. Finaliters live on Paradise, but Ascendington is their eternal home address.
3. Seventh-stage spirits may give up their residence on Paradise.

### II. UB 13:2.2 — “If outer universes...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p2_2) — “If outer universes...”

**COMMENT**

Ascenders from outer space will regard Ascendington as their home world.

### III. UB 13:2.3 — “Ascendington is...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p2_3) — “Ascendington is...”

**COMMENT**

Ascendington is the only Paradise world unreservedly open to the inspection of mortal ascenders.

### IV. UB 13:2.4 — “The Trinity-origin beings...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p2_4) — “The Trinity-origin beings...”

**COMMENT**

Trinity-origin beings are residential on Paradise, but fraternize with ascenders on Ascendington.

### V. UB 13:2.5 — “You might assume...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p2_5) — “You might assume...”

**COMMENT**

1. There are many questions difficult of understanding relating to these sacred worlds of Paradise.
2. Status on the Father’s worlds is determined by:
	- A. The universe age.
	- B. Nature of origin.
	- C. Actuality of service.

### VI. UB 13:2.6 — “The worlds of the...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:2.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p2_6) — “The worlds of the...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Father’s worlds are more status worlds than actual residential spheres.
2. Finaliters are admitted to Sonarington, except for the one-seventh concerned with the incarnation of the divine Sons.

### VII. UB 13:2.7 — “Eventually you will have...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:2.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p2_7) — “Eventually you will have...”

**COMMENT**

1. Eventually finaliters have full access to Ascendington, relative access to the other Father worlds, except Divinington.
2. Throughout all eternity you will be denied access to Divinington—the “bosom of the Father.”

### VIII. UB 13:2.8 — “These rendezvous worlds...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:2.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p2_8) — “These rendezvous worlds...”

**COMMENT**

1. Only those things are forbidden which are wholly outside our personal experience.
2. You may become creature perfect even as the Father is deity perfect, but you may not share the personality secrets of other orders of personality.

### IX. UB 13:2.9 — “All these secrets...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p2_9) — “All these secrets...”

**COMMENT**

1. All secrets are known to the collective body of Trinitized Secrets of Supremacy.
2. Ascenders fully know the ten Secrets of Supremacy on Ascendington, but not so fully those on the other worlds, least of all those on Divinington.

### X. UB 13:2.10 — “The Trinitized Secrets...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p2_10) — “The Trinitized Secrets...”

**COMMENT**

The Secrets of Supremacy are related to the Supreme, the Ultimate, and to the Supreme-Ultimate.

## 3. THE SACRED WORLDS OF THE ETERNAL SON

### I. UB 13:3.1 — “The seven luminous spheres...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p3_1) — “The seven luminous spheres...”

**COMMENT**

The luminous spheres of the Son are the source of the threefold light of the central universe and the worlds of the seven phases of pure-spirit reality.

### II. UB 13:3.2 — “Personality is not...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p3_2) — “Personality is not...”

**COMMENT**

1. No personalities are resident on these worlds—only other-than-personal beings.
2. These beings probably pertain to service on the projected worlds of outer space.
3. Every two-billion-year cycle witnesses the creation of new reserves of this order.

### III. UB 13:3.3 — “As far as I am...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p3_3) — “As far as I am...”

**COMMENT**

1. Even the personalities created by the Eternal Son do not go to these worlds.
2. All types of impersonal spirits are admitted to these luminous worlds.
3. High spirit personalities do not indulge idle curiosity—therefore refrain from visiting these secret worlds.

## 4. THE WORLDS OF THE INFINITE SPIRIT

### I. UB 13:4.1 — “Between the inner...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p4_1) — “Between the inner...”

**COMMENT**

1. The secret worlds of the Infinite Spirit are found between the worlds of the Son and the inner circuit of Havona.
2. The worlds of the Spirit are occupied by:
	- A. Offspring of the Infinite Spirit.
	- B. Trinitized sons of glorified personalities.
	- C. Unrevealed universe administrators.

### II. UB 13:4.2 — “The Seven Master Spirits...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p4_2) — “The Seven Master Spirits...”

**COMMENT**

1. The administration of the grand universe is conducted from these seven executive spheres.
2. The Seven Master Spirits are the mind-spirit co-ordinators of the master cosmos.

### III. UB 13:4.3 — “From these seven...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:4.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p4_3) — “From these seven...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Master Spirits equalize the cosmic-mind circuits and differentiate the presence of the Deities.
2. Physical reactions are uniform, but spiritual presence is determined by individual capacity for receptivity.

### IV. UB 13:4.4 — “Physical authority...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p4_4) — “Physical authority...”

**COMMENT**

1. Physical realities are unvarying in the universe, but things spiritual are dependent on attitudes of will creatures.
2. The spiritual presence of absolute Deity is not influenced by creature attitude, but the work of subabsolute Deity is influenced by the creature attitude.
3. The presence of divinity is not whimsical; it is determined by the free will of personality.

### V. UB 13:4.5 — “The determiner of...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p4_5) — “The determiner of...”

**COMMENT**

1. The determiner of the spiritual presence consists in the choosing of the freewill creature.
2. Thus does the spirit of divinity become obedient to the choosing of the creature.

### VI. UB 13:4.6 — “The executive abodes...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:4.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p4_6) — “The executive abodes...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Master Spirit on each world presides over one of the seven superuniverses.
2. These executive worlds are open to all beings who desire to visit thereon.

### VII. UB 13:4.7 — “To me...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 13:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p4_7) — “To me...”

**COMMENT**

1. These executive worlds are the most intriguing spheres outside of Paradise—the activities being material, intellectual, and spiritual.
2. These worlds are favorite spheres for “vacations” by numerous celestial beings.
3. In no other place can you observe such a revelation of the seven levels of universe reality.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Transcript_of_Lecture">Transcript of Lecture and Discussion of The Foreword by William Sadler, Jr.</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/2">Paper 2. The Nature of God</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>