---
title: "Workbook I — Foreword and Part I — Paper 15. The Seven Superuniverses"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: theology, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1959 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/14">Paper 14. The Central and Divine Universe</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/16">Paper 16. The Seven Master Spirits</a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## INTRODUCTION

### I. UB 15:0.1 — “As far as...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p0_1) — “As far as...”

**COMMENT**

1. God as a father deals with individuals. Practically speaking, the universes are nonexistent.
2. The Son and the Spirit deal more directly with the local universes.
3. The Trinity is concerned more with the seven superuniverses.
4. A Master Spirit is concerned with a single superuniverse.

The Ancients of Days maintain intelligent control of both physical and spiritual forces designed to facilitate intellectual advancement and spiritual growth of all will creatures.

## 1. THE SUPERUNIVERSE SPACE LEVEL

### I. UB 15:1.1 — “Within the limited range...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p1_1) — “Within the limited range...”

**COMMENT**

1. Urantia and its universe are not plunging into new and uncharted space.
2. The galaxies are controlled and are swinging in majestic grandeur around Paradise.

Our local universe pursues a definite space path. It is a comparatively recent creation. Its position in the Milky Way galaxy is well known.

## 2. ORGANIZATION OF THE SUPERUNIVERSES

### I. UB 15:2.1 — “Only the Universal Father...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p2_1) — “Only the Universal Father...”

**COMMENT**

Only God the Father knows the number and name of all the inhabited worlds in the grand universe.

This section presents the organization plan of the grand universe—from the local system to the superuniverse capital.

## 3. THE SUPERUNIVERSE OF ORVONTON

### II. UB 15:3.4 — “Of the ten major...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p3_4) — “Of the ten major...”

**COMMENT**

Of the ten major divisions of Orvonton, Urantia astronomers have identified eight.

### III. UB 15:3.5 — “The rotational center...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p3_5) — “The rotational center...”

**COMMENT**

Our minor sector (Ensa) revolves around the center of the Sagittarius star cloud.

Description of the Milky Way. The astronomical position of Urantia. Dimensions of the Milky Way like a watch. Paradise lies beyond the area of greatest density of the Milky Way. Story of the Andronover nebula and the birth of the solar system. Nebadon and associated universes revolve around Sagittarius. Story of the seven different stellar movements. Orvonton moves counterclockwise around Paradise. Physical organization of a local universe.

## 4. NEBULAE—THE ANCESTORS OF UNIVERSES

Mystery of the ultimatons and the force charge of space. Universe organization. Paradise force organizers transmute space potency and power directors organize it. The mystery of energy segmentation. Paradise force organisers are nebulae originators. Suns originate in these mother wheels of space. A mother wheel may give origin to one hundred million suns. Administrative units are not related to nebulae organization. Story of spiral nebulae. Andromeda. Constitution of the Milky Way. Magellanic cloud. Stellar gas.[UB 15:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p4_1)

## 5. THE ORIGIN OF SPACE BODIES

Origin of planets—ten different methods. One hundred ways of sun formation.[UB 15:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p5_1)

## 6. THE SPHERES OF SPACE

The spheres of space—suns, dark islands, minor space bodies, planets. Architectural spheres. Suns that shine without heat. Solar dynamos. More than ten million blazing suns in Orvonton. Dark islands are gravity controllers. Comets. Inhabited planets. Dead suns. Three inhabitable planets in our solar system.[UB 15:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p6_1)

## 7. THE ARCHITECTURAL SPHERES

Architectural capitals independently lighted and heated. Standard Orvonton time. Economy of headquarters worlds is material, morontial, and spiritual. Jerusem and seven cultural worlds. Edentia and 70 satellites. Salvington and 490 worlds. Uminor the third and Umajor the fifth. Uversa and 490 worlds.[UB 15:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p7_1)

## 8. ENERGY CONTROL AND REGULATION

Energy control and regulation. Superuniverse capitals centers of energy control—power centers and physical controllers. Physical energy circuits take 968 million years to complete circuit of superuniverse. Velocity and mass are determining factors. Gravity and antigravity. Stellar collisions. Energy regulation. The Absolutes and experiential Deities. The universe does not run down.[UB 15:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p8_1)

## 9. CIRCUITS OF THE SUPERUNIVERSES

Universal gravity circuits. The seven superuniverse circuits. The three local universe circuits. Blending circuits—settling a universe in light and life. Essentials of superuniverse membership.[UB 15:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p9_1)

## 10. RULERS OF THE SUPERUNIVERSES

### I. UB 15:10.1 — “The headquarters...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:10.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p10_1) — “The headquarters...”

**COMMENT**

1. The executive branch of superuniverse government is directed by one of the Seven Master Spirits.
2. The Master Spirits administer the superuniverses through their

### II. UB 15:10.2 — “The superuniverse headquarters...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:10.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p10_2) — “The superuniverse headquarters...”

**COMMENT**

The reflectivity mechanism of the grand universe operates from the capitals of the seven superuniverses.

### III. UB 15:10.3 — “Each superuniverse is...” and “The three...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:10.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p10_3) — “Each superuniverse is...” and “The three...”

**COMMENT**

The three Ancients of Days rule a superuniverse, assisted by:
1. One billion Perfectors of Wisdom.
2. Three billion Divine Counselors.
3. One billion Universal Censors.

### IV. UB 15:10.12 — “The remaining three orders...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:10.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p0_12) — “The remaining three orders...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Ancients of Days are also assisted by three orders of glorified ascendant mortals:
	- A. Mighty Messengers.
	- B. Those High in Authority.
	- C. Those Without Name and Number.
2. These three groups are known as Trinitized Sons of Attainment.
3. They are all dual-origin mortals who became finaliters and were then embraced by the Trinity.

### V. UB 15:10.21 — “The Reflective Image Aids...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:10.21](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p0_21) — “The Reflective Image Aids...”

**COMMENT**

On the superuniverse capitals, the Reflective Image Aids function as representing numerous groups who are related to the superuniverse governments—such as:
1. Manifestations of the Supreme Being.
2. Unqualified Supervisors of the Supreme.
3. Qualified Vicegerents of the Ultimate.
4. Liaison reflectivators of Majeston.
5. Superpersonal spirit representatives of the Eternal Son.

## 6. THE DELIBERATIVE ASSEMBLY

### I. UB 15:11.1 — “It is on such worlds...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:11.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p11_1) — “It is on such worlds...”

**COMMENT**

1. On Uversa the autocracy of perfection and the democracy of evolution meet face to face.
2. The superuniverse government is constituted as follows:
	- A. Executive branch originates in the realms of perfection.
	- B. The legislative branch derives from the flowering of the evolutionary universes.

### II. UB 15:11.3 — “Never have I known...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:11.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p11_3) — “Never have I known...”

**COMMENT**

1. In superuniverse government, the executive and legislative branches never disagree.
2. All this proves that evolutionary beings can attain to heights of perfected wisdom.
3. It also demonstrates the wisdom of the Father’s plan of the Paradise ascension.

## 12. THE SUPREME TRIBUNALS

### I. UB 15:12.2 — “The courts of the...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:12.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p12_2) — “The courts of the...”

**COMMENT**

1. The tribunals of the Ancients of Days are the supreme courts for all component local universes.
2. Local universe courts are well-nigh supreme except in matters involving the extinction of will creatures.
3. Mandates for the extinction of will creatures originate on, and are executed from, the headquarters of the superuniverses.

## 13. THE SECTOR GOVERNMENTS

This section deals with the organization and conduct of the minor and major sector governments of the seven superuniverses.[UB 15:13.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p13_1)

## 14. PURPOSES OF THE SEVEN SUPERUNIVERSES

### I. UB 15:14.2 — “Orvonton, the seventh...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 15:14.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/15#p14_2) — “Orvonton, the seventh...”

**COMMENT**

Orvonton is renowned for:
1. Lavish bestowal of mercy.
2. Justice tempered by mercy.
3. Power conditioned by patience.
4. Time sacrificed to secure eternal stabilizations.

Further summary of Section 14. The seven major purposes of the superuniverses. The seventh superuniverse is something like a “meaning-of-the-whole.” Much going on in Orvonton remains unrevealed. Urantia is No. 606 in Satania which now has 619 inhabited worlds. Relation of system to other superuniverse divisions.

## DISCUSSION OF THE NUMBER SEVEN IN THE BIBLE

1. The seven-day week origin in Eden. (See [Gen. creation week](/en/Bible/Genesis/1.htm).)
2. Noah waited seven days to send the dove out the second time. “He waited another seven days, and again he sent forth the dove.” **[Gen 8:10](/en/Bible/Genesis/8#v10)**.
3. Moses waited seven days after smiting the Nile. “Seven days passed after the Lord had struck the Nile.” **[Ex 7:25](/en/Bible/Exodus/7#v25)**.
4. Samuel tarries seven days at Gilgal. “Seven days you shall wait, until I come to you and show you what you shall do.” **[1 Sam 10:8](/en/Bible/1_Samuel/10#v8)**.
5. After seven days the word of the Lord came to Ezekiel. “And I sat there overwhelmed among them seven days.” **[Eze 3:15](/en/Bible/Ezekiel/3#v15)**.
6. Paul stopped seven days at Troas. “We came to them at Troas, where we stayed for seven days.” **[Acts 20:6](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/20#v6)**.
7. He did the same thing at Tyre. “And having sought out the disciples, we stayed there for seven days.” **[Acts 21:4](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/21#v4)**.
8. Also at Puteoli. “There we found brethren, and were invited to stay with them for seven days.” **[Acts 28:14](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/28#v14)**.
9. The feasts lasted seven days. “Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread.” **[Ex 12:15](/en/Bible/Exodus/12#v15)**. “And the king gave...a banquet lasting for seven days.” **[Esther 1:5](/en/Bible/Esther/1#v5)**.
10. Priests and altars were consecrated for seven days. “The son who is priest in his place shall wear them seven days.” **[Ex 29:30](/en/Bible/Exodus/29#v30)**. “Through
11. Defilement lasted seven days. “Then she shall be unclean seven days.” **[Lev 12:2](/en/Bible/Leviticus/12#v2)**.
12. Fasting for seven days. “And they...fasted seven days.” **[1 Sam 31:13](/en/Bible/1_Samuel/31#v13)**.
13. Mourning for seven days. “And he made a mourning for his father seven days.” **[Gen 50:10](/en/Bible/Genesis/50#v10)**.
14. Seven years of service. “I will serve you seven years for your younger daughter.” **[Gen 29:18](/en/Bible/Genesis/29#v18)**.
15. Seven animals offered. “Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock apart.” **[Gen 21:28](/en/Bible/Genesis/21#v28)**.
16. The seven altars. “Build for me here seven altars.” **[Num 23:1](/en/Bible/Numbers/23#v1)**.
17. Sprinkled blood and oil seven times. “And the priest shall...sprinkle part of the blood seven times before the Lord.” **[Lev 4:6](/en/Bible/Leviticus/4#v6)**.
18. Marched around Jericho seven times on the seventh day and blew seven trumpets. “And seven priests shall bear seven trumpets...and on the seventh day you shall march around the city seven times.” **[Josh 6:4](/en/Bible/Joshua/6#v4)**.
19. Naaman dips seven times. “Go and wash in the Jordan seven times.” **[2 Kings 5:10](/en/Bible/2_Kings/5#v10)**.
20. Bowing seven times. “He himself went on before them, bowing himself to the ground seven times.” **[Gen 33:3](/en/Bible/Genesis/33#v3)**.
21. Praise God seven times. “Seven times a day I praise thee.” **[Ps 119:164](/en/Bible/Psalms/119#v164)**.
22. Restoration sevenfold. “And if he is caught, he will pay sevenfold.” **[Prov 6:31](/en/Bible/Proverbs/6#v31)**.
23. Forgiveness seven times. “Jesus said to him, ‘I do not say to you seven times, but seventy times seven.’” **[Matt 18:22](/en/Bible/Matthew/18#v22)**.
24. Seven deacons. “Pick out from among you seven men of good repute.” **[Acts 6:3](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/6#v3)**.
25. The seven churches. “John to the seven churches.” **[Rev 1:4](/en/Bible/Revelation/1#v4)**.
26. Job’s seven troubles. “He will deliver you from six troubles; in seven there shall no evil touch you.” **[Job 5:19](/en/Bible/Job/5#v19)**.
27. The seven lamps. “And you shall make the seven lamps for it.” **[Ex 25:37](/en/Bible/Exodus/25#v37)**.
28. Seven evil spirits. “Then he goes and brings with him seven other spirits more evil than himself.” **[Matt 12:45](/en/Bible/Matthew/12#v45)**.
29. The seven trumpet angels. “Then I saw the seven angels...and seven trumpets were given to them.” **[Rev 8:2](/en/Bible/Revelation/8#v2)**.
30. The seven last plagues. “Then I saw...seven angels with seven plagues.” **[Rev 15:1](/en/Bible/Revelation/15#v1)**.
31. The seven seals. “Then I saw...a scroll...sealed with seven seals.” **[Rev 5:1](/en/Bible/Revelation/5#v1)**.
32. The seven thunders. “The seven thunders sounded.” **[Rev 10:3](/en/Bible/Revelation/10#v3)**.
33. The sabbatical year.

**Note**: All of this seven business could hardly be derived from the seven-day week. You should also recall how the number seven appears in the periodic arrangement of chemistry.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/14">Paper 14. The Central and Divine Universe</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/16">Paper 16. The Seven Master Spirits</a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>