---
title: "Workbook I — Foreword and Part I — Paper 17. The Seven Supreme Spirit Groups"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: astronomy, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/16">Paper 16. The Seven Master Spirits</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/18">Paper 18. The Supreme Trinity Personalities</a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Author: **William S. Sadler**

## INTRODUCTION

### I. UB 17:0.1 — “The seven Supreme Spirit groups...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p0_1) — “The seven Supreme Spirit groups...”

**COMMENT**

The first three groups are created by the Trinity and the last four by the Infinite Spirit or his associates.

## 1. THE SEVEN SUPREME EXECUTIVES

### I. UB 17:1.4 — “These Supreme Executives do not originate...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p1_4) — “These Supreme Executives do not originate...”

**COMMENT**

1. These executives do not originate policies; they are the over-all administrators of the Seven Master Spirits.
2. They also co-ordinate the policies of all rulers of the grand universe.

### II. UB 17:1.8 — “Each Supreme Executive...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:1.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p1_8) — “Each Supreme Executive...”

**COMMENT**

Each Supreme Executive has two cabinets:
1. Children of the Infinite Spirit.
2. Mortals of Paradise attainment and trinitized sons of glorified mortals.

## 2. MAJESTON—CHIEF OF REFLECTIVITY

### I. UB 17:2.2 — “This momentous transaction...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p2_2) — “This momentous transaction...”

**COMMENT**

1. When the Seven Master Spirits completed creation of forty-nine Reflective Spirits a new universe reaction occurred.
2. Majeston was created by:
	- A. Seven Master Spirits.
	- B. Paradise Trinity.
	- C. Supreme Being.
	- D. Deity Absolute.

### II. UB 17:2.5 — “The creation of Majeston...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p2_5) — “The creation of Majeston...”

**COMMENT**

1. Majeston was the first supreme creative act of the Supreme Being.
2. Majeston was the greatest factualization since Havona.
3. The Deity response in the creation of Majeston was vastly beyond all expectations.

## 3. THE REFLECTIVE SPIRITS

### I. UB 17:3.1 — “The forty-nine Reflective Spirits...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p3_1) — “The forty-nine Reflective Spirits...”

**COMMENT**

1. Though Reflective Spirits are of Trinity origin, each resembles one of the Seven Master Spirits.
2. To portray all Deity traits of the Father, Son, and Spirit it requires seven diverse Reflective Spirits.
3. Accordingly, each superuniverse has seven diverse Reflective Spirits.

### II. UB 17:3.5 — “The Reflective Spirits are not...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p3_5) — “The Reflective Spirits are not...”

**COMMENT**

1. Reflective Spirits are retentive as well as transmitting personalities.
2. They produce seconaphim who also are retentive personalities.

### III. UB 17:3.7 — “The reflectivity organization...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:3.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p3_7) — “The reflectivity organization...”

**COMMENT**
The reflective system is in constant operation as both a news-gathering and a decree-disseminating mechanism.

## 4. THE REFLECTIVE IMAGE AIDS

## 5. THE SEVEN SPIRITS OF THE CIRCUITS

### I. UB 17:5.5 — “The Circuit Spirits are...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p5_5) — “The Circuit Spirits are...”

**COMMENT**

1. These spirits are related to Havona natives much as Adjusters are related to mortals.
2. But these Spirits never become a part of the Havona personality.
6. THE LOCAL UNIVERSE CREATIVE SPIRITS

### II. UB 17:6.1 — “Much that pertains...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p6_1) — “Much that pertains...”

**COMMENT**

There are six **known** phases of the universe Mother Spirits:
1. Initial Paradise Differentiation.
2. Preliminary Creatorship Training.
3. The Stage of Physical Creation.
4. The Life-Creation Era.
5. The Postbestowal Ages.
6. The Ages of Light and Life.
7. The Unrevealed Career.

## 7. THE ADJUTANT MIND-SPIRITS

## 8. FUNCTIONS OF THE SUPREME SPIRITS

### I. UB 17:8.1 — “The seven groups of...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p8_1) — “The seven groups of...”

**COMMENT**

1. These Spirits operate from the Trinity on Paradise to mortals on evolutionary worlds.
2. They unify descending administrative levels.

### II. UB 17:8.2 — “Together with their...”

**REFERENCES**:[UB 17:8.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p8_2) — “Together with their...”

**COMMENT**

The vast host of ministering spirits are created by these Supreme Spirits.

### III. UB 17:8.3 — “The seven Supreme “Spirit groups...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 17:8.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p8_3) — “The seven Supreme “Spirit groups...”

**COMMENT**

1. These groups co-ordinate all inhabited creation—the grand universe.
2. The first group—the Seven Master Spirits—seems to co-ordinate the activities of God the Sevenfold.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/16">Paper 16. The Seven Master Spirits</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/18">Paper 18. The Supreme Trinity Personalities</a></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>