---
title: "Workbook I — Foreword and Part I — Paper 18. The Supreme Trinity Personalities"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: astronomy, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/17">Paper 17. The Seven Supreme Spirit Groups</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/19">Paper 19. The Co-Ordinate Trinity-Origin Beings</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

Author: **William S. Sadler**

## INTRODUCTION

### I. UB 18:0.1 — “Supreme Trinity Personalities...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p0_1) — “Supreme Trinity Personalities...”

**COMMENT**

They are designed for specific work and function in seven groups.

### II. UB 18:0.10 — “Throughout the grand universe...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:0.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p0_10) — “Throughout the grand universe...”

**COMMENT**

They are perfect administrators and represent the justice and **are** the executive judgment of the Paradise Trinity.

## 1. THE TRINITIZED SECRETS OF SUPREMACY

### I. UB 18:1.2 — “The Trinitized Secrets of Supremacy...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p1_2) — “The Trinitized Secrets of Supremacy...”

**COMMENT**

1. These Sons function as a council of ten as world rulers; they also function as individuals in charge of seven divisions of administration.
2. A group of three represent the Deities of the Trinity.

### II. UB 18:1.3 — “Although there is...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p1_3) — “Although there is...”

**COMMENT**

1. There is an over-all resemblance of these Secrets of Supremacy.
2. There is also a group characteristic distinguishing each company of ten. This is determined by the seven possible associations of the three Deities.

## 2. THE ETERNALS OF DAYS

### I. UB 18:2.1 — “Each of the billion worlds...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p2_1) — “Each of the billion worlds...”

**COMMENT**

1. One billion Eternals of Days rule the worlds of Havona. They are created by the Trinity.
2. They eternally rule the one world of original assignment.

### II. UB 18:2.4 — “The architecture...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:2.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p2_4) — “The architecture...”

**COMMENT**

1. All structures and embellishment of each Havona world are original and unique.
2. Ascenders spend some time on each of these worlds.
3. Havona is inward from our world rather than upward.

## 3. THE ANCIENTS OF DAYS

### I. UB 18:3.2 — “The Ancients of Days are...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p3_2) — “The Ancients of Days are...”

**COMMENT**

1. All Ancients of Days are identical. They disclose the unified nature of the Trinity.
2. They possess diverse personalities.
3. They provide a uniform direction of the otherwise seven different superuniverses.

### II. UB 18:3.3 — “The Seven Master Spirits...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p3_3) — “The Seven Master Spirits...”

**COMMENT**

1. The diverse Master Spirits determine the **nature** of their superuniverses.
2. The Ancients of Days provide the **administration**.
3. There is uniformity of administration in the presence of creative diversity.

### III. UB 18:3.4 — “The Ancients of Days were...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p3_4) — “The Ancients of Days were...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Ancients of Days represent the beginning of the personality records of the universes.
2. The first entry on universe records pertains to the creation of the 21 Ancients of Days.

## 4. THE PERFECTIONS OF DAYS

### I. UB 18:4.1 — “There are just two hundred...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p4_1) — “There are just two hundred...”

**COMMENT**

1. These beings rule the major sectors of the superuniverses.
2. They are the vicegerents of the Ancients of Days.

### II. UB 18:4.7 — “You will early see...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p4_7) — “You will early see...”

**COMMENT**

All ascenders contact these Sons; they administer pledges to the major sector graduates.

### III. UB 18:4.9 — “Although you are entered...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:4.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p4_9) — “Although you are entered...”

**COMMENT**

Ascenders pass through all ten of the major sectors in our superuniverse on the way to Havona.

## 5. THE RECENTS OF DAYS

### I. UB 18:5.1 — “The Recents of Days are the youngest...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p5_1) — “The Recents of Days are the youngest...”

**COMMENT**

1. They rule the minor sectors.
2. They were all trained by the Havona Eternals of Days.

### II. UB 18:5.5 — “You will all sometime know...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p5_5) — “You will all sometime know...”

**COMMENT**

Urantians will meet the Recents of Days on Uminor the third, the capital of our minor sector of Ensa.

## 6. THE UNIONS OF DAYS

### I. UB 18:6.1 — “The Trinity personalities...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p6_1) — “The Trinity personalities...”

**COMMENT**

1. The orders of “Days” do not function as administrators below the superuniverse level.
2. The Unions of Days represent the Paradise Trinity to the rulers of the local universes.
3. They also in a special manner represent the Universal Father.

### II. UB 18:6.5 — “A Union of Days is not...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p6_5) — “A Union of Days is not...”

**COMMENT**

1. These Sons are not organically connected with the local universe governments, and act only on request.
2. They are ex officio members of all primary councils.

## 7. THE FAITHFULS OF DAYS

### I. UB 18:7.1 — “These high Trinity-origin...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p7_1) — “These high Trinity-origin...”

**COMMENT**

1. These Sons are Paradise advisers to the constellation rulers—the Most Highs.
2. The reserve corps of these Sons is the Advisory Commission of Interuniverse Ethics and Self-government.
3. They rotate in service.

### II. UB 18:7.5 — “The Faithfuls of Days...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 18:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/18#p7_5) — “The Faithfuls of Days...”

**COMMENT**

1. These Sons are the last link in the long advisory chain extending from Paradise to the local universes.
2. The two lower units of local universe administration (systems and inhabited worlds) are wholly in the hands of native beings.

## BIBLE TEACHING ON THE JUDGMENT

1. **Judgment Day**—”Day of the Lord.”
	- **[2 Peter 2:9](/en/Bible/2_Peter/2#v9)**. “And to keep the unrighteous under punishment until the day of judgment.”
	- **[2 Peter 3:7](/en/Bible/2_Peter/3#v7)**. “Have been stored up for fire, being kept until the day of judgment.”
	- **[Matt 11:24](/en/Bible/Matthew/11#v24)**. “It shall be more tolerable on the day of judgment for the land of Sodom.”
*	- *John 12:31**. “Now is the judgment of this world.”
2. **Judgment Seat**—Throne
	- **[Rom 14:10](/en/Bible/Romans/14#v10)**. “For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of God.”
	- **[Ps 9:7](/en/Bible/Psalms/9#v7)**. “He has established his throne for judgment.”
	- **[Rev 20:4](/en/Bible/Revelation/20#v4)**. “I saw thrones, and seated on them were those to whom judgment was committed.”
3. **The Ancients of Days**
	- **[Dan 7:9](/en/Bible/Daniel/7#v9)**. “Thrones were placed and one that was Ancient of Days took his seat.”
	- **[Dan 7:13](/en/Bible/Daniel/7#v13)**. “Then came one like a son of man, and he came to the Ancient of Days and was presented before him.”
	- **[Dan 7:22](/en/Bible/7#v22)**. “Until the Ancient of Days came, and judgment was given for the saints of the Most High.”
	- These are the only references to the Ancients of Days in the Bible.
	- In **[Dan 7:10](/en/Bible/Daniel/7#v10)** it says: “The court sat in judgment and the books were opened.”
	- This recalls **Job 12:10**. “In his hand is the life of every living thing.”
	- The [Moffatt](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Moffatt) translation reads: “In whose control lies every living soul, and the whole life of man.”
4. **The Book of Life**
	- **[Dan 12:1](/en/Bible/Daniel/12#v1)**. “Your people shall be delivered, every one whose name shall be found written in the book.”
*	- **[Ps 69:28](/en/Bible/Psalms/69#v28)**. “Let them be blotted out of the book of the living.”
*	- **[Rev 20:12](/en/Bible/Revelation/20#v12)**. “Also another book was opened, which is the book of life.”
	- **[Phil 4:3](/en/Bible/Philippians/4#v3)**. “And the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.”
	- **[Rev 3:5](/en/Bible/Revelation/3#v5)**. “And I will not blot his name out of the book of life.”
5. **As You Judge**
	- **[Matt 7:2](/en/Bible/Matthew/7#v2)**. “For with the judgment you pronounce you will be judged.”
6. **According to Your Deeds**
	- **[Eccl 11:9](/en/Bible/Ecclesiastes/11#v9)**. “But know that...God will bring you into judgment.”
	- **[Eccl 12:14](/en/Bible/Ecclesiastes/12#v14)**. “For God will bring every deed into judgment, with every secret thing, whether good or evil.”
	- **[Matt 12:36](/en/Bible/Matthew/12#v36)**. “On the day of judgment men will render account for every careless word they utter.”
7. **God’s Judgment Is Just**
	- **[Job 34:12](/en/Bible/Job/34#v12)**. “And the Almighty will not pervert justice.”
	- **[Isa 30:18](/en/Bible/Isaiah/30#v18)**. “The Lord is a God of justice.”
	- **[Rom 2:2](/en/Bible/Romans/2#v2)**. “We know that the judgment of God rightly falls on those who do such things.”
	- **[Rom 11:33](/en/Bible/Romans/11#v33)**. “How unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways!”
8. **The Righteous Are Judged First**
	- **[1 Peter 4:17](/en/Bible/1_Peter/4#v17)**. “The time has come for judgment to begin with the household of God.”
	- **[Matt 24:31](/en/Bible/Matthew/24#v31)**. “And he will send out his angels...and they will gather his elect.”
9. **Judgment of Fallen Angels**
	- **[2 Peter 2:4](/en/Bible/2_Peter/2#v4)**. “For if God did not spare the angels when they sinned, but cast them into hell and committed them to pits of nether gloom to be kept until the judgment.”
	- **[Jude 6](/en/Bible/Jude/6)**. “And the angels that did not keep their own position...have been kept by him in eternal chains in the nether gloom until the judgment of the great day.”
10. **The Father Makes the Son Judge**
	- **[John 5:22](/en/Bible/John/5#v22)**. “The Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the Son.”
	- **[Rom 2:16](/en/Bible/Romans/2#v16)**. “On that day when...God judges the secrets of men by Christ Jesus.”
11. **The Saints Acting as Judges**
	- **[Dan 7:22](/en/Bible/Daniel/7#v22)**. “Until the Ancient of Days came, and judgment was given for the saints of the Most High.”
	- **[Luke 22:30](/en/Bible/Luke/22#v30)**. “That you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.”
	- **[1 Cor 6:2,3](/en/Bible/1_Corinthians/6#v2)**. “Do you not know that the saints will judge the world?... Do you not know that we are to judge angels?”

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/17">Paper 17. The Seven Supreme Spirit Groups</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/19">Paper 19. The Co-Ordinate Trinity-Origin Beings</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>