---
title: "Workbook I — Foreword and Part I — Paper 19. The Co-Ordinate Trinity-Origin Beings"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: astronomy, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/18">Paper 18. The Supreme Trinity Personalities</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/20">Paper 20. The Paradise Sons of God</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

Author: **William S. Sadler**

## INTRODUCTION

### I. UB 19:0.1 — “This Paradise group...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p0_1) — “This Paradise group...”

**COMMENT**

This is a mixed group of Trinity-origin beings with widely varying functions.

## 1. THE TRINITY TEACHER SONS

### I. UB 19:1.1 — “Of all the high orders...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_1) — “Of all the high orders...”

**COMMENT**

1. While these Sons are of Trinity origin, they function in the realms of divine sonship.
2. They bridge the gulf between Trinity- and dual-origin personalities.

### II. UB 19:1.4 — “In this connection...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p0_4) — “In this connection...”

**COMMENT**

1. Teacher Sons are the supreme co-ordinators of Trinity origin.
2. In the universe two great dangers exist:
	- A. The error of the circumscribed viewpoint.
	- B. The evil of a segmentalized conception of reality and divinity.

### III. UB 19:1.5 — “For example...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:1.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_5) — “For example...”

**COMMENT**

1. Ordinarily the human mind craves to approach problems by proceeding from the simple to the complex.
2. This technique may reveal origins, but it reveals little about destiny.

### IV. UB 19:1.7 — “When the human mind...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:1.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_7) — “When the human mind...”

**COMMENT**

Reasoning from the simple to the complex may involve four errors:
1. Failure to perceive the final goal.
2. Oversimplification of cosmic evolutionary reality.
3. Knowledge of causation does not necessarily indicate present status.
4. History does not reveal destiny. Ends are not shown in time beginnings.

### V. UB 19:1.12 — “Therefore, because of these...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:1.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p1_12) — “Therefore, because of these...”

**COMMENT**

The plan of _The_ Urantia Book is to approach planetary problems by starting out with the infinite, the eternal, and the divine.

## 2. THE PERFECTORS OF WISDOM

### I. UB 19:2.1 — “The Perfectors of Wisdom...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p2_1) — “The Perfectors of Wisdom...”

**COMMENT**

These are the specialized Trinity beings who personify divine wisdom.

### II. UB 19:2.3 — “Wherever and whenever...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p2_3) — “Wherever and whenever...”

**COMMENT**

1. When these beings function, Trinity wisdom functions.
2. Perfectors of Wisdom do not _reflect_ wisdom—they are wisdom.
3. They are fountains of discretion and wellsprings of discrimination to all.

### III. UB 19:2.5 — “The Perfectors of Wisdom...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p2_5) — “The Perfectors of Wisdom...”

**COMMENT**

1. Perfectors of Wisdom require the complement of experiential wisdom for administrative sagacity.
2. After becoming seventh stage spirits, Paradise finaliters may attain new heights of administrative wisdom in the ultimate universes of outer space.

## 3. THE DIVINE COUNSELORS

### I. UB 19:3.1 — “These Trinity-origin beings...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p3_1) — “These Trinity-origin beings...”

**COMMENT**

These Trinity-origin beings do not **reflect** divine counsel—they **are** that counsel.

### II. UB 19:3.2 — “Divine Counselors are...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p3_2) — “Divine Counselors are...”

**COMMENT**

1. From one to seven Counselors are associated with a Perfector of Wisdom and a Universal Censor.
2. All three orders serve throughout all divisions of the superuniverse government.

### III. UB 19:3.4 — “One Perfector of Wisdom...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p3_4) — “One Perfector of Wisdom...”

**COMMENT**

1. A tribunal of Trinity divinity, the highest mobile advisory body in the universe, consists of:
	- A. 1 Perfector of Wisdom.
	- B. 1 Universal Censor.
	- C. 7 Divine Counselors.
2. These advisers function as:
	- A. Fact finders.
	- B. Truth revealers.
	- C. Problem solvers.
3. Their verdicts and decisions are equivalent to the adjudication of the Ancients of Days.

## 4. THE UNIVERSAL CENSORS

### I. UB 19:4.1 — “There are exactly eight billion...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p4_1) — “There are exactly eight billion...”

**COMMENT**

1. These Censors **are** the judgment of Deity—the Paradise Trinity.
2. Ancients of Days do not sit in judgment without the Censors.

### II. UB 19:4.4 — “Whenever and wherever...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:4.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p4_4) — “Whenever and wherever...”

**COMMENT**

1. Censors render verdicts in association with Perfectors of Wisdom and Divine Counselors—their decisions represent the united wisdom, counsel, and judgment of the Trinity.
2. In this juridical trio—
	- A. Perfector of Wisdom is — “I was.”
	- B. Divine Counselor is — “I will be.”
	- C. Universal Censor is — “I am.”

### III. UB 19:4.5 — “The Censors are...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:4.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p4_5) — “The Censors are...”

**COMMENT**

1. Censors are universe totaling personalities.
2. Regardless of the number of witnesses or the multiplicity of evidence—the Censor totals the whole.
3. There is no appeal from the verdict of a Censor.

### IV. UB 19:4.7 — “But this is not...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p4_7) — “But this is not...”

**COMMENT**

1. It is impossible to forecast the Censor’s verdict.
2. It is possible to determine the Creator attitude and the creature experience, but Censor decisions are unpredictable.
3. The explanation: The Censors are probably in liaison with the Deity Absolute.

**Note**: Observation of a musical genius or a mathematical prodigy will afford some hint of how certain minds can almost automatically solve intricate mathematical problems. Recall how the seraphim knows the number of hairs on your head.

## 5. INSPIRED TRINITY SPIRITS

### I. UB 19:5.1 — “I will be able...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p5_1) — “I will be able...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Trinity Spirits are a wholly secret order of Trinity helpers.
2. Their number is probably not fixed.

### II. UB 19:5.2 — “We fully understand...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:5.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p5_2) — “We fully understand...”

**COMMENT**

1. We understand little about these Spirits. Perhaps they are superpersonal spirits.
2. They operate over all known circuits and are almost independent of both time and space.

### III. UB 19:5.4 — “The Melchizedeks...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p5_4) — “The Melchizedeks...”

**COMMENT**

Inspired Trinity Spirits may sometime in the future function in place of Solitary Messengers, whose ranks are gradually being depleted.

### IV. UB 19:5.5 — “I may relate...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p5_6) — “I may relate...”

**COMMENT**

1. Solitary Messengers detect both qualitative and quantitative response when in the presence of Inspired Trinity Spirits.
2. Thought Adjusters produce only a qualitative response.
3. There appears to be a close relationship between Inspired Trinity Spirits and Thought Adjusters.

### V. UB 19:5.9 — “We know that the...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:5.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p5_9) — “We know that the...”

**COMMENT**

1. Trinity Teacher Sons are devoted to conscious enlightenment.
2. Inspired Trinity Spirits may be concerned with **superconscious** techniques of creature enlightenment.
3. There may be a liaison function of these two types of spiritual teachers.

## 6. HAVONA NATIVES

### I. UB 19:6.1 — “The Havona natives are...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p6_1) — “The Havona natives are...”

**COMMENT**

Havona natives are created by the Paradise Trinity and are beyond the range of mortal conception.

### II. UB 19:6.4 — “The status evolution...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p6_4) — “The status evolution...”

**COMMENT**

1. The population of Havona is being gradually depleted by infiltration into the various finaliter corps.
2. Will this sometime stop? Or, will the population of Havona undergo a change in the future ages?
3. Possible future inhabitants of Havona may be:
	- A. Univitatia.
	- B. Superuniverse mortals from worlds long settled in light and life.
	- C. Spiritual aristocracy from the outer universes.

### III. UB 19:6.8 — “We know that the Havona...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:6.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p6_8) — “We know that the Havona...”

**COMMENT**

1. Present-day Havona differs from the Havona of former ages.
2. The future may bring about still other changes.
3. The universe is nonstatic; only God is changeless.

## 7. PARADISE CITIZENS

**REFERENCE**: [UB 19:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/19#p7_1) — “There are resident...”

**COMMENT**

There are more than three thousand orders of Paradise Citizens.

## WISDOM IN THE BIBLE

1. **The Spirit of Wisdom**
	- **[Isa 11:2](/en/Bible/Isaiah/11#v2)**. “And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord.” The spirit of wisdom (the seventh adjutant spirit) is mentioned first.
2. **Wisdom Is the Gift of God**
	- **[Ex 28:3](/en/Bible/Exodus/28#v3)**. “You shall speak to all who have ability, whom I have endowed with an able mind.” (King James Version: “Have endowed with wisdom.”)
	- **[1 Kings 3:28](/en/Bible/1_Kings/3#v28)**. “And they stood in awe of the king, because they perceived that the wisdom of God was in him.”
	- **[1 Kings 4:29, 30](/en/Bible/1_Kings/4#v29)**. “And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding beyond measure...so that Solomon’s wisdom surpassed the wisdom of all the people of the east.”
	- **[Prov 2:6](/en/Bible/Proverbs/2#v6)**. “For the Lord gives wisdom.”
	- **[Eph 1:17](/en/Bible/Ephesians/1#v17)**. “That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ...may give you a spirit of wisdom.”
	- **[Jas 1:5](/en/Bible/James/1#v5)**. “If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask God who gives to all men generously.”
3. **Wisdom a Spiritual Bestowal**
	- **[Ex 35:31](/en/Bible/Exodus/35#v31)**. “And he has filled him with the Spirit of God, with ability.” (Wisdom)
	- **[Deut 34:9](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/34#v9)**. “And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom.”
4. **Wisdom a Divine Attribute**
	- **[Job 12:13](/en/Bible/Job/12#v13)**. “With God are wisdom and might.”
	- **[Prov 3:13](/en/Bible/Proverbs/3#v13)**. “Happy is the man who finds wisdom.”
	- **[Eccl 8:1](/en/Bible/Ecclesiastes/8#v1)**. “A man’s wisdom makes his face shine.”
	- **[Dan 2:21](/en/Bible/Daniel/2#v21)**. “He gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to those who have understanding.”
5. **Fear of God the Beginning of Wisdom**
	- **[Job 28:28](/en/Bible/Job/28#v28)**. “Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom.”
	- **[Ps 111:10](/en/Bible/Psalms/111#v10)**. “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.”
	- **[Prov 9:10](/en/Bible/Proverbs/9#v10)**. “The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy One is insight.”
6. **Wisdom the Chief of All Goals**
	- **[Ps 90:12](/en/Bible/Psalms/90#v12)**. “So teach us to number our days that we may get a heart of wisdom.”
	- **[Prov 4:5](/en/Bible/Proverbs/4#v5)**. “Get wisdom; get insight.”
*	- *Prov 16:16**. “To get wisdom is better than gold.”
7. **The Folly of Worldly Wisdom**
	- **[1 Cor 3:19](/en/Bible/1_Corinthians/3#v19)**. “For the wisdom of this world is folly with God.”
	- **[Matt 11:25](/en/Bible/Matthew/11#v25)**. “Jesus declared, ‘I thank thee, Father...that thou hast hidden these things from the wise and understanding and revealed them to babes.’”
8. **Spiritual Wisdom**
	- **[Luke 7:35](/en/Bible/Luke/7#v35)**. “Wisdom is justified by all her children.”
	- **[Acts 6:3](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/6#v3)**. “Pick out from among you seven men of good repute, full of the Spirit and of wisdom.”
	- **[Col 1:9](/en/Bible/Colossians/1#v9)**. “That you may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding.”
	- **[Jas 3:17](/en/Bible/James/3#v17)**. “But the wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, open to reason, full of mercy and good fruits.”
9. **Conceit Is Not Wisdom**
	- **[Prov 3:7](/en/Bible/Proverbs/4#v7)**. “Be not wise in your own eyes.”
	- **[Prov 28:11](/en/Bible/Proverbs/28#v11)**. “A rich man is wise in his own eyes.”

**Note**: Many “wisdom” passages in the King James Version are rendered “ability” or “intelligence” in the Revised Standard Version.

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/18">Paper 18. The Supreme Trinity Personalities</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/20">Paper 20. The Paradise Sons of God</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>