---
title: "Workbook I — Foreword and Part I — Paper 21. The Paradise Creator Sons"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: theology, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/20">Paper 20. The Paradise Sons of God</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/22">Paper 22. The Trinitized Sons of God</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 1961 William S. Sadler<br>© 1961 Urantia Foundation</p>

## INTRODUCTION

### I. UB 21:0.1 — “The Creator Sons are...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p0_1) — “The Creator Sons are...”

**COMMENT**

1. These Sons are the creators and rulers of the local universes.
2. These sovereigns are unique in nature and personality.

### II. UB 21:0.2 — “In the vast work...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p0_2) — “In the vast work...”

**COMMENT**

1. In perfecting and evolving the local universes, these Creator Sons enjoy the full support of the Universal Father.
2. This profound affection of Father and Son is the wellspring of human affection.

## 1. ORIGIN AND NATURE OF CREATOR SONS

### I. UB 21:1.1 — “When the fullness of...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p1_1) — “When the fullness of...”

**COMMENT**

1. Creator Sons are produced by the Father and the Son when:
	- A. Fullness of absolute spiritual ideation in the Son encounters
	- B. Fullness of absolute personality concept in the Father.
2. These original Sons of the perfect ideal and the powerful idea are only-begotten Sons.

### II. UB 21:1.2 — “Each Creator Son is...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:1.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p1_2) — “Each Creator Son is...”

**COMMENT**

1. Each Creator Son is the absolute of the united deity concepts of his origin.
2. Such Sons are the only-begettable offspring of such eternal and perfect minds.
3. Each Son is the final and eternal expression of the infinite potential of the concept of his origin.

### III. UB 21:1.4 — “I do not know...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:1.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p1_4) — “I do not know...”

**COMMENT**

1. There are more than 700,000 Creator Sons in existence.
2. Michael Sons continue to be created.
3. The destiny of Creator Sons above the 700,000 is not revealed.

## 2. THE CREATORS OF LOCAL UNIVERSES

### I. UB 21:2.1 — “The Paradise Sons...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_1) — “The Paradise Sons...”

**COMMENT**

1. Michael Creators are designers, creators, and administrators of local universes.
2. They choose the cosmic sites for their universes.
3. These Sons, before undertaking creative work, undergo long special training.

### II. UB 21:2.3 — “The departure of a...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_3) — “The departure of a...”

**COMMENT**

Creator Sons are limited by the following:
1. Energy-matter is dominated by the Infinite Spirit.
2. Creature types are controlled by the Eternal Son.
3. Personality is bestowed by the Universal Father.

### III. UB 21:2.9 — “When such a perfect...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:2.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_9) — “When such a perfect...”

**COMMENT**

1. Materialization is effected by the liaison of Creator Sons and the Daughters of the Infinite Spirit.
2. Subsequent to physical creation they produce their universe family of living creatures.
3. Now the local universe Mother Spirit assumes the qualities of personality.

### IV. UB 21:2.10 — “Notwithstanding that all...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_10) — “Notwithstanding that all...”

**COMMENT**

1. Michaels are unique, diverse, and exclusive in nature and personality.
2. This insures that local universes will also be unique and diverse.

### V. UB 21:2.12 — “The personal presence...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:2.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_12) — “The personal presence...”

**COMMENT**

The smooth running of a local universe does not require the personal presence of the Creator Son.


## 3. LOCAL UNIVERSE SOVEREIGNTY

### I. UB 21:3.1 — “A Creator Son is given...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p3_1) — “A Creator Son is given...”

**COMMENT**

1. The leasehold of a local universe is granted by the Trinity and one of the Seven Master Spirits.
2. The Creator Son earns his complete sovereignty by his seven bestowals.
3. Before earned sovereignty, the Michael Son reigns as vicegerent of the Father.

### II. UB 21:3.2 — “A Creator Son could assert...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p3_2) — “A Creator Son could assert...”

**COMMENT**

At any time a Michael could assert full sovereignty regardless of bestowals, but such action would deprive him of his Paradise advisers.

### III. UB 21:3.3 — “The fact of creatorship...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:3.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p3_3) — “The fact of creatorship...”

**COMMENT**
	- N. Michael is known who ever asserted his sovereignty before completing his seven bestowals.

### IV. UB 21:3.4 — “The sovereignty of a Creator Son...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p3_4) — “The sovereignty of a Creator Son...”

**COMMENT**

There are seven stages of a Creator Son’s sovereignty, as follows:
1. Initial vicegerent sovereignty.
2. Conjoint vicegerent sovereignty.
3. Augmenting vicegerent sovereignty.
4. Supreme sovereignty.
5. Augmenting supreme sovereignty.
6. Trinitarian sovereignty.
7. Unrevealed sovereignty.

### V. UB 21:3.16 — “The technique of obtaining...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:3.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p3_16) — “The technique of obtaining...”

**COMMENT**

Local universe supreme sovereignty involves seven experiential steps, starting with seven bestowals, each dedicated to a different will of Deity, and culminating in a new and higher relationship with the Supreme Being.

## 4. THE MICHAEL BESTOWALS

### I. UB 21:4.1 — “There are seven groups...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p4_1) — “There are seven groups...”

**COMMENT**

There are seven groups of bestowal Creator Sons—depending on the number of their bestowals.

### II. UB 21:4.2 — “Avonal bestowals are...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p4_2) — “Avonal bestowals are...”

**COMMENT**

1. Michael bestowals differ from the Avonal bestowals.
2. Michael bestowals portray the seven primary expressions of the nature and will of Paradise Deity on seven different creature levels.

## 5. RELATION OF MASTER SONS TO THE UNIVERSE

### I. UB 21:5.1 — “The power of a...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p5_1) — “The power of a...”

**COMMENT**
The sovereignty of a Master Michael is supreme because it embraces both the sevenfold Deity viewpoint and a sevenfold creature attitude and synthesizes the two.

### II. UB 21:5.10 — “The Master Sons seem...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:5.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p5_10) — “The Master Sons seem...”

**COMMENT**

1. Master Sons maintain contact with their bestowal worlds—also with worlds of the Avonal bestowals.
2. Chief of this contact technique is the Spirit of Truth.
3. Michaels have unbroken connection with the Eternal Son.
4. Their sympathetic reach extends from the Paradise Father to the lowly mortals.

## 6. DESTINY OF THE MASTER MICHAELS

### I. UB 21:6.1 — “No one may...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:6.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p6_1) — “No one may...”

**COMMENT**

1. Each Paradise Michael is the **absolute** of the dual concepts of his origin.
2. The work of the Michaels in the finite local universes does not afford expression for their full potentials.
3. The Michael superfinite capacities must pertain to the universes of a future age.
4. But no one really knows what the future work of the Michaels may be.

### II. UB 21:6.3 — “It is highly probable...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p6_3) — “It is highly probable...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Michaels are probably destined to service in the now mobilizing universes of outer space.
2. Master Sons and seventh stage Creative Spirits may attain absonite levels of new things, meanings, and values.
3. This absonite service could be on the transcendental levels of the Ultimate.

### III. UB 21:6.4 — “Just as the Deity...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 21:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p6_4) — “Just as the Deity...”

**COMMENT**

1. As the Supreme Being is actualizing by experience, so the Michaels may be in preparation for future augmented service.
2. Said Jesus: “I am the way, the truth, and the life.”
3. The Michaels are blazing the path that leads from supremacy through ultimate absonity to eternal deity finality.

## WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES ABOUT THE SON OF GOD

Throughout the New Testament Michael, our Creator Son, is confused with the Eternal Son of Paradise—the Second Person of Deity and a member of the Trinity.

1. **The Divinity of Jesus**
	- **[Mark 1:1](/en/Bible/Mark/1#v1)**. “The gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.”
	- **[John 17:5](/en/Bible/John/17#v5)**. “Father, glorify thou me...with the glory which I had with thee before the world was made.”
	- **[Col 2:9](/en/Bible/Colossians/2#v9)**. “For in him the whole fulness of deity dwells bodily.”
	- **[Matt 26:64](/en/Bible/Matthew/26#v64)**. “I tell you, hereafter you will see the Son of man seated at the right hand of Power.”
	- **[John 10:30](/en/Bible/John/10#v30)**. “I and the Father are one.”
	- **[Mark 8:29](/en/Bible/Mark/8#v29)**. “Peter answered him, ‘You are the Christ.’”
	- **[1 Cor 1:24](/en/Bible/1_Corinthians/1#v24)**. “Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.”
	- **[Matt 12:8](/en/Bible/Matthew/12#v8)**. “The Son of man is lord of the sabbath.”
	- **[Matt 9:6](/en/Bible/Matthew/9#v6)**. “That you may know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins.”
	- **[John 5:26](/en/Bible/John/5#v26)**. “He has granted the Son also to have life in himself.”
	- **[John 11:25](/en/Bible/John/11#v25)**. “Jesus said to her, ‘I am the resurrection and the life.’”
	- **[Heb 2:14](/en/Bible/Hebrews/2#v14)**. “That through death he might destroy him who has the power of death.”
	- **[John 10:17](/en/Bible/John/10#v17)**. “I lay down my life, that I may take it again.”
2. **The Humanity of Jesus**
	- **[John 1:14](/en/Bible/John/1#v14)**. “The Word became flesh and dwelt among us.”
	- **[Matt 8:20](/en/Bible/Matthew/8#v20)**. “And Jesus said to him: ‘Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man has nowhere to lay his head.’”
	- **[Heb 5:8](/en/Bible/Hebrews/5#v8)**. “Although he was a Son, he learned obedience through what he suffered.”
	- **[Mark 9:12](/en/Bible/Mark/9#v12)**. “That he should suffer many things and be treated with contempt.”
	- **[Heb 2:18](/en/Bible/Hebrews/2#v18)**. “He himself has suffered and been tempted.”
	- **[Mark 14:34](/en/Bible/Mark/14#v34)**. “And he said to them, ‘My soul is very sorrowful, even to death.’”
	- **[John 11:35](/en/Bible/John/11#v35)**. “Jesus wept.”
	- **[Heb 4:15](/en/Bible/Hebrews/4#v15)**. “One who in every respect has been tempted as we are, yet without sinning.”
3. **Sovereignty of Jesus**
	- **[1 Tim 6:15](/en/Bible/1_Timothy/6#v15)**. “Blessed and only Sovereign.”
	- **[1 Cor 15:25](/en/Bible/1_Corinthians/15#v25)**. “For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet.”
	- **[Col 2:10](/en/Bible/Colossians/2#v10)**. “Him, who is the head of all rule and authority.”
	- **[1 Cor 15:27](/en/Bible/1_Corinthians/15#v27)**. “For God has put all things in subjection under his feet.”
	- **[Eph 1:22](/en/Bible/Ephesians/1#v22)**. “And he has put all things under his feet and has made him head over all things.”
	- **[Acts 8:10](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/8#v10)**. “‘This man is that power of God which is called Great.’”
	- **[Matt 28:18](/en/Bible/Matthew/28#v18)**. “And Jesus...said to them: ‘All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.’”
	- **[Mark 14:62](/en/Bible/Mark/14#v62)**. “‘And you will see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of Power.’”
	- **[John 18:37](/en/Bible/John/18#v37)**. “Jesus answered, ‘You say that I am a king. For this I was born, and for this I have come into the world.’”
	- **[Rev 17:14](/en/Bible/Revelation/17#v14)**. “The Lamb will conquer them, for he is Lord of lords and King of kings.”
	- **[Mark 13:26](/en/Bible/Mark/13#v26)**. “And then they will see the Son of man coming in clouds with great power and glory.”
4. Jesus as the Atonement Sacrifice
	- **[John 10:11](/en/Bible/John/10#v11)**. “The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.”
	- **[1 Peter 2:21](/en/Bible/1_Peter/2#v21)**. “Christ also suffered for you.”
	- **[Heb 2:17](/en/Bible/Hebrews/2#v17)**. “To make expiation for the sins of the people.”
	- **[1 Peter 3:18](/en/Bible/1_Peter/3#v18)**. “For Christ also died for sins once for all.”
	- **[John 1:29](/en/Bible/John/1#v29)**. “‘Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world.”
	- **[2 Cor.5:21](/en/Bible/2_Corinthians/5#v21)**. “For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no sin, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.”
	- **[Gal 1:4](/en/Bible/Galatians/1#v4)**. “Who gave himself for our sins.”
	- **[Matt 20:28](/en/Bible/Matthew/20#v28)**. “‘Even as the Son of man came...to give his life a ransom for many.’”
	- **[1 Peter 1:18](/en/Bible/1_Peter/1#v18)**. “You know that you were ransomed...with the precious blood of Christ.”
	- **[Eph 1:7](/en/Bible/Ephesians/1#v7)**. “We have redemption through his blood.”
	- **[1 John 1:7](/en/Bible/1_John/1#v7)**. “And the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin.”
	- **[Rom 8:34](/en/Bible/Romans/8#v34)**. “Is it Christ Jesus...who indeed intercedes for us?”
5. **The Kingdom of Heaven**
	- A. **Jesus’ Gospel**
		- **[Luke 12:32](/en/Bible/Luke/12#v32)**. “Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.”
		- **[John 18:36](/en/Bible/John/18#v36)**. “My kingship is not of this world.”
		- **[Matt 4:23](/en/Bible/Matthew/4#v23)**. “And he went about all Galilee...preaching the gospel of the kingdom.”
		- **[Luke 24:47](/en/Bible/Luke/24#v47)**. “And that repentance and forgiveness of sins should be preached in his name to all nations.”
		- **[Mark 12:30, 31](/en/Bible/Mark/12#30)**. “‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart...you shall love your neighbor as yourself.’”
		- **Note**: In the religion **of** Jesus the gospel of the kingdom was: The Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man. Peace, forgiveness, liberty, and eternal life were the results of that faith which accepted the salvation of the gospel.
	- B. **The Apostolic Gospel** (The religion **about** Jesus)
		- **[Acts. 2:32, 33, 38](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/2#v32)**. “This Jesus God raised up, and...Being therefore exalted at the right hand of God...has poured out this which you see and hear...And Peter said to them, ‘Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins.’”
		- **[Acts 20:24](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/20#v24)**. “The ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify to the gospel of the grace of God.”
		- **[Eph 1:13](/en/Bible/Ephesians/1#v13)**. “You...who have heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, and have believed in him.”
		- **[Eph 6:15](/en/Bible/Ephesians/6#v15)**. “And having shod your feet...with the gospel of peace.”
		- **[Mark 1:1](/en/Bible/Mark/1#v1)**. “The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.”
		- **[Rom 2:16](/en/Bible/Romans/2#v16)**. “On that day when, according to my gospel, God judges the secrets of men by Christ Jesus.”
6. **Jesus and the Lucifer Rebellion**
	- **[Luke 9:1](/en/Bible/Luke/8#v1)**. “And he called the twelve together and gave them power and authority over all demons.”
	- **[Luke 10:18](/en/Bible/Luke/10#v18)**. “And he said to them, ‘I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.’”
	- **[John 16:11](/en/Bible/John/16#v11)**. “The ruler of this world is judged.”
7. **Michael in the Bible**
	- Michael as the name of human beings occurs about a dozen times in the Old Testament. As applied to supermortals, it is found in five passages.
	- **[Dan 10:13](/en/Bible/Daniel/10#v13)**. “But Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me.”
	- **[Dan 10:21](/en/Bible/Daniel/10#v21)**. “There is none who contends by my side against these except Michael, your prince.”
	- **[Dan 12:1](/en/Bible/Daniel/12#v1)**. “At that time shall arise Michael, the great prince who has charge of your people.”
	- **[Jude 1:9](/en/Bible/Jude/1#v9)**. “But when the archangel Michael, contending with the devil, disputed about the body of Moses.”
	- **[Rev 12:7](/en/Bible/Revelation/12#v7)**. “Michael and his angels fighting against the dragon.”

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
	<table>
		<tbody>
			<tr>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/20">Paper 20. The Paradise Sons of God</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
				<td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/22">Paper 22. The Trinitized Sons of God</a></td>
			</tr>
		</tbody>
	</table>
</figure>