---
title: "Workbook I — Foreword and Part I — Paper 31. The Corps of the Finality"
description: 
published: true
date: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
tags: astronomy, study aid, william sadler
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2022-10-08T14:02:03.086Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/22">Paper 22. The Trinitized Sons of God</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

Author: **William S. Sadler**

## INTRODUCTION

### I. UB 31:0.10 — “During the present...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:0.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p0_10) — “During the present...”

**COMMENT**

1. Finaliters serve in all seven superuniverses.
2. Thus they gain the sevenfold concept of the Supreme Being.

### II. UB 31:0.12 — “We have no idea...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:0.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p0_12) — “We have no idea...”

**COMMENT**

The corps is wholly a self-governing body.

## 1. THE HAVONA NATIVES

### I. UB 31:1.1 — “Many of the Havona natives...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p1_1) — “Many of the Havona natives...”

**COMMENT**

1.Millions of Havoners register to join the Mortal Finaliter Corps.
2.They provide the viewpoint of one born in perfection.

### II. UB 31:1.3 — “The inhabitants of the...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:1.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p1_3) — “The inhabitants of the...”

**COMMENT**

1. Only one Havoner may join a company of 1000.
2. A company of mortal finaliters includes:
	- A. 997 Ascendant beings.
	- B. 1 Havona Native.
	- C. 1 Gravity Messinger.
	- D. 1 Temporary member.

## 2. GRAVITY MESSENGERS

### I. UB 31:2.1 — “Wherever and whenever...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:2.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p2_1) — “Wherever and whenever...”

**COMMENT**

1. Gravity Messengers are directed by Grandfanda—assigned only to the Mortal Corps of the Finality.
2. Messengers attached to the other corps are not personalized—they are absonitized.

### II. UB 31:2.2 — “Gravity Messengers hail from...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p2_2) — “Gravity Messengers hail from...”

**COMMENT**

1. Gravity Messengers are modified and personalized Adjusters.
2. Finaliters cannot ignore time and space, but the Messengers can.

### III. UB 31:2.3 — “Gravity Messengers may be...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p2_3) — “Gravity Messengers may be...”

**COMMENT**

Only one Messenger belongs to a finaliter company, but unlimited numbers may be attached.

## 3. GLORIFIED MORTALS

### I. UB 31:3.1 — “Ascendant Adjuster-fused...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:3.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p3_1) — “Ascendant Adjuster-fused...”

**COMMENT**

1. The Corps contains more mortals than seraphim.
2. Mortals and seraphim make up all but one per cent of each finaliter company.

### II. UB 31:3.2 — “We of Uversa...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p3_2) — “We of Uversa...”

**COMMENT**

1. Finaliters for the time being serve in the Corps of Light and Life assigned to the superuniverses.
2. Future destiny—probably outer space.

## 4. ADOPTED SERAPHIM

### I. UB 31:4.1 — “Many of the faithful...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:4.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p4_1) — “Many of the faithful...”

**COMMENT**

Ascendant seraphim are attached to nonmortal finality corps—but in larger numbers to the mortal corps.

## 5. GLORIFIED MATERIAL SONS

### I. UB 31:5.1 — “There is provision...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p5_1) — “There is provision...”

**COMMENT**

Some mortal finaliter companies contain Adamic Sons.

## 6. GLORIFIED MIDWAY CREATURES

### I. UB 31:6.2 — “The midway creatures...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p6_2) — “The midway creatures...”

**COMMENT**

All midway creatures ascend to one of the finality corps, but the secondaries always go into the **mortal** corps.

## 7. THE EVANGELS OF LIGHT

### I. UB 31:7.1 — “At the present time...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p7_1) — “At the present time...”

**COMMENT**
Each finaliter company has 999 permanent members, the last place being filled by a temporary Evangel of Light.

### II. UB 31:7.2 — “Any celestial personality...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:7.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p7_2) — “Any celestial personality...”

**COMMENT**

Any celestial being assigned to the company on a temporary basis may be called an Evangel of Light.

## 8. THE TRANSCENDENTALERS

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p8_1) — “Part of the perfected...”

**COMMENT**

Finaliters must associate with more than one thousand groups of transcendental supercitizens of Paradise.

## 9. ARCHITECTS OF THE MASTER UNIVERSE

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:9.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p9_2) — “The sixteenth proscription...”

**COMMENT**

The Master Architects total 28,011 personalities and function on seven levels of the absonite:
1. Paradise Level—the senior Architect.
2. Havona Level—3 Architects.
3. Superuniverse Level—7 Architects.
4. Primary Space Level—70 Architects.
5. Secondary Space Level—490 Architects.
6. Tertiary Space Level—3,430 Architects.
7. Quartan Space Level—24,010 Architects.

## 10. THE ULTIMATE ADVENTURE

### I. UB 31:10.1 — “Each of these destiny corps...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:10.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p10_9) — “Each of these destiny corps...”

**COMMENT**

1. These seven Corps of the Finality are under the general direction of the senior Architect.
2. Grandfanda, the first ascendant mortal, is the head of the Supreme Council of Destiny, consisting of the seven heads of the finaliter corps.

### II. UB 31:10.19 — “As we view this...”

**REFERENCE**: [UB 31:10.19](/en/The_Urantia_Book/31#p10_19) — “As we view this...”

**COMMENT**

There is impressive evidence that the perfected ascendant mortals who have become finaliters are destined for a glorious future in outer space.

## ULTIMATE DESTINY IN THE BIBLE

1. **God’s Eternal Purpose**
	- **[Eph 3:11](/en/Bible/Ephesians/3#v11)**. “This was according to the eternal purpose which he has realized in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
	- **[Deut 33:27](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/33#v27)**. “The eternal God is your dwelling place, and underneath are the everlasting arms.”
2. **Survival in the Old Testament**
	- I. early times, among the Hebrews, survival was very hazy. There were seven heavens and also Sheol and Hades. Belief in the resurrection was slow in appearing—became general only shortly before the times of Christ. During the days of Jesus, the Sadducees did not believe in the resurrection.
	- T. the Jews, survival meant the biologic survival—survival of the Hebrew race or nation.
3. **Immortality**
	- Among the Jews the concept evolved slowly from Moses to Daniel.
	- During the times of Jesus the doctrine of immortality was born full-fledged.
	- A. **Man Is Not Naturally Immortal**.
		- Deity alone has immortality.
		- **[1 Tim 6:16](/en/Bible/1 Tim/6#v16)**. “Who alone has immortality and dwells in unapproachable light, whom no man has ever seen or can see.”
	- B. **Eternal Life Is the Gift of God**
		- **[Luke 18:30](/en/Bible/Luke/18#v30)**. “Who will not receive manifold more in this time, and in the age to come eternal life.”
		- **[John 3:15](/en/Bible/John/3#v15)**. “That whoever believes in him may have eternal life.”
		- **[John 6:40](/en/Bible/John/6#v40)**. “For this is the will of my Father, that every one who sees the Son and believes in him should have eternal life.”
		- **[John 6:47](/en/Bible/John/6#v47)**. “Truly, truly, I say to you, he who believes has eternal life.”
		- **[John 10:28](/en/Bible/John/10#v28)**. “And I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish.”
		- **[John 17:3](/en/Bible/John/17#v3)**. “And this is eternal life, that they know thee the only true God.”
		- **[Rom 2:7](/en/Bible/Romans/2#v7)**. “To those who by patience in well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, he will give eternal life.”
		- **[Rom 6:23](/en/Bible/Romans/6#v23)**. “For the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life.”
		- **[1 Tim 6:12](/en/Bible/1_Timothy/6#v12)**. “Fight the good fight of faith; take hold of the eternal life.”
		- **[1 John 2:25](/en/Bible/1_John/2#v25)**. “And this is what he has promised us, eternal life.”
		- **[1 John 5:13](/en/Bible/1_John/5#v13)**. “I write this to you who believe in the name of the Son of God, that you may know that you have eternal life.”
4. **Heaven**
	- The Jews believed in seven heavens.
	- A. **Heaven of the Old Testament**
		- **[Deut 10:14](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/10#v14)**. “Behold, to the Lord your God belong heaven and the heaven of heavens.”
		- **[1 Kings 8:49](/en/Bible/1_Kings/8#v49)**. “Then hear those in heaven thy dwelling place their prayer and their supplication.”
		- **[2 Chron 2:6](/en/Bible/2_Chronicles/2#v6)**. “But who is able to build him a house, since heaven, even highest heaven, cannot contain him?”
		- **[Job 22:12](/en/Bible/Job/22#v12)**. “Is not God high in the heavens?”
	- B. **Jesus’ Teaching about Heaven**
		- **[Luke 10:20](/en/Bible/Luke/10#v20)**. “But rejoice that your names are written in heaven.”
		- **[Luke 15:7](/en/Bible/Luke/15#v7)**. “There will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous persons who need no repentance.”
	- C. **Paul and the Apostles**
		- **[Col 1:5](/en/Bible/Colossians/1#v5)**. “Because of the hope laid up for you in heaven.”
		- **[2 Tim 4:18](/en/Bible/2_Timothy/4#v18)**. “The Lord will rescue me from every evil and save me for this heavenly kingdom.”
		- **[Heb 12:23](/en/Bible/Hebrews/12#v23)**. “And to the assembly of the first-born who are enrolled in heaven...and to the spirits of just men made perfect.”
		- **[1 Peter 1:4](/en/Bible/1_Peter/1#v4)**. “And to an inheritance which is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading, kept in heaven for you.”
5. **Hell**
	- A. **Hell in the Old Testament**
		- Old Testament ideas about hell were very indefinite, being centered about the concepts of Sheol and Hades.
		- **[Deut 32:22](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/32#v22)**. “For a fire is kindled by my anger, and it burns to the depths of Sheol.”
		- **[Ps 18:5](/en/Bible/Psalms/18#v5)**. “The cords of Sheol entangled me, the snares of death confronted me.”
		- **[Ps 9:17](/en/Bible/Psalms/9#v17)**. “The wicked shall depart to Sheol, all the nations that forget God.”
		- **[Prov 23:14](/en/Bible/Proverbs/23#v14)**. “If you beat him with the rod you will save his life from Sheol.”
		- **[Amos 9:2](/en/Bible/Amos/9#v2)**. “Though they dig into Sheol, from there shall my hand take them.”
	- B. **Hell in the New Testament**
		- **[Matt 5:22](/en/Bible/Matthew/5#v22)**. “Whoever insults his brother...and whoever says, You fool shall be liable to the hell of fire.”
		- **[Matt 23:33](/en/Bible/Matthew/23#v33)**. “You brood of vipers, how are you to escape being sentenced to hell?”
		- **[Luke 10:15](/en/Bible/Luke/10#v15)**. “And you Capernaum...you shall be brought down to Hades.”
		- **[Luke 16:23](/en/Bible/Luke/16#v23)**. “And in Hades, being in torment, he lifted up his eyes, and saw Abraham far off.”
		- **Heb 10:26,27**. “For if we sin deliberately after receiving the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins, but a fearful prospect of judgement, and a fury of fire which will consume the adversaries.
		- **[James 3:6](/en/Bible/James/3#v6)**. “The tongue is a fire. The tongue is an unrighteous world...setting on fire the cycle of nature, and set on fire by hell.”
		- **[2 Peter 2:4](/en/Bible/2_Peter/2#v4)**. “For if God did not spare the angels when they sinned, but cast them into hell and committed them to pits of nether gloom to be kept until the judgment.”
6. **Punishment**
	- A. **Punishment in the Old Testament**
		- - The Jews had very hazy ideas regarding punishment in either Sheol or Hades. In general, they believed that both rewards and punishment were received during their mortal lives on earth.
		- - Justice among the Jews pertained to restitution and retaliation—a life for a life. They had no prisons.
		- **[Jer 21:14](/en/Bible/Jeremiah/21#v14)**. “I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, says the Lord.”
		- **[Lam 3:39](/en/Bible/Lamentations/3#v39)**. “Why should a living man complain, a man, about the punishment of his sins?”
		- **[Ezek 14:10](/en/Bible/Ezekiel/14#v10)**. “And they shall bear their punishment—the punishment of the prophet and the punishment of the inquirer shall be alike.”
	- B. **Punishment in the New Testament**
		- **[Matt 25:46](/en/Bible/Matthew/25#v46)**. “And they will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.”
		- **Note**: The good have eternal life. The bad get eternal punishment.
		- **[Rev 21:8](/en/Bible/Revelation/21#v8)**. “Their lot shall be in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.”
		- **Note**: While such punishment is spoken of as “everlasting punishment,” at the same time it is referred to as the “second death.” It is the result—not the duration—of the punishment which is **eternal**—even eternal death. **Obad 16**. “They shall drink, and stagger, and shall be as though they had not been.”
		- **[Matt 25:46](/en/Bible/Matthew/25#v46)**. “And they shall go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.”
		- **Note**: 1. The righteous to eternal life.
		- **Note**: 2. The wicked to eternal death.
		- Notice again - **[2 Thess 1:9](/en/Bible/2_Thessalonians/1#v9)**. “They shall suffer the punishment of eternal destruction and exclusion from the presence of the Lord.”
		- Once more: It is the result which is _eternal_—not the _duration_ of the punishment.
		- **[Heb 12:29](/en/Bible/Hebrews/12#v29)**. “For our God is a consuming fire.”
		- Fire is a figure of speech which suggests that all of sin and iniquity will be consumed by fire—divinity.
		- **[2 Peter 2:9](/en/Bible/2_Peter/2#v9)**. “The Lord knows how...to keep the unrighteous under punishment until the day of judgment.”
		- **Note**: Here is the suggestion of pre-judgment punishment.
		- **FIRE** has many meanings in the Bible:
			1. Purification.
			2. Divinity.
			3. Metaphysical—refining.
			4. Discipline.
			5. Punishment.
			6. Destruction.
		- See **[Heb 1:7](/en/Bible/Hebrews/1#v7)**. “Of the angels he says, ‘Who makes his angels winds, and his servants flames of fire.”
7. **Redemption**
	- A. **Redemption in the Old Testament**
		- There are two meanings of redemption in the Bible:
			- (1) Man’s act—like redeeming land.
			- (2) God’s act-the plan of salvation.
		- **[Deut 21:8](/en/Bible/Deuteronomy/21#v8)**. “Forgive, 0 Lord, thy people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed.”
		- **[Job 33:24](/en/Bible/Job/33#v24)**. “And he is gracious to him, and says, ‘Deliver him from going down into the Pit, I have found a ransom.”
		- **[Ps 19:14](/en/Bible/Psalms/19#v14)**. “0 Lord, my rock and my redeemer.”
		- **Ps.103:4**. “Who redeems your life from the Pit, who crowns you with steadfast love and mercy.”
		- **[Ps 130:7](/en/Bible/Psalms/130#v7)**. “With him is plenteous redemption.”
		- **[Isa 43:14](/en/Bible/Isaiah/43#v14)**. “Thus says the Lord, your Redeemer.”
		- - The Old Testament presented God as a vindicator, redeemer, deliverer. and avenger.
	- B. **Redemption in the New Testament**
		- **[Matt 20:28](/en/Bible/Matthew/20#v28)**. “Even as the Son of man came...to give his life as a ransom for many.”
		- **[John 10:15](/en/Bible/John/10#v15)**. “And I lay down my life for the sheep.”
		- **[Rom 3:24](/en/Bible/Romans/3#v24)**. “They are justified by his grace as a gift, through redemption which is in Christ Jesus.”
		- **[Eph 1:7](/en/Bible/Ephesians/1#v7)**. “In him we have redemption through his blood.”
		- **[1 Tim 2:6](/en/Bible/1_Timothy/2#v6)**. “Who gave himself as a ransom for all.”
		- **[Heb 9:12](/en/Bible/Hebrews/9#v12)**. “He entered once for all into the Holy Place, taking... his own blood, thus securing an eternal redemption.”
		- **[1 John 3:16](/en/Bible/1_John/3#v16)**. “That he laid down his life for us.”
		- Throughout the New Testament Paul’s doctrine of the atonement is supported.
8. **The Resurrection**
	- A. **Resurrection in the Old Testament**
		- The resurrection doctrine was a gradual growth among the Jews. It was becoming general by the times of Daniel. But even in Jesus’ time the Sadducees did not believe in the resurrection.
		- The Hebrew concept of survival was the continuance of the race—the nation. It was a reproach to be childless. **[Gen. 30:23](/en/Bible/Genesis/30#v23)**. “She conceived and bore a son, and said, ‘God has taken away my reproach.”
		- **[Ps 17:15](/en/Bible/Psalms/17#v15)**. “When I awake, I shall be satisfied.”
		- **[Ps 73:24](/en/Bible/Psalms/73#v24)**. “Thou dost guide me with thy counsel, and afterward thou wilt receive me to glory.”
		- **[Dan 12:2](/en/Bible/Dan/12#v2)**. “And many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.”
	- B. **Resurrection in the New Testament**
		- **[Matt 22:23](/en/Bible/Matthew/22#v23)**. “The Sadducees came to him, who say there is no resurrection.”
		- **[Acts 24:15](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/24#v15)**. “Having a hope in God...that there will be a resurrection of both the just and the unjust.”
		- **[Luke 14:14](/en/Bible/Luke/14#v14)**. “You will be repaid at the resurrection of the just.”
		- **[Rev 20:5](/en/Bible/Revelation/20#v5)**. “This is the first resurrection.”
	- C. **Paul and the Resurrection**
		- **[Acts 26:8](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/26#v8)**. “Why is it thought incredible by any of you that God raises the dead?”
		- **[Acts. 24:21](/en/Bible/Acts_of_the_Apostles/24#v21)**. “With respect to the resurrection of the dead I am on trial before you this day.”
		- **[1 Thess 4:16](/en/Bible/1_Thessalonians/4#v16)**. “For the Lord himself will descend from heaven...And the dead in Christ will rise first.”
		- **[1 Cor 15:52](/en/Bible/1_Corinthians/15#v52)**. “For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised imperishable, and we shall be changed.”
		- **1 Cor 15:35. 38**. “‘How are the dead raised? With what kind of body do they come?’...God gives it a body as he has chosen.”
		- **[Rom 6:5](/en/Bible/Romans/6#v5)**. “For if we have been united with him in a death like his, we shall certainly be united with him in a resurrection like his.”
	- D. **Jesus and the Resurrection**
		- **[Matt 22:31](/en/Bible/Matthew/22#v31)**. “And as for the resurrection of the dead, have you not read what was said to you by God.”
		- **[John 11:25](/en/Bible/John/11#v25)**. “Jesus said to her, ‘I am the resurrection and the life.’”
		- **[Mark 12:25](/en/Bible/Mark/12#v25)**. “When they rise from the dead, they...are like angels in heaven.”
		- **[Luke 20:36](/en/Bible/Luke/20#v36)**. “They...are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.”
		- **[John 5:28, 29](/en/Bible/John/5#v28)**. “The hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his voice and come forth, those who have done good, to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment.”

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/22">Paper 22. The Trinitized Sons of God</a></td>
        <td><a href="/en/article/William_S_Sadler/Workbook_1_Foreword_and_Part_I/Index">Index</a></td>
        <td></td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>