---
title: "Armenian Infancy Gospel — Chapter XII"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/11">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter XI</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/13">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter XIII</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## XII. How Joseph and Mary circumcised Jesus, and brought him to the temple in Jerusalem with gifts

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span> After all the events that had occurred, Joseph and his wife remained secretly in the cave, keeping it hidden, so that no one someone knew anything. And, taking all the treasures brought by the wise men, Joseph carefully hid them in the grotto. And, always stealing from people, he went out and circulated daily through the town, the village and the countryside. Everyone's material needs were provided for and no one worried them or threatened them, by the will of God, since, although from Bethlehem to the city of Jerusalem, it is barely twelve miles, the entire surrounding territory is deserted and uninhabited. And, every time Joseph went to any place for some business, he left his youngest son, who had followed him to Bethlehem, as guardian, in the service of Mary.

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> And when the child was eight days old, Joseph said to Mary, How shall we deal with this child, since the law orders circumcision to be performed eight days after birth? And Mary said to him: Proceed as you please in this matter. And Joseph went quietly to Jerusalem, and brought from there a wise man, merciful, and fearing the Lord, whose name was Joel, and who thoroughly knew the divine laws. And he came to the grotto, where he found the child. And when the knife was applied, no cut resulted on his body. At this prodigy, he was astonished, and exclaimed: Behold, the blood of this child has flowed without any incision. And he received the name Jesus, which had been imposed on him beforehand by the angel.

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span> And the holy family continued in the grotto. And the child Jesus grew and progressed in grace and wisdom. And, until forty days, the spouses continued to hide it, so that no one would see it.

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span> And, when Herod saw that the wise men had returned to their country without visiting it, he made the following reflection: If The magicians who came here have not returned, it is because they are family traffickers of the kings. That's why they didn't want to reveal their secrets to me. But, fearing that I would demand a ransom from them, they escaped from me falsely and under false pretexts, so that I would not harm them. And having thus spoken, Herod left the city of Jerusalem, and went to reside temporarily in Achaiah. For the moment, he gave no more thought to his project of looking for the baby Jesus, to give him a bad start. And, as the priests and the people did not pursue the matter either, it fell into oblivion.

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> And Joseph, secretly taking Mary and Jesus, with numerous gifts and offerings from the liberality of the wise men , went up to the city of Jerusalem. And, after having presented the child Jesus to the priests, they offered to the temple, according to consecrated custom, a pair of turtledoves, or two pigeons. And old Simeon, having taken and received the Messiah in his arms, asked the Lord to send him away in peace, before his soul was free to return to Him. And, possessed of a prophetic spirit, Simeon said of Jesus: Behold which is appointed for the fall and rising of many in Israel.

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> And, after having paid tribute with his gifts and his sacrifices, Joseph returned, with Mary and with Jesus, to Bethlehem. Secluded in the grotto, they remained there for long days, until the new year, without appearing in public, for fear of the impious King Herod. And, at nine months, Jesus spontaneously stopped breastfeeding at his mother's breasts. And, at the notary, she and Joseph were greatly amazed, and asked each other: How is it that he neither eats, nor drinks, nor sleeps, but is always alert and awake? And they could not understand the empire of will that he exercised over himself.


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/11">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter XI</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/13">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter XIII</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>