---
title: "Armenian Infancy Gospel — Chapter II"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter I</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/3">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter III</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## II. Of the birth of the Virgin Mary, and what happened in her father's house

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span> And Joachim rose very early, called his shepherds, and said to them, Bring me ten white lambs, and this It will be the offering for the august temple of my God; and twelve calves, and this will be for the priests, the scribes and the ministers, who are the servants of the Synagogue, and one hundred rams, and this will be for all the people of Israel. And, when Joachim had taken these offerings, he brought them to the temple of the Lord, and, having prostrated himself before the priests and before the whole assembly, he presented to them the gifts brought. And they rejoiced, and congratulated him that it had pleased the Lord to accept such holy offerings from his hands. And the multitude of people who were there were amazed, and said: Praise be to the Lord God of Israel, who has fulfilled the vows of your heart. Go to your house in peace, and the Lord will be with you forever, and he will give you a blessed son and a sanctified offspring, the fruit of your wife's womb.

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> And Joachim, after having prostrated himself before the priests, arose, entered the temple, and, standing prayer, he gave thanks to the Lord, and said: Lord God of Israel, since you have listened to your servant, and have treated him with ample measure of mercy, I promise you that the child that you grant me, whether male or female , I will give him to you, so that he may be at your service in this temple, all the days of his life. And when he had thus spoken, Joachim rose up and went joyfully to his house.

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span> After three months, the son trembled in his mother's womb. And Anna, filled with great joy, said in a transport of joy: By the life of the Lord, if a blessed child of the male or female sex is granted to me, I give him to the holy temple, for all the days of his life. And Ana was one hundred and sixty days pregnant, which is equivalent to six months.

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span> And Joachim departed with gifts, came to the holy temple, and, before the priests, offered the sacrifices that he had promised fully comply at the beginning of the year. And, as they lifted the victims on the altar of sacrifice, and immolated them, the priests saw, while the blood flowed, that those victims did not contain any blemish, and, full of joy, they gave thanks to the Most High.

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> But Joachim, after having made his ordinary offerings, took a lamb, and, first making his oblation, he He then sacrificed on the altar. And everyone saw, by an unexpected miracle, a kind of white milk instead of blood coming out of the artery. Faced with such a singular spectacle, the priests and all the people were astonished, surprised and amazed. Because a prodigy similar to the one verified in such a sacrifice had never been seen. And Eleazar, the Great Priest, asked Joachim to tell in whose name he had presented that lamb on the altar as an offering and sacrifice.

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> And Joachim answered: I promised the first offerings to the Lord, as a vow that I had to fulfill. But I offered this last lamb in the name of my future offspring, and I reserved it for him. And the High Priest said: Do you know what this sign implies that the Lord has shown you on behalf of your future offspring? The milk that has just come out of that artery has a precise meaning. Because what will be born from her mother's womb will be a female, an impeccable and holy virgin. And this virgin will conceive without the intervention of man, and a male child will be born to her, who will become a great monarch and king of Israel. And, upon hearing these things, all who were present were filled with the greatest admiration. Joachim went in silence to his house, and told his wife of the wonders that had occurred. And, giving thanks to their God, they rejoiced, and said to the Most High: Thy will be done.

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span> And, when Ana's pregnancy reached two hundred and ten days, which suddenly seven months ago, seventh hour, Ana brought her holy daughter into the world, during the 21st day of the month (of...), which is September 8. The first day she asked the midwife: What have I brought into the world? And the midwife answered: You have brought into the world an extremely beautiful daughter, graceful and radiant to the eye, without any blemish or stain. And Hannah exclaimed: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has heard the supplications of his servants, who has shown us his extensive mercy, and who has done great things for us, which have filled our souls with joy. Now my heart is firmly established in the Lord, and my hope has been exalted in God my Savior.

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span> And when the child was three days old, Anna ordered the midwife to wash her and take her to her home. bedroom with respect. And when the midwife presented the girl to her, she gave him her breast and nourished her with her milk. And, in an outpouring of tenderness, she named him Maria. From day to day the girl grew and advanced, and her mother, in the transports of her joy, rocked her in her arms. And so her parents fed her and took care of her. And, when the time for her purification arrived, as Mary had turned forty days old, her parents took her with respect, and, bringing numerous offerings, led her to the holy temple, according to the rule of her tradition.

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span> And little Mary grew and advanced day by day. When she was six months old, her mother allowed her to try to walk on her own. And the girl advanced three steps on her own, and turning back, she fell into her mother's arms. And her mother, lifting her in her arms, and caressing her, exclaimed: Oh you, Mary, holy mother of virgins, root of beautiful growth, branch of a noble throne, from you will rise the dawn, the precursor star of the light, like the moon more than any star, daylight brighter than the splendor of the sun, dawn of the sun of the East! This is how Ana spoke, and she added many other things. And, caressing her holy daughter, she said: As the Lord lives, your feet will not set foot on the ground until the day we take you to the temple. And Anna asked Joachim: Build your daughter Mary a room in which she will live, until the time she grows up, and let us take her to the holy temple.

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span> And after some time, the husband and wife said to each other, Let us bring her to the house of the Lord, that she may live. in his presence, according to our vote. But Ana warned Joaquín: Let's wait for her to become aware of herself. And, in those same days, Anna became pregnant, and she brought into the world a girl whom she called Parogithä, saying: Mary will be the Lord's, and Parogithü will be our delights (phurgäiä) in Mary's place.


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/1">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter I</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/3">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter III</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>