---
title: "Armenian Infancy Gospel — Chapter XX"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/19">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter XIX</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/21">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter XXI</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## XX. How Jesus was entrusted to Gamaliel to learn letters. New wonders performed by Jesus.

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span> And the next day Joseph went with Jesus to Gamaliel's house. And when the boy saw the teacher, she bowed down and prostrated herself before him. And Gamaliel said: Welcome to you, new plant, soft fruit, flowering cluster. Then he asked Joseph: Tell me, venerable old man: Is this son yours or someone else's? And Joseph answered, God has given him to me as a son, not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. Gamaliel questioned: How old is he? José answered: Seven. Gamaliel added: Have you taken him, before me, to another teacher, to instruct him, or to make him learn some other profession? And Joseph replied: I have not taken it to anyone. Gamaliel said: And now, what do you want to do with him? Joseph said: By order of the king and with your acquiescence, I have come here, attracted by the fame of wisdom that surrounds you. And Gamaliel replied: Welcome, venerable old man. I have the greatest considerations for you, and I feel my spirit overwhelmed and confused, when conversing with you, and when speaking in your presence. However, listen to me and I will tell you the truth. When I look at your son, I see clearly in the beautiful expression of his features and in the beautiful likeness of his image, that he does not need to study, I mean, that he does not need to hear or understand anyone's lessons. For he is full of all grace and all knowledge, and the Holy Spirit dwells in him, and cannot be separated from him. Joseph objected: But what will I do with him, without the help of a teacher to teach him a single word of writing? Gamaliel advised him: Dedicate him to a manual trade, one that matches your interest or one that matches his inclination. Upon hearing these words, Joseph was deeply upset, and, with tears in his eyes, he fell at the feet of Gamaliel, and exclaimed, suppliant: Good teacher, be patient with my son, and long-suffering with me! Do not treat me like a foreigner without a country, and do not disdain me. Take good care of this child. Whatever God deigns to grant you in the gift of science, He will grant you. As for me, I will pay you double the price of your efforts. And Gamaliel said: Enough! I will do what you wish.

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> Then the teacher took the tablets that Jesus had brought with him, and said: I will write twelve letters, and, if the child is able to adjust and organize the others in his head, I will write these last ones until I complete them all. Joseph said: Do as you like. And the teacher began to write twelve letters. And Jesus, standing before his teacher, began to observe first the particularities of the writing, and then the letters. When the teacher had written them, he handed the tablets to Jesus. And he bowed down and prostrated himself before him, and received the tablets from his hand.

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span> Gamaliel explained: Listen to me, my son, and read as I tell you. And he began to name the letters. But Jesus made him observe: Master, you speak in such a way that I do not understand what you say. That word you just said seems to me to be a term from another language, and I don't understand it. Gamaliel replied: It is the name of the letter. Jesus objected: I know the lyrics, but give me his explanation. Gamaliel replied: And what interpretation would this letter stand by itself? Jesus asked: Why does the first letter have another appearance, another shape and even another figure than the others? Gamaliel responded: It is so that, thanks to that circumstance, it speaks to our eyes, so that we see it well, recognize it well, discern it well, and then we can adequately determine its meaning. And Jesus said: You speak wisely and correctly, but explain to me what I ask of you. I know that every letter has a defined range, in which its mysterious meaning is manifested, which is unique and determined for each letter. And Gamaliel warned: The ancient doctors and wise men have not stopped their attention on anything other than the shape of the letter and its name. Jesus said: I know it perfectly, and what I would like you to provide me is the explanation of the letter. The teacher asked: What do you mean by that request, which I do not understand? The child answered this question with three others: What is the letter? And what is the word? And what is the phrase? And Gamaliel humbled himself, saying: I leave the answer to you, because I do not know it. When Joseph heard this, his soul was indignant, and he said to Jesus: My son, do not answer your teacher like this. He begins by learning, after which, you will know. And, having made this recommendation, he went silently to his house, and I told Mary what she had heard Jesus say and seen him do. And she was very sad, and said to him: I warned you beforehand that she would not allow herself to be taught by anyone. But Joseph reassured her, saying: Do not be distressed, for everything will happen as God wills. And, upon leaving the teacher's house, Joseph had left the child in the same place he occupied. And Jesus, taking the tablet, without saying anything, began to read, first the letters, then the words, and finally the phrases. And I placed the tablet before Gamaliel, and he said: Master, I know the letters you have written. He now writes the other letters by his order until he completes them all. And, prostrating himself before Gamaliel, he took the tablet again, and read in the same way first the letters, then the words, and finally the phrases. And again I placed the tablet before Gamaliel, and he said: Master, have you finished the series of letters that you had begun to form? Gamaliel replied. Yes, my son. Here are their names gathered together in order and in their entirety. And Jesus said: Master, everything that you have written to me, I have learned and know perfectly. Now, for my instruction, write me something else, so that I may learn and know it. And Gamaliel replied: But first give me the interpretation of the letters, so that I may know it. Jesus answered and said, Art thou a teacher in Israel, and knowest not this? Gamaliel answered and said: All I know is what I have learned from my fathers. And Jesus explained: The simple letter itself means the name of God. The word that is born from the letter, and that takes shape in it, is the incarnate Word. And the phrase that is expressed by the letter and by the word is the Holy Spirit. So that, in this Trinity, the simple letter or God generates the word or Word, which is incorporated into the Spirit, which, when manifested, is affirmed in the word enunciated.

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span> When Gamaliel heard these things, I looked at him, stupefied at the knowledge he was gifted with, and I asked him: Where have you acquired the science you possess? I think that all the gifts of the Holy Spirit have been gathered in you. But Jesus replied: Master, I beg you again to teach me something else from those you have promised to teach me. And Gamaliel said: My son, it is my turn to become your disciple, since you have appeared among us as a prodigy, to the point that, recently, your fellow teachers have asked me to restore you to your home, for being too wise to continue among them. It is I, I repeat, who once again begs you to give me an explanation of the writing. And Jesus said: I will give it to you, but you will not be able to understand this mystery, which is hidden from the intuitions of human reason, until the Lord, who scrutinizes thoughts in every place and at all times, reveals it to all those born. , and distribute the gifts of the Holy Spirit profusely. Because now, from the little you have seen of me, and heard my words, you can know me, and know who I am. However later, hearing about me, you will see me and know me. And Gamaliel murmured among himself, Truly, this is the son of God. I believe that he is the Messiah, whose coming the prophets have announced.

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> And Gamaliel called Joseph, and said to him: Venerable old man, you were right when you told me that this child was not a son yours according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. And Joseph asked Jesus: What shall I do with you, since you do not submit to the master? Jesus answered: Why are you angry with me? I already knew what he taught me, and he did not provide a solution to the questions he posed to me. Joseph replied: I have put you to instruct, to receive lessons, and to acquire wisdom, and it turns out that it is you who teaches the teacher. Jesus said: What I did not know I have learned, and what I know I do not need to learn. And Gamaliel exclaimed: Speak no more, for you disgrace me! Arise, go in peace, and may the Lord be prosperous to you.

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> And Jesus rose up without delay, took the tablets, prostrated himself before Gamaliel, and said to him: Good teacher, May God grant you your reward. And Gamaliel answered: Go in peace, and may the Lord fulfill your desires for your good. And Jesus went to meet his mother, who questioned him: My son, how have you been able to learn everything in a single day? And Jesus affirmed: I have learned everything, in fact, and the teacher has not been able to respond satisfactorily to anything I proposed to him.

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span> And Joseph, who was very sad because of Jesus, consulted Gamaliel, asking him: Tell me, teacher, What will I do with my son? And Gamaliel replied: Teach him everything that concerns your craft as a carpenter. And Joseph went to his house, and seeing Jesus sitting with the tablets in his hand, he questioned him: Have you learned everything? Jesus replied: I have learned everything, and I would like to be a children's teacher. But José said: Since I know that you do not want to study, you will learn the carpenter's trade with me. And Jesus said: I will learn it too.

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span> And Joseph had begun to make a magnificently carved throne for the king. And one of the steps was very short, and could not be connected proportionally to the other step. And Jesus asked: How do you plan to fix this? And Joseph said: What do you care about this matter? Take the axe, cut this step perpendicularly, from top to bottom, and square it regularly in its four corners. Jesus observed: Yes, I will do what you command me. But explain to me what you want to do with this wood that you polish with so much art by means of rope, compass and measurement. Joseph replied: Three times you have already questioned me about this work, which you cannot know and understand. Jesus hinted: Precisely for this reason, I question you and inform myself, in order to know the truth. And Joseph explained: I want to build a royal throne for the sovereign, and the wood for one of the steps is insufficient. Jesus said: Let me see it. Joseph said: It is this piece of wood that you see before you. I asked Jesus: How many spans long is it? José answered: One of the sides must be twelve spans long, and the other the same. And Jesus asked again: And what is the length of this piece? José I answered: Fifteen spans. And Jesus said: It's okay. Go in silence to occupy yourself with your work, and fear nothing. And, taking the ax, Jesus split the fifteen-hand-long piece of wood into three. And cutting it in half, he divided it into two trunks, put the iron on the wood, and sat down. And Mary came and said unto him, My son, have you finished the work which you began? And Jesus, not without indignation, replied: Yes, I finished it. But why do you force me to learn all kinds of work? Truly, do I need to learn anything? And you, what care compels you to take care of me at the cost of so much agitation and restlessness? And after speaking thus, Jesus remained silent.

<span id="v9"><sup><small>9</small></sup></span> And Joseph came, and seeing the wood divided into two parts, he exclaimed: My son, what destruction is This, how serious damage does it cause me? Jesus replied: Do you want to tell me what I have done to harm you? Joseph replied: One of the two pieces of wood is too small, and the other is too big. Why have you cut them so that they don't fit properly on both sides? And Jesus said: I have cut them that way so that they are symmetrical. Joseph said: How can that be? But Jesus said: Do not be upset. Grab the pieces by their two sides, measure each of them separately, and then you will understand. And Joseph, taking one of the two pieces of wood, measured it, and it was twelve spans long. Then he measured the other piece and found that it was the same length. And the wood was not short, in truth, but, instead of fifteen spans, it was twenty-four, divided into two pieces of twelve feet. Such was the miracle that Jesus performed in front of Mary and Joseph and immediately, leaving the house in a hurry, he went to join the children of the town, in the place where they were gathered. At the sight of him, everyone happily approached to meet him. And, kneeling before him, they questioned him, saying: What will we do today, Little Jesus? And he answered: If you listen to me, and if you submit to my orders, execute exactly what I command you. And they cried out together: Yes, we are all affectionate to you, and we are subject to your will, in all that pleases you. And Jesus spoke to them like this: Do not violate anyone, do not return evil for evil, be charitable, and behave towards each other as friends and brothers. And then I too will live among you with a heart always ready to serve you. And the children kissed him and hugged him with joy. And there was a boy of twelve years old, who, as a result of very violent headaches, had lost the light in his eyes, and could not walk with ease, unless someone guided him, leading him by the hand. And Jesus took pity on him, and, putting his hand on his head, I blew into his ear. And, at the same moment, the boy's eyes opened, and he regained his normal vision. And the boys who witnessed such a miracle shouted and went to the city to tell of the famous miracle of a blind man to whom Jesus had restored his sight. And multitudes of people came out of the city to see him, but they did not find him. Because Jesus had disappeared, and he hid, so as not to be noticed by the public.

<span id="v10"><sup><small>10</small></sup></span> A few days later, Joseph brought the throne he had built to the king, before whom he prostrated himself. And the king saw it, and he was rejoiced and satisfied. And he ordered that the resources necessary for his subsistence be given in abundance to Joseph. And, receiving them, Joseph marched jubilantly to his house.

<span id="v11"><sup><small>11</small></sup></span> One day, the king invited Joseph to a banquet, which was also attended by princes of the highest rank. And they all ate and drank and were merry to the greatest extent. And the king said to Joseph: Elder, I am going to make a request of you, that you may execute it. Joseph said: Order, sir. And the king said: I want you to build me a splendid palace, with a very high hall and double doors. You will give it the same dimensions lengthwise as widthwise; you will put lamps and seats around it; you will adorn it with elegantly sculpted shapes, contours, figures and drawings; you will represent, on the capitals, all kinds of animals; With the chisel you will polish the surfaces, and with the chisel you will form intertwined ornaments; you will make it accessible by a solidly pegged ladder; you will waste all the resources of decorative art; you will use a profusion of solid woods of all kinds; and, above it, you will place a curved dome, which you will establish on the plan of a temple, which you know how to do wonderfully. And for your work, I will give you double what you need for your subsistence. Joseph said: Yes, king, I will execute your orders. But order that incorruptible wood be brought to me, so that I may examine it. And the king said: It will be done as you wish.

<span id="v12"><sup><small>12</small></sup></span> And the king, with the high princes and Joseph, went to a picturesque place, where There were beautiful meadows, numerous fountains, an amphitheater-shaped pond, and a high hill at the water's edge. And the king ordered Joseph to measure the location. And Joseph measured it length and breadth, as the king had commanded him, and began to build.

<span id="v13"><sup><small>13</small></sup></span> But, when I wanted to finish the work on the dome, I found that a piece of wood did not fit it, for being too short. And José, upset, did not know what to do. And, at that moment, the king came, and, noticing Joseph's confusion, he asked him: Why are you worried and not working? José responded: I have worked on this wood with great effort, and my work came out unsuccessful. And the king said: I will order longer wood to be brought to you.

<span id="v14"><sup><small>14</small></sup></span> And while they were in this conversation, behold, Jesus came to them, and bowed down and prostrated himself before them. the king, who said to him: Welcome to you, beautiful child, your father's only son. And Jesus asked: Why are you sitting here sadly, idle and silent? And the monarch replied: Everything is finished, you see, and yet something is missing. Jesus said: What is it about? The king said: Look at this carved wood, and you will see that it is too short, and that it does not fit the other one well. And Jesus said to Joseph: Take the end of this wood, and hold it firmly. The king, fixing his gaze on Jesus, questioned him: What are you going to do? And Jesus, taking the other end of the wood, said to Joseph: Pull in a straight line, so that it will not be noticed that this wood is too short. And those present believed that the boy was joking. But Joseph had faith in the will of Jesus, and, stretching out his hand, he took hold of the wood, and it lengthened by three spans.

<span id="v15"><sup><small>15</small></sup></span> And when the king saw the wonder that Jesus had done, he feared him, and fell down before him, and I hug him. And he covered him with a royal garment, and girded his head with a diadem, and I sent him to his mother. And José finished all the construction work. And the king, whom he greatly pleased, rewarded Joseph with much gold and silver, and sent him to his house full of joy.

<span id="v16"><sup><small>16</small></sup></span> As for Jesus, he was always coming and going through the places where his childhood friends frequented. And they greeted him with great affection, and hurried to carry out everything he ordered them.

<span id="v17"><sup><small>17</small></sup></span> And, one day, Jesus, who had left his house, went through the city silently and in secret, so that no one saw it. And behold, a little boy, who saw him and recognized him, caught him from behind, and grabbing him and shaking him, he began to shout: Look, everyone, and see the baby Jesus, the son of the old man, the one who works so many miracles. and so many wonders. He was immediately assaulted by the demon, and he fell senseless to the ground. And Jesus disappeared, and he was so mistreated by the evil spirits, that he lay on the ground as if dead, for three hours. And his parents appeared, full of fright and dissolved in tears. And they took him up, and searched throughout the town in search of Jesus, but they did not find him. Then they went, crying, to meet old Joseph, to beg him that Jesus would deliver his son from the evil spirits. And, when Jesus knew his thoughts, and knew that the child was also crying out for his own relief, he appeared to him that same day, suddenly. And the child, falling at Jesus' feet, asked for forgiveness for his faults. And Jesus put his hand on his head and healed him.

<span id="v18"><sup><small>18</small></sup></span> And, days later, Jesus, leaving, went, as usual, to the place where the children They gathered to play. And when they saw him, everyone welcomed him with great joy, and received him with great honor. Jesus asked them: What have you deliberated and decided that we should do today? The children answered: We will make you and Zeno, the king's son, our leaders. We will divide ourselves into two camps, and one of the sides will be yours, and the other will belong to the king's son. And we will go play ball, and we will see which of the two teams triumphs in the contest. Jesus said: Well thought out. And everyone, on both sides, agreed.

<span id="v19"><sup><small>19</small></sup></span> And, in that place, there was a very large old tower with very high walls, in front of which The children of the city always met to verify their games. And Jesus said to Zeno: What do you propose to do now? I leave it to your discretion. Zenón replied: Let us divide ourselves, again, and by common agreement, minors and youngsters, into two camps, and then we will go together to play ball. Jesus said: Do as you like. And Zenón, gathering his companions, divided them into two groups, which advanced to throw the ball. And Zenón, who had the first turn. He threw the ball with such vigor that, soaring it to an enormous height, he made it fall on the tower, which was very difficult to get up and down. But, wanting to recover the ball, he began the painful climb, and Saul, son of the aristocrat Zacarías, launched after him. And, taking the game basket with both hands, he struck her on the back of the head from behind. And Zeno fell to the ground from the top of the tower, and he died. And Zechariah escaped with all the boys who were there, and Jesus hid himself from his sight, and also disappeared.

<span id="v20"><sup><small>20</small></sup></span> Then a great outcry arose in the city, and everywhere it was spread that the children had killed the son of the king, who played with them. Hearing this, all the inhabitants gathered together and went to the tower. And the king, the princes, the great ones, the chiefs, the dignitaries, the army officers, the entire army, the relatives, the friends, the slaves, the servants, men, women, intimates, relatives and foreigners, all who When they heard the news, they rushed to the tower, crying and beating their chests. And, with great mourning, they lamented over the child, who was nine years and three months old.

<span id="v21"><sup><small>21</small></sup></span> After spending three hours crying and moaning, the king and his entourage opened a report, and they questioned themselves. each other, in order to find out who had committed the criminal attack. And they all said together: No one knows what has happened except the children who were playing in this place. Then the king ordered the body of his son to be lifted up and taken to the palace. And he commanded to gather together all the children of the city, from the oldest to the youngest, and brought them before him. When they had arrived, the king began by speaking kind words to them, and said to them: My children, declare who among you has caused this misfortune. I know that you have not acted on purpose, and that this has happened much to your regret, and perhaps without your knowledge: The children responded unanimously: Oh king, reason assists you! But who among us would have dared to commit that homicidal action of killing the king's son, handing himself over to perdition and an inevitable death? The king replied: I told you that you would hear kind words from me. But now I repeat to you that you try not to exasperate me, and not to kindle fury in my heart. For the moment you have nothing to fear. But tell me the truth. Who is the author of the blow that caused my son to die a cruel and premature death? If anyone shows it to me, I will make him a companion to my throne, I will associate him with my greatness, and I will give his parents power and rank. The children said: O king, just is your command! But to the question you ask us, we answer, truthfully, that we do not know which of us is the author of the act. You have only two options before you, and if you spontaneously prefer life to death, you will avoid losing the first at your tender age. Fear the torments and abuses that I am determined to inflict on you and your parents. Reveal the truth to me without hesitation, and thus you will escape certain death. And they answered: Here we are before you. Whatever you have to do, do it quickly.

<span id="v22"><sup><small>22</small></sup></span> Then the king had the children brought to the door of the palace, and quantities of very overgrown with gold and silver. And I ordered the chief of the executioners to take a steel sword, and to make it shine over the heads of the children who came forward to take their share of the treasure. And, after all the children, one by one, were bravely collecting their share, and retreating without any fear, the killer of the king's son approached. And when he saw the sword shining in the executioner's hand, he was overcome with sudden fear and trembling. And, in the terror that the weapon produced in him, no longer being able to stand on his legs, he fell to the ground face-first. And they asked him: Why do you fear and tremble? The boy replied: Leave me a moment, so that I can recover and recover my spirits. They consented to this, and questioned him again: Does the sight of this sword cause you fear? And he agreed, saying: Yes, I am very afraid that you will make me die. And the monarch told the executioner: Put your sword in the sheath, so as not to cause panic in the child. And after an interval of an hour, he stood up and said: O king! I knew who your son's murderer was, but I scrupled giving you his name. The king replied: Give it to me, my son, for it is better for him who is worthy of death to perish than for an innocent person. And the child said: O king, your son has been killed by the child Jesus, the old man's son! The king, who heard this, was astonished, and ordered that Jesus be summoned and summoned to appear before him. But Jesus was not found, but only Joseph, whom he arrested, and I brought him to the court. And, having bowed and prostrated himself before the king, he said to him: You have treated me well today, old man, in return for the benefits I have done to you! You have just paid me twice for my benevolent welcome! Joseph replied: O king, please do not believe in every vain word that reaches your ears! Do not be angry with me, despite my innocence, nor lightly and rashly judge me, for I am not responsible for the blood of your son. The king replied: I already knew your spirit of independence and the indomitable nature of the baby Jesus. You came here to take orders according to your preparations, and I executed whatever was to your liking. Joseph begged again: I repeat to you, O king, do not give credence to lying species, nor make reproaches to me without witnesses to support him, because I do not understand anything of what you speak to me. The king cut off the dialogue by exclaiming: Where is your son, so that I can see him? Joseph swore, saying: By the life of the Lord, I do not know where my son is. And the king exclaimed: Very good! First the homicide is committed, and then impunity is sought in the escape! And I ordered that Joseph be closely guarded, and said to his men: Go and search throughout the city, until you find the child Jesus; Arrest him, and bring him here well guarded. And they went through all the streets and all the outskirts of the town, looking for Jesus, but they did not find him, and they returned to communicate to the king the negative result of their search. And the king said to his elders: What shall we do with that old man? Because he has facilitated the escape of his mother and son, and the latter's whereabouts are not known. The princes said: Order the old man to appear before us, and let us subject him to another interrogation, since he knows where his son and his mother are. And the king said: You are right. I will not bring the grave to me, nor will I eat, nor drink, nor sleep, until the blood of that child has compensated for that of mine.

<span id="v23"><sup><small>23</small></sup></span> And when he spoke of this fate, and deliberated concerning Joseph, asking himself with what kind of death would cause him to perish, behold, Jesus himself came to present himself to him, and, bowing, he prostrated himself before him. And the king cried out, furious: In time you come, baby Jesus, executioner and killer of my son. But Jesus answered: Why, O king, are you so angry? Why does your heart seem filled with confusion, anger and fury? Why do you show me such a broken face? Do not use such unfair language with me: it is not worthy of kings and powerful monarchs to condemn someone without witnesses for the prosecution. The king replied: If I declare you worthy of death, it is on the faith of numerous witnesses. Jesus objected: It is not enough. First of all, inform yourself, question, reason, and then judge in truth and law. And, if I am worthy of death, do what judges with legitimate power do in these cases. But the king answered: Do not bewilder us with vain speeches, and tell us clearly what has caused the loss of my son. Jesus reproached: If you believe my word, and if you accept the testimony I state, know that I am innocent of that fact. But if you want to condemn me lightly and recklessly, call your witness and place him in my presence so that I can see him. The king said: You are right. And, immediately afterwards, he made the murderer of his son appear, to whom I asked: Child, do you depose against Jesus? The culprit responded: Yes, I formally denounce him. Listen to me and I will reveal everything to you. But let me speak before you freely. The king said: Speak: And the guilty man confronted Jesus, saying: Did I not see you yesterday at the ball game? You had the basket in your hand; you went up with Zenón to the top of the wall, to collect the ball; you hit him with two hands behind the neck; you killed him, throwing him to the ground; and you fled from there immediately. Jesus replied: It is well. And when the king heard this, the princes, the great ones, who were with him, and all the rest of the popular crowd, said: What have you to answer to this accusation? Answering the question with another, Jesus said: And in your law, what is written to this effect? And they all cried out together: In our law it is written: He who sheds man's blood, by man his blood will be shed. And Jesus nodded, saying: You are right.

<span id="v24"><sup><small>24</small></sup></span> Then the king said: Tell me how I should treat you and with what kind of death I will kill you. And Jesus said, Being, as you are, judge of all, why do you ask that of me? The king answered: Yes, I know it very well, since I can do whatever I please. But I demand that the truth be revealed to me, to judge righteously, so that I myself may not be judged. Jesus hinted: If you want to question me about the fact, within the legal forms, you will pass an iniquitous judgment, without knowing it. The king exclaimed: How so? Jesus said: Do you not know that every man who has committed a crime swears falsely, for fear of death? And those who, under oath, testify and depose for each other, know very well who is guilty. The king argued: If the culprit is not you, why do you always respond with a barrage of words, declaring yourself innocent, and denying others? And Jesus declared: I also know something about the cause of this crime. But everyone who has committed evil is quick to protest that he is not worthy of death. And the king replied: I do not understand what you say. If you want me to believe in the truth of your words, present me a witness who will vouch for you, and you will be acquitted. And Jesus observed: If only they spoke sincerely! None of them ignores and anyone can, therefore, attest, that I am innocent. The king replied: It is up to them, and not you, to bear that testimony. Jesus replied: His testimony is false and perjured, because they are friends of one another, and I am a foreigner, a stranger and unknown in the city. Where will I find the benevolent friend who will examine my cause with equity, and who will think of doing me justice?

<span id="v25"><sup><small>25</small></sup></span> And the king said: You attack and contradict me without rest, especially in moments of tribulation, when I can no longer stand. I have to cry, lament and beat my chest. Jesus answered: And what do you want me to do? Here I am betrayed by numerous witnesses, and placed in your hands. Do what you have resolved to do to me. The king said: Why do you continue to confront me? I only ask that you explain to me the exact truth, and I only want to hear from your mouth the reason why you have repaid me so badly for the benevolence that I showed you. And Jesus said: If you decide to open serious information, and find out things thoroughly, your judgment will be truly fair. But the king interrupted: Whose judgment is right? The one who has a testimony to support him or the one who doesn't? Jesus answered: Of the one who has a sincere testimony, and judges over him. And the king observed: And when someone deposes in his favor, can he judge him, yes or no? Jesus said: No. And the king added: Then why, deposing your own cause, do you claim to be innocent? Jesus replied: O king, if you demand a testimony from me, oppose me with another from the adverse side, the only way to prove who is good and who is evil! The king contradicted, saying: The law commands judges not to judge anyone except on testimony. Bring your witness here, as everyone does, and I will believe you. And Gamaliel, who was present there, took up the word, and exclaimed: O king, I beseech thee to hear me! Truly, this child is innocent. Do not condemn him for appearances, with contempt for justice.

<span id="v26"><sup><small>26</small></sup></span> And all the multitude cried with a loud voice, He has been your disciple. Here's why you talk about him in those terms. And again the king said to Jesus: What sentence should I pronounce against you with justice? To what tortures will I deliver you? With what death will I make you perish? Jesus answered: Why do you want to intimidate me with such threats? What do you propose, always repeating the same thing to me? And what should I allege in defense of myself? If you judge me according to legal usage, you will be exempt from all fault. But if you hand me over to death in an arbitrary and tyrannical manner, without curing yourself through the legal procedures, the terrible judgment of God will fall upon you. And the king said: Several times I have forgiven you with patience. But you do not feel any fear of me, nor are you in any way frightened by my threats, nor do you take responsibility for the immense sadness that overwhelms me. Answer me by giving me a testimony and you will escape death. Jesus answered him: Tell me what I must do, and I will do it. The king replied: Now I pity you, considering your tender age, and you inspire my respect, because you are the son of a great family. But, on the other hand, I cannot bear the pain of the misfortune befalling my son. So reveal to me the real culprit, be it you or someone else. And Jesus answered: I have tried in vain to convince you, since you have not believed my words. And, although I know who it is who deserves death, I have limited myself to giving testimony of myself, to the exclusion of the testimony of others. But, since you insist so much that I present you a witness, I am going to present him to you. Take me to the room where your son lies.

<span id="v27"><sup><small>27</small></sup></span> And, once before the corpse, Jesus cried out with a loud voice: Zeno, open your eyes, and see which It's the boy who killed you. And suddenly, as if he had been taken out of his sleep, Zeno woke up and sat up. And, with a circular gaze, he contemplated everyone, and was amazed at the multitude of people who were there. At whose sight, everyone, parents and relatives, men and women, adults and children, cried out, and, with tears and joy, embraced him and kissed him, asking him: Son, what has happened to you, and how are you? do you find? The boy responded: I feel fine. And Jesus, in turn, questioned him in this way: Tell us who caused your violent death. Zeno answered: Lord, it is not you who is responsible for my blood, but Apion, the son of the noble Zechariah. He was the one who, with his basket, hit me from behind, causing me to fall to the ground from that height. When the king and all the multitude of the people heard this, they were shaken with great terror, and all, filled with fear of Jesus, were terrified, and said: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who works with men according to his commands. merits and his right, and that he acts as a just judge. Truly, this child is God or his messenger. And Jesus said to the monarch: Detestable king of Israel, do you now believe on my word that I am innocent? You see how I have procured for myself the testimony that I am not responsible for your son's blood, which seemed to you a lie on my part. Ah, look at your son, returned to life, serving as my witness, and covering you with confusion! However, I had warned you, and repeated again and again the warning to open your eyes, not to let yourself be deceived by false speeches, and not to believe in boys unworthy of faith. You did not listen to me, and now, you and all your fellow citizens regret not having taken advantage of my witness assistance. And Gamaliel intervened, to say the same as Jesus, and to reproach the king for not having believed his words.

<span id="v28"><sup><small>28</small></sup></span> And the king's son remained alive the whole day. And, sitting in the middle of those characters, he conversed with the great ones and the princes and told them about some surprising vision or other prodigious wonders. Everyone, from the greatest to the smallest, went to prostrate themselves before the king's son, and to offer him their services, until the hour when, at the end of the afternoon, he covered the earth with his shadows at night. Then Jesus, questioning the resurrected man again, said to him: Zeno, son of King Baresu, return to your bed, sleep and rest, until the advent of the just judge. And as soon as Jesus had spoken thus, Zeno got up from his seat, lay down on his bed, and fell asleep again. And the entire crowd of people who saw the miracle performed by Jesus, seized with fear and terror, fell to the ground, and they all remained, for an hour, breathless and as if dead. Then, rising, they all fell at Jesus' feet, and, through tears, begged him to restore the resurrected man to life again. But Jesus exclaimed: King, the same case that you made of my sweet and benevolent words, I will make of your pleading and selfish intercessions. Because, in this city, no one has uttered a single sentence in my favor, on the contrary, everyone has gathered and gathered against me, and have condemned me to the ultimate punishment. But I warned you well, warning you to watch what you were doing, and that later you would regret it, and you would gain nothing. And the king said: How could I have recognized in you a God incarnate and appearing on earth, to rule in life and death as sovereign owner? And Jesus said: It is not for your sake, nor for my own vainglory, that I have restored your son to existence, but in response to all the vexations and all the insults that I have received from you. But the king implored again: Hear my prayer and that of all the multitude of my people, and make Zeno rise again. Jesus replied: I fear no one, nor have I ever done harm to any man. And I did not perform the miracle for profit, but to provide myself with a testimony that would make you known and identify the killer of your son. The king insisted, tearfully: Do not be angry with me, and do not repay with evil what I caused you. Jesus answered: Your prayers are useless. If you had heeded my words, I had the power to perform this miracle on your behalf, and in consideration of the kindness you had shown me. However, you forgot, and did not take into account the prodigy that I performed before you, when the construction of your palace, increasing a piece of wood to the measure that was missing. Therefore, I do not owe you any gratitude, since you have not believed in me, and have annulled, with a manifestation of hostility, all the spontaneous benevolence and all the friendly gifts with which you had previously gratified me. And the king still said: Listen to me, Jesus. In the excess of my confusion and my grief, I was not truly able to foresee anything. Completely stunned and maddened, due to the force of crying and because of the tumult, I lost my mind and the memory of everything. But Jesus answered, saying: That I had caused the loss of your son, no one in the city had seen it, and no one could testify, therefore, that I deserved death. And even if it had indeed caused the loss of your son, no one would have seen it either. But everyone knew who the killer was, and they did not denounce him until the moment when, by resurrecting the dead man, I confused them all. And having thus spoken, Jesus quickly left the crowd and hid himself from the eyes of those present.

<span id="v29"><sup><small>29</small></sup></span> And Joseph was taken out of prison and set free. And several people went in search of Jesus, and did not find him. And they questioned one another, and said, Who has seen the child Jesus, the son of Joseph? We look for him, so that he can come to resurrect the king's son. And they searched all the outskirts of the city, without finding him. And many believed in his name, and said, A great prophet has arisen among us. And the king, all the princes, and the inhabitants of the city redoubled their mourning over the dead child, and grieved even more after Jesus' departure.

<span id="v30"><sup><small>30</small></sup></span> And old Joseph and his wife Mary distrusted the king and his army, who could stop them by force, and imprison them. And, that same night, they left their house and fled from the city, secretly and without anyone knowing anything. At dawn, without stopping walking, they looked for the child. And it came to pass, as they went talking among themselves, and asking one another, that Jesus himself came and went with them together in silence. And, recognizing him, his mother said to him, through tears: My son, you well see the trials we went through, how you have put us in mortal danger, and how your innocence has saved you. How many times have I told you not to meet with strangers, or with people of another nationality, who don't know who you are! Jesus replied: Do not grieve, mother, because when they persecute you in one city, you will flee to another.

<span id="v31"><sup><small>31</small></sup></span> And, thus talking, they continued on their way in peace. And they came to a city called Bozrah or Bosora, and there they resided for a long time. And Jesus, who was now eight years and two months old, was traveling through the region, and the children of this age gathered around him. And he spoke to them, and gave them advice, with kind sweetness. And he called them to him familiarly, and said to them: Do not dispute or quarrel among yourselves. Do not be angry with one another, nor, in anger, strike one another. And, upon hearing this, the innocent little ones wanted to always be by his side, and follow in his footsteps.

<span id="v32"><sup><small>32</small></sup></span> And, one day, as they had gathered, he left with them for a distant place. And a six-year-old boy who accompanied them, and who had a beautiful countenance and pleasant presence, was helpless, very damaged and crippled on one side. And Jesus, looking at him, saw that he could not follow in the footsteps of the other children. And he took pity on him, called him to him, and asked him: Child, do you want to be cured? And he, beholding Jesus, burst into tears, and answered him, Should I not love him? But who will cure me? Jesus said: Don't cry. And he called all the children of the expedition, and ordered them: Take this child, spread him on the ground, grab him, some by the legs and others by the hands, and pull hard. And he stood before the child for a very short time, and moving away a little from there, he said to his companions: Let him go. And the boy got up slowly, and returned home very happy. And the other children followed him, and told everyone about the miracle performed by Jesus. And he hid himself from his sight, so that no one would know him. And he returned to his mother secretly, and without wanting to show himself in public. And many inhabitants of the city came to ask him and examine him. But he disappeared from their eyes.


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/19">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter XIX</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/21">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter XXI</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>