---
title: "Armenian Infancy Gospel — Chapter XXV"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/24">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter XXIV</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/26">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter XXVI</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## XXV. How the angel warned Joseph to go to the people of Nazareth

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span> And on Wednesday, the fourth day of the week, the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a night vision, And he said to him, Arise, take the child and his mother, and go to the town of Nazareth, where you will make your residence, and from where you will not depart. You will build a house there, and you will dwell in it for a long time, until God, in his goodness, gives you another warning. And having said this, the angel left him. And the next day Joseph got up early, took the child and his mother, and went to the town of Nazareth, to the house where they lived before, and where they stayed eighteen years. And Jesus was twelve when he arrived at Nazareth, which makes the sum of thirty years.

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> And on the second day of the week, Jesus left Nazareth, and went to sit in a place on the road. And he saw two boys advancing, and quarreling among themselves violently. And they came to blows, and they stuck to each other. But when they saw Jesus, they stopped fighting, and came closer and prostrated themselves before him. Jesus ordered them to sit down, and they did so. And Jesus asked them: Children, from what comes such anger? What disagreement divides you, that you exchange blows with such violence? One of the two, who was the younger, replied: There is no judge here to judge us by law. Jesus said: What are your names? The younger answered: My name is Malachi, and this man's name is Micah. We are two brothers, united by family feelings. And Jesus objected: Why then do you treat each other so cheerfully and insultingly?

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span> Malachi explained to Jesus: I beg you, child, to listen to what I want to tell you. My brother is older than me, I am his second son. And he strives to treat me iniquitously, which I do not allow him in any way. He pronounces, therefore, between us, an equitable judgment. Jesus replied: Explain to me what is the reason for your displeasure. Micah observed: It seems that you are the son of a judge and the descendant of great monarchs. Jesus confirmed: You said it. And Micah exclaimed: May God reward you and your parents if today you bring justice with peace to my brother and me!

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span> But Jesus said, Who made me a judge or a judge over you? I understand well that you do not want to submit to my commands. The two brothers replied: Do not say that, nor do us such an affront. You take us for ignorant children. We have, however, letters, and we know the divine law. Jesus indicated: First of all, make a commitment not to deceive each other, and to do what I demand. And the boys cried out together: We take the divine law as witness, and we swear on its commandments to obey your orders, as orders emanating from the Royal Gate. And Jesus answered: Reveal the truth to me, so that I may hear it from you.

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> And Malachi said: We are two brothers, who were orphaned of father and mother. Our parents left us an inheritance, and people outside the family retain our heritage by usurpation. And we dispute among ourselves, because my brother tries to dispossess me unjustly, and I am not willing to do so. And Jesus asked: When your parents died, to whom did they entrust you as guardian or guardian until you reached the age of reason? The children said: Neither of us remembers our parents. Jesus questioned them: Why then do you quarrel with one another? And Malachi answered: My brother seeks to harm me, claiming that he is the eldest. But Jesus replied: Do not act like this. If you want to listen to me, make peace, and share your property amicably. And Micah said to Jesus: Child, I recognize that you proceed sensibly, when speaking to us about conciliation. However, as for the judgment you pronounce, it is very different, and listen to what I want to tell you. When our parents died, I was older than my brother, who was still very young, and I worked, with great effort, to rebuild our heritage, which was devastated and in the most complete abandonment. I alone did that painful work, and my brother knows nothing about it.

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> Jesus made him observe: But he is your brother, and he is a child. Until today, you have sustained and nourished him out of charity. Don't hurt him now. Go and distribute your goods equitably. Have mutual affection for each other, and the peace of God will be with you. And they, obedient to Jesus' wishes, prostrated themselves before him. And, falling into each other's arms, they kissed each other, and said to Jesus: Son of a king, through whose mediation harmony has been restored between them, may God glorify your person and your holy name throughout the earth. We ask you to bless us. And Jesus answered: Go in peace. and may the love of God remain in you.

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span> And when Jesus had spoken thus, they fell down again before him, and went to their place. home. And Jesus returned to his home in Nazareth, together with Mary. And his mother, seeing him, asked him: Where have you been all day, without understanding that I do not know what may happen to you, and that I am alarmed for you, thinking that you walk alone in remote places? And Jesus answered: What do you want from me? Don't you know that I must, from now on, travel the region, and fulfill what is written about me? Because this is what I have been sent for. Mary objected: My son, since you are still only a child, and not a grown man, I am constantly afraid that some misfortune will happen to you. But Jesus warned: My mother, your thoughts are not reasonable, because I know all the things that will come upon me. And Mary replied: Do not be distressed by what I told you, because many ghosts haunt me, and I do not know what I should do. And Jesus asked: What do you plan to do with me? His mother answered: That is what makes me sad, because your father and I have made sure that you learned all the professions in your early childhood, and you have not done anything, nor have you done anything. And now, that you are older, what do you want to do, and how do you want to live on earth?

<span id="v8"><sup><small>8</small></sup></span> When Jesus heard this, his spirit was moved, and he said to his mother: You speak to me with extreme inconsideration. Do you not understand the signs and wonders that I have done before you, and which you have seen with your own eyes? And you continue still in disbelief, despite the time I have been living with you. Consider all my miracles and all my works, and be patient for a while, until you see them fulfilled, since my hour has not yet come, and remain firmly faithful. And having said this, Jesus left the house quickly.


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/24">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter XXIV</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/26">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter XXVI</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>