---
title: "Armenian Infancy Gospel — Chapter IX"
description: 
published: true
date: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
tags: Bible, Apocrypha NT
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2023-12-05T13:55:38.362Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/8">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter VIII</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/10">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter X</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

## IX. How Eve, our first mother, and Joseph came to the cave with IX. haste, and they saw the birth of the very Holy Virgin Mary

<span id="v1"><sup><small>1</small></sup></span> And when Joseph and our first mother saw that, they fell down with their faces in the dust, and, praising They glorified God with a loud voice, and said: Blessed are you, God of our fathers, God of Israel, who, by your coming, has accomplished the redemption of man; that you have established me again, and raised me from my fall; and that you have restored me to my former dignity. Now my soul feels enlarged and possessed of hope in God my Savior.

<span id="v2"><sup><small>2</small></sup></span> And, after speaking thus, Eve, our first mother, saw a cloud ascending to heaven, breaking away of the cave. And, on the other hand, a sparkling light appeared, which was placed over the manger in the stable. And the child took his mother's breast, and drank milk from it, after which she returned to her place, and sat down. Before this spectacle, Joseph and our first mother Eve praised and glorified God, and admired, stupefied, the wonders that had just occurred. And they said: Who has heard such a thing from anyone's mouth, nor seen with his eyes anything that we are seeing?

<span id="v3"><sup><small>3</small></sup></span> And our first mother entered the cave, took the child in her arms, and caressed him tenderly. And she blessed God, because the child had a resplendent, beautiful countenance and very open features. And she, wrapping him in swaddling clothes, laid him in the oxen's manger, and then she left the grotto. And suddenly she saw a woman named Salome, who came from the city of Jerusalem. And going towards her, he said to her: I announce to you happy and good news. In this grotto, she has brought a son into the world, a virgin who has never known a man at all.

<span id="v4"><sup><small>4</small></sup></span> And Salome replied: I know that the entire city of Jerusalem has condemned her as guilty and worthy of death. And, because of her shame and her dishonor, she has fled the city, to come here. And I, Salome, have learned in Jerusalem that that virgin has given birth to a man child, and I have come, rejoicing, to see him. Our first mother Eve said: It is true, and yet her virginity is holy, and she remains immaculate. Salomé asked: And how could you find out that she is still in a virginal state after giving birth? Eve answered: When I entered this grotto, I saw a luminous cloud hovering above it, and a murmur of words could be heard in the heights, with which the numerous army of the spiritual choirs of the angels blessed the Most High. , and they exalted his glory. And, towards the sky, it rose like a brilliant mist. Salome said to him: By the life of the Lord, I will not believe your words, before I see that a virgin who has not known a man has brought a son into the world, without male help. And, entering the cave, our first mother said to Mary: Prepare yourself, because it is necessary, for Salome to test you and corroborate your virginity.

<span id="v5"><sup><small>5</small></sup></span> And, when Salome entered the cave and, extending her hand, wanted to bring it closer to the belly of the Virgin, suddenly A flame, which erupted from there with intense burning, burned his hand. And, uttering a shrill cry, he exclaimed: Woe to me, miserable and unfortunate, whom my faults have seriously led astray! Who has produced this horror in me? For I have sinned against the Lord, I have blasphemed him, and I have tempted the living God. Behold, my hand has become a burning fire!

<span id="v6"><sup><small>6</small></sup></span> But an angel, who was near Salome, said to her: Stretch out your hand toward the child, hold it close to him. , and you will be cured. And, falling at the feet of the child, Salome kissed him, and, taking him in her arms, she caressed him, and said: O newborn, son of the Father, great and powerful, child Jesus, Messiah, king of Israel, redeemer, anointed of the Lord, you have appeared in the city of David! Oh light that has risen above the earth, you have revealed to us the redemption of the world!

<span id="v7"><sup><small>7</small></sup></span> Salome added other similar words to these words, and, at the same moment, her hand was healed. And she, rising, worshiped the child. Then the angel spoke to him and warned him: When you return to Jerusalem, do not tell anyone about the vision that has appeared to you, lest it come to the knowledge of King Herod, before the baby Jesus goes to the temple for purification. , after forty days. Salome replied: I will obey, Lord, according to your will. And, returning to his house, he did not communicate to anyone the words that the angel had spoken to him.


<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/8">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">Chapter VIII</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel#index">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/Bible/Armenian_Infancy_Gospel/10">
          <span class="pr-2">Chapter X</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>