---
title: "XX. The Maqama of the Ape"
description: "The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání"
published: true
date: 2024-11-25T21:24:44Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-25T21:24:44Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/19">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XIX. The Maqama of Sásán</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/21">
          <span class="pr-2">XXI. The Maqama of Moṣul</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<span id="p84">[<sup><small>p. 84</small></sup>]</span>

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: While I was in the city of Peace, [^504] returning from the Sacred Territory, [^505] I was swaggering along, with the swaggering of pedestrians, on the bank of the Tigris, observing those rare sights and closely examining those embellishments until, suddenly, I reached a ring of men crowding together, excitement agitating their heads [^506] and laughter exploding [^507] their cheeks. Curiosity impelled me to do what it had driven them to do, till I stood within earshot of the voice of a man without being able to see his face, because of the intensity of the thronging and the excessiveness of the crowding, and behold! it was a monkey-trainer causing his monkey to dance and making those near him to laugh. So I bounded as bounds the well-trained hound, [^508] and went forward, after the manner of one lame, over the necks of the people. This one's shoulder throwing me in that one's stomach, [^509] until I made the beards of two men my carpet and sat down after much fatigue. [^510] And verily shame choked me with its spittle and the straitness of the place distressed me. When the monkey-trainer had finished his performance and the place of assembly divested itself of its people, I arose, and verily terror had clothed me in its garb, and I stood up that I might see his face, and lo! by Heavens! it was Abú’l-Fatḥ, al-Iskanderí. So I said: ‘Sirrah, what meaneth this baseness?’ Then he indited saying:—

<span id="p85">[<sup><small>p. 85</small></sup>]</span>

‘The sin is the days’ [^511] not mine,
So censure the vicissitudes of the nights.
By means of folly I obtained my desire
And proudly trailed my embellished skirts.’

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/19">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XIX. The Maqama of Sásán</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/21">
          <span class="pr-2">XXI. The Maqama of Moṣul</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^504]: 84:1 _The city of Peace:_ i.e., the city of God. Al-Manṣúr is said to have called Baghdad the city of Peace—Madína al-Salám—because the Tigris had been previously called the valley and river of Peace. It is said ‘Abd al-‘Azíz ibn ‘Alí Ruwwid called it the city of Peace, because in Persian _bagh_ is an idol and _dad_ a gift which made an impious or ill-omened name. Yaqút, i, 678. See also Le Strange, _Baghdad during the ‘Abbásid Khalífate_, p. 10.

[^505]: 84:2 _The sacred territory:_ Mecca.

[^506]: 84:3 … _Their heads:_ Literally, their necks.

[^507]: 84:4 _Exploded (literally, split) their cheeks:_ Cf. English, split their sides.

[^508]: 84:5 … _Well-trained hound:_ Literally, having a collar of white shells such as are worn on the neck to avert the evil eye. It seems that only trained hounds were given this collar.

[^509]: 84:6 … _Stomach:_ Literally, the navel.

[^510]: 84:7 … _great fatigue:_ Another reading is … between two.

[^511]: 85:1 _The sin is the days:_ Metre, _kámil_.

This maqáma has been translated by De Sacy. See his _Chrestomathie Arabe_, iii. p. 246.