---
title: "XXXIX. The Maqáma of Nishapur"
description: "The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání"
published: true
date: 2024-11-25T21:24:44Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-25T21:24:44Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/38">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XXXVIII. The Maqáma of Khalaf</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/40">
          <span class="pr-2">XL. The Maqáma of Knowledge</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: I was at Nishapur [^901] on a Friday so I presented myself at the _obligatory_. [^902] When I had performed it there passed by me a man who had donned a tall hat and turned a portion of his turban beneath his chin [^903] like the Sunni's. So I asked the worshipper at my side, ‘Who is this?’ He said: ‘This is a moth that attacks none but the woollen garment of the orphans, a locust that falls upon none but the forbidden crop, a burglar that breaks into [^904] none but the treasury of pious bequests, a Kurd that raids upon none but the weak, a wolf that preys upon none but God's servants, between their kneeling and prostration, a warrior that plunders nothing but God's property, under cover of covenants and witnesses. He has donned his tall hat but doffed his piety; he has conventionally put on his cloak but perverted the use of his, hand <span id="p151">[<sup><small>151</small></sup>]</span> and tongue; he has clipped short his moustache [^905] but lengthened his snares; he has displayed his vehement eloquence, [^906] but covered up his defects; he has whitened his beard, [^907] but blackened his record; he has paraded his abstinence, but concealed his greed.’ I said: ‘May God curse the fellow! but who art thou?’ He replied: ‘I am a man known as al-Iskanderí.’ I said: ‘May God bless the land [^908] that grew this excellence, and the father that left this progeny, and, where art thou going?’ He answered, ‘To the Ka‘ba.’ So I said: ‘Excellent! Excellent! is its feast, though still unprepared! We are, in that case, fellow-travellers.’ He said: ‘How is that, when I am going up and thou art going down?’ I asked: ‘How canst thou go _up_ to the Ka‘ba?’ He replied: ‘But I am going to the Ka‘ba of the needy, not to the Ka‘ba of the pilgrims, to the station of generosity not the station of sanctity, [^909] to the house of captives, [^910] not to the house of sacrifices, to the source of gifts, [^911] not the Qibla [^912] of prayer, to the desire [^913] of guests, not to the Mina of Khaif.’ [^914] I asked: ‘And where are these excellences?’ Then he indited saying:—

<span id="p152">[<sup><small>p. 152</small></sup>]</span>

‘Where are the Faith and the king [^915] strengthened with might,
Through whom the cheek of noble deeds is dyed rosy red.
In a land where hopes flourish,
For Khalaf ibn Aḥmad is its rain-cloud.’

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/38">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XXXVIII. The Maqáma of Khalaf</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/40">
          <span class="pr-2">XL. The Maqáma of Knowledge</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^901]: 150:2 Nishapur (_Naisabur_): A well-known town, the capital of the province of the same name, situated forty-nine miles west of Meshed. It was captured by the Arabs in A.H. 31. Yaqút in his _Geographical Dictionary_, iv, 757, referring to this place says of all the cities he had visited Naisabur (Nishapur) was the finest. It was in this city, says Tha‘alibi (_Yatima_, iv, 168) that Hamadhání wrote his four hundred maqámát and vanquished his great literary rival the renowned Abú Bakr al-Khwárazmí.

[^902]: 150:3 _The obligatory:_ See Qur’án, lxii, 9, which commands attendance at congregational worship on Fridays.

[^903]: 150:4 _Turned a portion of his turban beneath the chin:_ Ibn al-Athír refers to a tradition of the prophet wherein the people were commanded to tie the extremity of the turban under the chin and were forbidden to do otherwise. (Niháyah under …)

[^904]: 150:5 … _Breaks into:_ Literally, bores.

[^905]: 151:1 … _Clipped short his moustache:_ Still regarded as an outward mark of piety.

[^906]: 151:2 … _His vehement eloquence:_ From … he (a camel) brayed in his shiq-shiqa, or faucial bag. The primary meaning is loudness of voice and then vehement eloquence. Shiqshiqa is also the name of a sermon preached by ‘Alí and interrupted by a member of the congregation, a man from ‘Iráq, handing him a letter. When desired by Ibn ‘Abbás to continue his address, ‘Alí answered: ‘Alas! Ibn ‘Abbás, the Shiqshiqa has roared and subsided’, meaning that the inspiration of the moment had gone. \[_Nahaj_ _al-Balágha_, p. 26 (Beyrut ed. A.H. 1308)\]. The saying became proverbial. See Freytag, _Arab Proverbs_, i, 673.

[^907]: 151:3 _Whitened his beard:_ To give himself a venerable appearance.

[^908]: 151:4 … _God bless the land!:_ Literally, may God water the land!

[^909]: 151:5 … _The station of sanctity:_ That is, Muzdalifa.

[^910]: 151:6 … _The house of captives:_ The spoils of his victorious campaigns.

[^911]: 151:7 … _Gifts and prayer:_ See De Sacy, _Ḥarírí_, i, 18 for a similar play on these words.

[^912]: 151:8 _Qibla:_ That part of the horizon, or of a mosque, which is in the direction of Mecca towards which Muslims turn to say their prayers.

[^913]: 151:9 _Desire:_ Text, p. 201, line 5, for … read ….

[^914]: 151:10 _Mina al-Khaif:_ A small town near Mecca, to which the pilgrims descend on the morning of the ‘Id.

[^915]: 152:1 _Where are the Faith and the king:_ Metre, _wafir_. These expressions regarding the two Ka‘bas will be found in No. 38, page 101, of Hamadhání's Letters. They are cited by Tha‘álibí (_Yatíma_ iv, 176) as a specimen of Hamadhání's elegant epistolary style. They are also quoted by Ibn Khallikan, 113. Their chief merit consists of a mere play on words impossible to preserve in a rendering into English. For similar and additional criticisms of the Qáḍí and a description of what a Qáḍí should be, see the Author's Letters, pp. 168-9.