---
title: "XL. The Maqáma of Knowledge"
description: "The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání"
published: true
date: 2024-11-25T21:24:44Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-25T21:24:44Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/39">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XXXIX. The Maqáma of Nishapur</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/41">
          <span class="pr-2">XLI. The Maqama of Advice</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: I was crossing one of those parts where exile had thrown me, when behold I met a man who was asking another, ‘By what means hast thou acquired knowledge?’ And the latter, answering him, said: ‘I sought it and found it to be difficult of access. [^916] It is not shot with a shaft, nor allotted by the divining arrows. [^917] It is not seen in the dream nor controlled with the bridle. [^918] It is neither inherited from paternal uncles, nor borrowed from the generous. Therefore I adopted, as a means of attainment thereto, the making of clods a bed, the taking of a stone for a pillow, repelling weariness, braving danger, prolonging vigils, making a companion of travel, much reading and meditation. And I found it to be a thing suitable only for planting, and it is not planted save in the mind. A quarry that is ensnared but rarely and is not caught, save in the breast. A bird that is deluded only by the snaring of the word, and nought catches it but the net of memory. Therefore I laid it upon my soul and confined it within my eye. I spent <span id="p153">[<sup><small>153</small></sup>]</span> my means, but stored my mind. I wrote elegantly by virtue of much reading, and passed on from reading to investigation, and from investigation to composition, and I relied therein on divine guidance.’

Now I heard language such as penetrated the ear, reached the heart, and quickly entered the breast, so I asked: ‘O young man! Whence the orient of this sun?’ Then he began to say:—

‘Alexandria is my home, [^919] if but in it my resting-place were fixed.
But my night I pass in Syria, in ‘Iráq my day.’

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/39">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XXXIX. The Maqáma of Nishapur</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/41">
          <span class="pr-2">XLI. The Maqama of Advice</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^916]: 152:2 … _Difficult of access:_ This and the succeeding five sentences will be found in No. 41, p. 165 of the Letters where almost the entire maqáma is reproduced verbatim.

[^917]: 152:3 … _By the divining arrows:_ By means of which the Arabs in the time of the Ignorance. (Barbarism), sought to know what was allotted to them. This practice is forbidden in Qur’án, v, 4.

[^918]: 152:4 … _With a bridle:_ Literally, with a bit, i.e. the appurtenances of a bridle, by an extension of meaning, applied to this with its straps; arabicized from the Persian … _Lagám_.

[^919]: 153:1 _Alexandria is my home:_ Metre, _mujtath_.
	Cf. the fifteenth maqáma, p. 74. A very interesting disquisition on knowledge and the course to be followed in the acquisition thereof. We have doubtless in this maqáma a statement of the author's own methods of study. An amplification of the idea will be found on pp. 165-8 of the Letters. For a synopsis of both, see end of the Cambridge MS, 1066 (Badí‘ al- Zamán).