---
title: "XLVII. The Maqama of Sariah"
description: "The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání"
published: true
date: 2024-11-25T21:24:44Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-25T21:24:44Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/46">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XLVI. The Maqama of the Yellow</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/48">
          <span class="pr-2">XLVIII. Maqama of Tamín</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: While we were at Sariah [^1036] with the governor thereof there came before him a youth with the fragrance of saffron upon him. So the assembly stood up for him and, out of respect, he was seated in the chief place; but awe of him hindered me from asking him his name. Then he began and said to the governor: ‘What hast thou done with yesterday's discussion, perhaps thou hast relegated it to oblivion?’ [^1037] He said: ‘God forbid! but there has hindered me from attaining to it a reason which it is impossible to explain, and one whose wounds [^1038] cannot be healed?’ Said the intruder: ‘Sirrah, the delay in the fulfilment of this promise has been long, and I shall not find thy morrow regarding it other than thy to-day, or <span id="p176">[<sup><small>176</small></sup>]</span> thy to-day concerning it other than thy yesterday. In promise breaking, I can only compare thee to the Salix Aegyptia tree whose blossoms fill the eye, but there is no fruit there.’

Said ‘Ísá ibn Hishám: When he had reached this point, [^1039] I cut him short and said: ‘God guard thee, art thou not al-Iskanderí?’ He answered: ‘And perpetual may thy preservation be, how excellent is thy sagacity!’ Then I said: ‘Welcome to the commander of speech and to the stray of the generous. [^1040] I have searched for it till I found it, and sought it till I obtained it.’ Then we became mutually friendly till the highland attracted me and the lowland swallowed him. I ascended and he descended, and I fared eastwards and he westwards. After his departure, I said:—

‘O would that I knew of a brother [^1041] whose hands were straitened, but whose fame was extensive:
Last night he passed with me, but where will he pass this our night?
May poverty not prosper, [^1042] for he is its exile, and, owing to poverty, I have been deprived of him.
I will surely place over it, in Khalaf ibn Aḥmad, one who will destroy it.’

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/46">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">XLVI. The Maqama of the Yellow</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Index</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/48">
          <span class="pr-2">XLVIII. Maqama of Tamín</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>


<br>

## Footnotes

[^1036]: 175:3 _Sariah:_ A town in Tabaristan (Mazandaran) and the seat of the governor during the rule of the Ṭáhirides.

[^1037]: 175:4 … _Oblivion:_ Probably an allusion to Qur’án, xix, 23.

[^1038]: 175:5 _Whose wounds_: That is, the effects of his inability to perform what he had promised.

[^1039]: 176:1 … _This point:_ Literally, this place.

[^1040]: 176:2 … _The stray of the generous_\—That is the stray _camel_ of the generous to which ‘Ísá ibn Hishám here compares al-Iskanderí.

[^1041]: 176:3 _O would that I knew of a brother:_ Metre, _kamil_.

[^1042]: 176:4 … _May poverty not prosper:_ Literally, may the milk of poverty not flow copiously!