---
title: "VIII. The Maqama of Adharbayján"
description: "The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání"
published: true
date: 2024-11-25T21:24:44Z
tags: Islam, book
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-11-25T21:24:44Z
---

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/7">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">VII. The Maqáma of Ghailan</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/9">
          <span class="pr-2">IX. The Maqáma of Jurjan</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

SAID ‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM: When wealth girded me with its flowing robe, I was suspected of being possessed of property that I had stolen, or of a treasure [^276] that I had found, so the darkness of the night urged me to flee, and the horse carried me away. In my flight I traversed paths that had never been trodden before, and where a bird could not find its way, until I passed through the land of terror, crossed its frontiers, entered the protected domain of safety, and there found tranquility. I arrived at Adharbayján [^277] and verily the camel's feet were abraded and the <span id="p51">[<sup><small>51</small></sup>]</span> stages travelled had consumed their flesh. And when I reached it,

‘We alighted intending the stay to be three days, [^278]
But it was so pleasant to us that we stopped there a month.’

Now one day while I was in one of its streets, there suddenly appeared a man with a small drinking-vessel which he had placed under his arm, with a walking-stick with which he supported himself, with a tall round cap [^279] which he had donned, [^280] and a waist-wrapper [^281] which he had put on. [^282] He raised his voice and said: ‘O God who createth things and causeth them to return again, the quickener of bones and the destroyer of them, the Creator of the sun and who causeth it to revolve; the Maker of the dawn to appear [^283] and its Illuminator, who sendeth us bounteous benefits [^284] and upholdeth the heavens [^285] that they fall not upon us; the Creator of souls, male and female; [^286] who hath made the sun [^287] for a light, [^288] the firmament for a roof [^289] and the <span id="p52">[<sup><small>52</small></sup>]</span> earth as a carpet; [^290] who hath ordained the night for rest [^291] and the day for labour; [^292] who formeth the pregnant clouds, [^293] and sendeth in vengeance the thunderbolts; [^294] who knoweth what is above the stars and what is beneath the uttermost parts of the earth, I beseech Thee to send Thy blessings upon Muḥammad, the chief of the prophets, and upon his holy family, and that Thou wilt aid me against exile, that I may rein her round [^295] homeward; and against hardship that I may be delivered from its depressing shade, and that Thou wilt make it easy for me to obtain at the hands of one of pious nature and pure origin, [^296] blessed with true religion, who is not blind to manifest truth, a camel to traverse this road, provision to suffice me and a travelling companion.’ Said ‘Ísá ibn Hishám, I whispered to myself, ‘This man is more eloquent than our al-Iskanderí, Abú’l-Fatḥ!’ Then I turned a glance upon him and lo, by Heavens! it was Abú’l-Fatḥ! So I said: ‘O Abú’l-Fatḥ! has thy mischief reached this land and thy hunting for game extended to this tribe?’ Then he indited saying:—

‘I am a mighty wanderer over the countries, [^297]
And a great traverser of the horizons.
I am the toy of time, [^298]
And am continually on the road. [^299]

<span id="p53">[<sup><small>p. 53</small></sup>]</span>

Blame me not—mayest thou receive right guidance!
For my mendicity, but taste it.’

<br>

<figure class="table chapter-navigator">
  <table>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/7">
          <span class="mdi mdi-arrow-left-drop-circle"></span><span class="pl-2">VII. The Maqáma of Ghailan</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat">
          <span class="mdi mdi-book-open-variant"></span><span class="pl-2">Title page</span>
        </a>
        </td>
        <td>
        <a href="/en/book/Islam/The_Maqamat/9">
          <span class="pr-2">IX. The Maqáma of Jurjan</span><span class="mdi mdi-arrow-right-drop-circle"></span>
        </a>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</figure>

<br>

## Footnotes

[^276]: 50:5 … _a treasure_\—property buried in the earth.

[^277]: 50:6 _Adharbayján:_ The Atropatene of the ancients the north-western and most important province of Persia. It was conquered by the Arabs under al-Mughíra in A.H. 20.

[^278]: 51:1 _We alighted intending the stay to be three days:_ This is an allusion to the Tradition: … Hospitality is for three days, see De Sacy, Ḥarírí, i, 177. Metre _táwil_.

[^279]: 51:2 … _Tall round cap:_ The kind of head-dress called _Qalansuwah_ of a Qáḍí said to be like a … a wine-jar, because high and round.

[^280]: 51:3 … _donned_, the … a kind of head-dress which, according to Dozy, was worn by the ‘Abbásid Khalífas, their ministers, and the Qáḍís, and is still used in Syria.

[^281]: 51:4 … _a waist-wrapper_, a kind of striped Indian cloth unsewn. The commentator says it is arabicized from a Sindhí word.
	Cf. the mediaeval Latin _Calantica_, tegumentum capitis ad usum mulierum. A covering for the head of women, a kind of veil.

[^282]: 51:5 … _He had put on:_ Literally, he attired himself with a _Tailisan_, a cloak or mantle. Cf. Hebrew פלית a cover or cloak similar to the Roman pallium, especially the _Talith_ the cloak of honour, the scholar or officer's distinction, adorned with fringes. Also the cloak of the leader in prayer (Jastrow, _Dictionary of the Targum_, p. 537). It is still worn by many of the professional and learned men in Muslim countries.

[^283]: 51:6 _The Maker of the dawn to appear:_ Qur’án, vi, 96.

[^284]: 51:7 _Bounteous benefits:_ An allusion to Qur’án, xxxi, 19,

[^285]: 51:8 _Who upholdeth the heavens:_ Qur’án, xxii, 64.

[^286]: 51:9 _Male and female:_ Literally, in pairs.

[^287]: 51:10 _The sun:_ … Literally, a lamp or its lighted wick. The latter is the proper, though not the more usual meaning, and is the one intended in Qur’án, xxiv, 35.

[^288]: 51:11 _Who hath made the sun for a light:_ An allusion to Qur’án, lxxi, 15.
	… Light, a lamp, apparently arabicized from the Syriac _Shirágá_, Persian _chiragh_.

[^289]: 51:12 _The firmament for a roof:_ An allusion to Qur’án, xxi, 33.

[^290]: 52:1 _The earth as a carpet:_ an illusion to Qur’án, ii, 20.

[^291]: 52:2 _The night for rest:_ an allusion to Qur’án, vi, 96.

[^292]: 52:3 _The day for labour:_ an allusion to Qur’án, lxxviii. 11.

[^293]: 52:4 _Who formeth the pregnant clouds:_ an allusion to Qur’án, xiii, 13.

[^294]: 52:5 _And sendeth in vengeance the thunderbolts:_ an allusion to Qur’án, xiii, 14. This prayer is composed in the style of Qur’án, lxxi, 13-19.

[^295]: 52:6 _I may rein her round:_ Literally, I may turn her rope.

[^296]: 52:7 … _Of pure origin:_ Literally, purity hath raised him.

[^297]: 52:8 _I am a mighty wanderer:_ Metre, _Khafif_.

[^298]: 52:9 … _Toy:_ A kind of whirling plaything which a boy turns round by means of a thread causing it to make a sound such as is termed … a small piece of wood in the middle of which is cut a notch and which is then tied with a string which, being pulled, turns round and is heard to make a sound such as is termed Imr al-Qais likens it to a swift horse. See Lyall's edition of the _Mu‘allaqát_, p. 23, verse 59.

[^299]: 52:10 … _Continually on the road_. Cf. … The Jinn that inhabit houses.
	This maqáma has been translated by De Sacy. See his _Chrestomathie Arabe_, iii, 253.