---
title: "August 21, 2003"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Urantia Movement Event, Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 2003 Chris Ragetly<br>© 2003 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>


On this August 21, 2003, we celebrate the 2010th anniversary of the birth of Jesus of Nazareth. Let us associate with this celebration the Personal Adjuster of Jesus. Here:

The incarnation of Michael of Nebadon on Urantia was to fulfill several purposes, and among them is one that concerns us more especially. Through the bestowal of the Spirit of Truth, the Comforting Spirit of Michael of Nebadon, the Thought Adjusters, also known as Mystery Monitors, now inhabit every normal human mind. This portion of the Universal Father, although not personal, is nonetheless individual. Let us not forget that each Mystery Monitor chooses “his mortal” according to the potentials that each of us possesses at birth, thus demonstrating a quasi-personal choice (whether these potentials are represented by the personality of each one or by other criteria, that is not the subject of this text.) What is interesting is to understand well the new relationship established between **all** mortals of Urantia and the Universal Father. It is a reinforced paternal relationship which further promotes the fraternal relationship between all mortals, because it is indeed a relationship which did not exist before the incarnation of Michael of Nebadon except among certain mortals. Now, whether we are conscious of it or not, this relationship allows the spiritual evolution of each one to grow in **quality** and **frequency**. And this spiritual relationship is nourished precisely by the quality and frequency of this evolution. (Spiritual evolution does not depend entirely on the relationship with the Mystery Monitor, but it is essential. See the seven psychic circles.) One cannot exist without the other.

It has consequences not only on the spiritual level, but also on the intellectual and physical level of each person. Therefore on the entire life of an individual. But, it is in the behavior towards ourselves that the progress and improvements are the most remarkable. Knowing ourselves is much easier and enriching when the Mystery Monitor is there to “show” us our deficiencies and how to remedy them, but it is especially by “indicating” the positive side of things, ideas and ideals that the Mystery Monitor is most useful to us here on Urantia. Of course, later, on other worlds, after the fusion, his experience of the eternal past will serve other purposes.

The teachings of Jesus and especially the example of his 37 years of life on Urantia are in part a reflection of his relationship becoming more and more “complete” with his Thought Adjuster. Let us not forget that the latter had inhabited the mind of Machiventa Melchizedek from 1973 B.C. to 1879 B.C. and “_... had embarked on prodigious exploits before inhabiting it, and also in the interval between these bestowal experiences._” [[UB 109:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p6_4)]

Thus, in celebrating this 2010th anniversary of the birth of Jesus on Urantia, we may also offer to Jesus’ Personalized Thought Adjuster a respectful greeting. [[UB 108:3.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p3_5)] _It is interesting to note that in examining a planet, the local universe inspectors always address the planetary chief of the Thought Adjusters, just as in presenting their recommendations they address the chief seraphim and the leaders of other orders of beings involved in the administration of an evolving world. Urantia recently underwent one of these periodic inspections by Tabamantia, the sovereign supervisor of all the planets where the life experiences of the universe of Nebadon are being conducted. The records reveal that in addition to his admonitions and criticisms to the various leaders of the superhuman personalities, he also presented to the chief of the Adjusters the following token of appreciation. We are not sure whether this leader was on Urantia, Salvington, Uversa, or Divinington, but here is what Tabamantia said:

_“Having been temporarily given authority over the experimental series of planets, I come to you, who are far superior to me, and I come to express my admiration and profound respect for the magnificent group of celestial ministers, the Mystery Monitors, who have voluntarily served on this abnormal sphere. However distressing the crises may be, you never waver. Neither in the records of Nebadon nor before the commissions of Orvonton has any one ever brought an indictment against a divine Adjuster. You have been loyal in your missions, you have been divinely faithful. You have helped to rectify the errors and to compensate for the failings of all who work on this troubled planet. You are wonderful beings, guardians of good among the souls of this backward world. I pay you homage, although you are apparently under my jurisdiction as volunteer ministers. I bow before you in humbly acknowledging your delicate unselfishness, your understanding ministry, and your impartial devotion. You deserve the name of divine servants of the mortal inhabitants of this world torn by conflict, struck by misfortune and afflicted by diseases. I honor you! I almost worship you! "_

This Adjuster supervises our spiritual evolution, for from the baptism of Jesus in the Jordan until the end of his sojourn on Urantia, Jesus was in constant communion with this Adjuster Personalized by the Universal Father, and then, at the resurrection of Jesus he relinquished his authority over the celestial hosts of Urantia, and is now the director of the activities of all the Thought Adjusters of Nebadon. [[UB 109:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/109#p6_4); [UB 136:2.3-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/136#p2_3); [UB 136:2.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/136#p2_5); [UB 189:0.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p0_2); [UB 189:3.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/189#p3_4)].

This is how I celebrate this 2010th anniversary, that of the birth of Jesus on Urantia, that of the seventh and final bestowal of Michael of Nebadon, with his now Personalized Adjuster, associated for a time on our planet Urantia, with our Creator Son.

Chris M. Ragetly

