---
title: "The 7 jubilees"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light gray lighten-3 px-2">© 2008 Chris Ragetly<br>© 2008 Association Francophone des Lecteurs du Livre d'Urantia</p>


606 Urantia — Satania 24 Jerusem — Norlatiadek
70 Edentia — Nebadon 84 Salvington
U Minor the Third 3 Ensa — U Major the
Fifth 5 Splandon — Orvonton 7 Uversa

## Series of studies entitled “Remarks”

### I. The 7 jubilees

(Quotes from the _Urantia Book_ are in italics, passages in bold or underlined are my own)

> _After the attainment of the supreme satisfaction of the fullness of worship, you are qualified for admission to the Corps of the Finality. The ascendant career is well-nigh finished, and the seventh jubilee prepares for celebration. The first jubilee marked the mortal agreement with the Thought Adjuster when the purpose to survive was sealed; the second was the awakening in the morontia life; the third was the fusion with the Thought Adjuster; the fourth was the awakening in Havona; the fifth celebrated the finding of the Universal Father; and the sixth jubilee was the occasion of the Paradise awakening from the final transit slumber of time. The seventh jubilee marks entrance into the mortal finaliter corps and the beginning of the eternity service. The attainment of the seventh stage of spirit realization by a finaliter will probably signalize the celebration of the first of the jubilees of eternity._
> After the attainment of the supreme satisfaction of the fullness of worship, you are qualified for admission to the Corps of the Finality. The ascendant career is well-nigh finished, and the seventh jubilee prepares for celebration. The first jubilee marked the mortal agreement with the Thought Adjuster when the purpose to survive was sealed; the second was the awakening in the morontia life; the third was the fusion with the Thought Adjuster; the fourth was the awakening in Havona; the fifth celebrated the finding of the Universal Father; and the sixth jubilee was the occasion of the Paradise awakening from the final transit slumber of time. The seventh jubilee marks entrance into the mortal finaliter corps and the beginning of the eternity service. The attainment of the seventh stage of spirit realization by a finaliter will probably signalize the celebration of the first of the jubilees of eternity.
> After the attainment of the supreme satisfaction of the fullness of worship, you are qualified for admission to the Corps of the Finality. The ascendant career is well-nigh finished, and the seventh jubilee prepares for celebration. The first jubilee marked the mortal agreement with the Thought Adjuster when the purpose to survive was sealed; the second was the awakening in the morontia life; the third was the fusion with the Thought Adjuster; the fourth was the awakening in Havona; the fifth celebrated the finding of the Universal Father; and the sixth jubilee was the occasion of the Paradise awakening from the final transit slumber of time. The seventh jubilee marks entrance into the mortal finaliter corps and the beginning of the eternity service. The attainment of the seventh stage of spirit realization by a finaliter will probably signalize the celebration of the first of the jubilees of eternity.
> After the attainment of the supreme satisfaction of the fullness of worship, you are qualified for admission to the Corps of the Finality. The ascendant career is well-nigh finished, and the seventh jubilee prepares for celebration. The first jubilee marked the mortal agreement with the Thought Adjuster when the purpose to survive was sealed; the second was the awakening in the morontia life; the third was the fusion with the Thought Adjuster; the fourth was the awakening in Havona; the fifth celebrated the finding of the Universal Father; and the sixth jubilee was the occasion of the Paradise awakening from the final transit slumber of time. The seventh jubilee marks entrance into the mortal finaliter corps and the beginning of the eternity service. The attainment of the seventh stage of spirit realization by a finaliter will probably signalize the celebration of the first of the jubilees of eternity.
> After the attainment of the supreme satisfaction of the fullness of worship, you are qualified for admission to the Corps of the Finality. The ascendant career is well-nigh finished, and the seventh jubilee prepares for celebration. The first jubilee marked the mortal agreement with the Thought Adjuster when the purpose to survive was sealed; the second was the awakening in the morontia life; the third was the fusion with the Thought Adjuster; the fourth was the awakening in Havona; the fifth celebrated the finding of the Universal Father; and the sixth jubilee was the occasion of the Paradise awakening from the final transit slumber of time. The seventh jubilee marks entrance into the mortal finaliter corps and the beginning of the eternity service. The attainment of the seventh stage of spirit realization by a finaliter will probably signalize the celebration of the first of the jubilees of eternity.
> After the attainment of the supreme satisfaction of the fullness of worship, you are qualified for admission to the Corps of the Finality. The ascendant career is well-nigh finished, and the seventh jubilee prepares for celebration. The first jubilee marked the mortal agreement with the Thought Adjuster when the purpose to survive was sealed; the second was the awakening in the morontia life; the third was the fusion with the Thought Adjuster; the fourth was the awakening in Havona; the fifth celebrated the finding of the Universal Father; and the sixth jubilee was the occasion of the Paradise awakening from the final transit slumber of time. The seventh jubilee marks entrance into the mortal finaliter corps and the beginning of the eternity service. The attainment of the seventh stage of spirit realization by a finaliter will probably signalize the celebration of the first of the jubilees of eternity.
> After the attainment of the supreme satisfaction of the fullness of worship, you are qualified for admission to the Corps of the Finality. The ascendant career is well-nigh finished, and the seventh jubilee prepares for celebration. The first jubilee marked the mortal agreement with the Thought Adjuster when the purpose to survive was sealed; the second was the awakening in the morontia life; the third was the fusion with the Thought Adjuster; the fourth was the awakening in Havona; the fifth celebrated the finding of the Universal Father; and the sixth jubilee was the occasion of the Paradise awakening from the final transit slumber of time. The seventh jubilee marks entrance into the mortal finaliter corps and the beginning of the eternity service. The attainment of the seventh stage of spirit realization by a finaliter will probably signalize the celebration of the first of the jubilees of eternity.
> After the attainment of the supreme satisfaction of the fullness of worship, you are qualified for admission to the Corps of the Finality. The ascendant career is well-nigh finished, and the seventh jubilee prepares for celebration. The first jubilee marked the mortal agreement with the Thought Adjuster when the purpose to survive was sealed; the second was the awakening in the morontia life; the third was the fusion with the Thought Adjuster; the fourth was the awakening in Havona; the fifth celebrated the finding of the Universal Father; and the sixth jubilee was the occasion of the Paradise awakening from the final transit slumber of time. The seventh jubilee marks entrance into the mortal finaliter corps and the beginning of the eternity service. The attainment of the seventh stage of spirit realization by a finaliter will probably signalize the celebration of the first of the jubilees of eternity. ([UB 27:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/27#p7_8))

1) **<ins>The first jubilee</ins>** marks the agreement between the mortal and his Adjuster when the purpose to survive is sealed. For this it is necessary that both parties agree, on the side of the Adjuster, we know that he has been seeking this agreement since his installation in the mind of the mortal in question, for the latter, this marks his new birth of the spirit. (Not to be confused with the first moral decision of a mortal which announces the arrival of the Adjuster and the birth of the soul). [UB 5:5.13](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p5_13) The eternal survival of the personality depends entirely on the choice of the mortal mind, whose decisions determine the survival potential of the immortal soul. When the mind believes God, the soul knows God and ***with the stimulating Adjuster all desire God, then survival is assured.***

> Jesus made plain to his apostles the difference between the repentance of so-called good works as taught by the Jews and the change of mind by faith—the new birth—which he required as the price of admission to the kingdom. He taught his apostles that *faith* was the only requisite to entering the Father’s kingdom. John had taught them “repentance—to flee from the wrath to come.” Jesus taught, “Faith is the open door for entering into the present, perfect, and eternal love of God.” Jesus did not speak like a prophet, one who comes to declare the word of God. He seemed to speak of himself as one having authority. Jesus sought to divert their minds from miracle seeking to the finding of a real and personal experience in the satisfaction and assurance of the indwelling of God’s spirit of love and saving grace. ([UB 138:8.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/138#p8_8))

If the purpose of survival is sealed, then the price of admission into the kingdom has been paid. The price is the acquisition of faith. The change of mind through faith. Here we have the interaction between the mind and the spiritual. The Adjuster (which is pure spirit) adjusts the mind (which is intellectual) to the new requirements of the spiritual level, with the agreement of the mortal. Once the agreement of the mortal is gained, these adjustments may be conscious or unconscious. There are three distinct efforts to spiritualize the material mind: the efforts of the material intellect and the joint activities of the soul and the Adjuster.

> _The Thought Adjuster is engaged in a constant effort so to spiritualize your mind as to evolve your morontia soul; but you yourself are mostly unconscious of this inner ministry. You are quite incapable of distinguishing the product of your own material intellect from that of the conjoint activities of your soul and the Adjuster._ ([UB 110:4.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p4_2))

> _“Verily, verily, I say to you, he who rules his own self is greater than he who captures a city. Self-mastery is the measure of man’s moral nature and the indicator of his spiritual development. In the old order you fasted and prayed; as the new creature of the rebirth of the spirit, you are taught to believe and rejoice. In the Father’s kingdom you are to become new creatures; old things are to pass away; behold I show you how all things are to become new. And by your love for one another you are to convince the world that you have passed from bondage to liberty, from death into life everlasting._ ([UB 143:2.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/143#p2_3))

2) **<ins>The second jubilee</ins>** is the awakening into the morontia life. It is the resurrection on the mansion worlds. This experience is the confirmation of our faith. Our physical body was left on Urantia, we find ourselves with a morontia form on mansion no. 1.

> _The physical body of mortal flesh is not a part of the reassembly of the sleeping survivor; the physical body has returned to dust. The seraphim of assignment sponsors the new body, the morontia form, as the new life vehicle for the immortal soul and for the indwelling of the returned Adjuster. The Adjuster is the custodian of the spirit transcript of the mind of the sleeping survivor. The assigned seraphim is the keeper of the surviving identity—the immortal soul—as far as it has evolved. And when these two, the Adjuster and the seraphim, reunite their personality trusts, the new individual constitutes the resurrection of the old personality, the survival of the evolving morontia identity of the soul. Such a reassociation of soul and Adjuster is quite properly called a resurrection, a reassembly of personality factors; but even this does not entirely explain the reappearance of the surviving *personality.* Though you will probably never understand the fact of such an inexplicable transaction, you will sometime experientially know the truth of it if you do not reject the plan of mortal survival._ ([UB 30:4.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p4_15))

This resurrection will remain in our memories as the most considerable experience of our adventure in the ascension towards Paradise, and we will remember it in eternity. What will our reactions be when we wake up on the first world of mansions? Certainly a formidable hope confirmed by this resurrection, doubled by the moving reunion of our loved ones and our friends.

Then there will be discoveries, physical, mental, morontial and spiritual.

3) **<ins>The third jubilee</ins>** is the celebration of fusion with our Mystery Monitor. This signifies that the seven psychic circles have been passed. That we are now one with our Thought Adjuster. We now have at our disposal the entire memory of the eternal past (as far as it is compatible with our degree of evolution, on all levels, in our continuing ascension). [UB 5:1.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/5#p1_11) ***...the eternal destiny of man is assured*** when his fusion with the Adjuster proclaims to the universe that this ascender has made the final and irrevocable choice to live the will of God. ***This is an absolute reality***: [UB 13:1.23](/en/The_Urantia_Book/13#p1_23) ...We are aware of the eternal fusion of a divine Adjuster with an immortal soul of human origin, but ascending finaliters know this very experience as an absolute reality. We are now a creature fused with the Father ([UB 30:1.101](/en/The_Urantia_Book/30#p1_101)). [UB 40:7.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/40#p7_5) Fusion with a fragment of the Universal Father is equivalent to a divine validation of final attainment on Paradise, and these Adjuster-fused mortals form the only class of human beings the totality of whom traverses the circuits of Havona and finds God on Paradise. ***To the Adjuster-fused mortal the career of universal service is wide open***.

It is on this occasion that we are given our new name. 538.3 Immediately after confirmation of Adjuster fusion, the new morontia being is for the first time introduced to his companions under his ***new name***.

We pass from the mortal state to the immortal state. 539.2 ...$..It is at the moment of fusion with the Adjuster that you truly pass from the mortal state to the ***immortal status***...

When fusion takes place on an evolutionary sphere, this operation takes place in the atmosphere (if this world does not have a morontia temple). [UB 55:1.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p1_6).

For persons experiencing the transference from material life to the morontia state—the fusion of the immortal soul with the indwelling Adjuster—on an evolutionary planet, it is the surest means of escape from natural death. [UB 55:2.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p2_2).

There are two modified orders of ascension.
- a) The progressive mortals of the intermediate evolutionary worlds, who after fusion are exempt from passage through the seven mansion worlds, they awaken either on the system capital or at the constellation headquarters.
- b) Mortals subject to the influence of the Son (Creator) are transferred directly into the presence of the Sovereign Son, at the headquarters of the local universe (here the universe of Nebadon). [UB 49:6.15](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p6_15) and [UB 49:6.18](/en/The_Urantia_Book/49#p6_18)

4) **<ins>The fourth jubilee</ins>** is the awakening on the pilot world of the **<ins>7th^ circuit of Havona</ins>** . [UB 14:5.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/14#p5_4) Until then, the evolutionary career has always been accomplished by group, now it is a question of personal education. ...no pilgrim can avoid passing through each of the seven Havonian circuits of progressive spiritualization. ([UB 26:3.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p3_2)) There is no shortcut to avoid passing through the billion worlds of Havona. The progression is made from the 7th^ circuit of Havona (outer circuit) towards the first inner circuit.

The pilgrims land on the receiving planet of Havona, the pilot world of the seventh circuit, with only one quality of perfection, ***perfection of purpose***. The Universal Father has decreed: “***Be you perfect, even as I am perfect.***” ([UB 26:4.12](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p4_12))

These are the secondary supernaphim who receive the pilgrims on Havona: The first of the seven groups of secondary supernaphim that we meet is that of the pilgrims' helpers, these beings with rapid understanding and broad sympathy who receive the ascenders from space...([UB 26:5.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p5_1))

> Time is of little consequence on the Havona circles. In a limited manner it enters into the possibilities of advancement, but achievement is the final and supreme test. The very moment your superaphic associate deems you to be competent to pass inward to the next circle, you will be taken before the twelve adjutants of the seventh Circuit Spirit. Here you will be required to pass the tests of the circle determined by the superuniverse of your origin and by the system of your nativity. The divinity attainment of this circle takes place on the pilot world and consists in the spiritual recognition and realization of the Master Spirit of the ascending pilgrim’s superuniverse. ([UB 26:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p5_5))

***<ins>It is in this circle (the sixth)</ins>*** that ascenders attain a new realization of the Supreme Godhead. ([UB 26:6.2](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p6_2)). When the guides of supremacy deem their students ripe for advancement, they bring them before the commission of seventy, a mixed group serving as examiners on the pilot world of circuit number six. ***After satisfying this commission as to their understanding of the Supreme Being and the Trinity of Supremacy***, the pilgrims receive confirmation that they may be transferred to the fifth circuit. ([UB 26:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p6_4))

> _Trinity guides are the tireless ministers of the fifth circle of the Havona training of the advancing pilgrims of time and space. The spiritual graduates are here designated “candidates for the Deity adventure” since it is on this circle, under the direction of the Trinity guides, that the pilgrims receive advanced instruction concerning the divine Trinity in preparation for the attempt to achieve the personality recognition of the Infinite Spirit. And here the ascending pilgrims discover what true study and real mental effort mean as they begin to discern the nature of the still-more-taxing and far-more-arduous spiritual exertion that will be required to meet the demands of the high goal set for their achievement on the worlds of this circuit._ ([UB 26:7.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p7_1))

> _When an ascendant soul actually starts for Paradise, he is accompanied only by the transit trio: the superaphic circle associate, the Graduate Guide, and the ever-present servital associate of the latter. These excursions from the Havona circles to Paradise are trial trips; the ascenders are not yet of Paradise status. They do not achieve residential status on Paradise until they have passed through the terminal rest of time subsequent to the attainment of the Universal Father and the final clearance of the Havona circuits. Not until after the divine rest do they partake of the “essence of divinity” and the “spirit of supremacy” and thus really begin to function in the circle of eternity and in the presence of the Trinity._
> 
> _The ascender’s companions of the transit trio are not required to enable him to locate the geographic presence of the spiritual luminosity of the Trinity, rather to afford all possible assistance to a pilgrim in his difficult task of recognizing, discerning, and comprehending the Infinite Spirit sufficiently to constitute personality recognition. Any ascendant pilgrim on Paradise can discern the geographic or locational presence of the Trinity, the great majority are able to contact the intellectual reality of the Deities, especially the Third Person, but not all can recognize or even partially comprehend the reality of the spiritual presence of the Father and the Son. Still more difficult is even the minimum spiritual comprehension of the Universal Father._
> 
> _Seldom does the quest for the Infinite Spirit fail of consummation, and when their subjects have succeeded in this phase of the Deity adventure, the Trinity guides prepare to transfer them to the ministry of the Son finders on the fourth circle of Havona._ ([UB 26:7.4-6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p7_4))

***<ins>The fourth circuit</ins>*** of Havona is sometimes called the “***Son circuit***.” From the worlds of this circuit, ascending pilgrims ***proceed to Paradise to establish understanding contact with the Eternal Son***, while on the worlds of this circuit descending pilgrims arrive at ***a new understanding of the nature and mission of the Creator Sons of time and space***. There are seven worlds in this circuit on which the reserve corps of Paradise Michaels maintain special schools of service, ministering mutually to ascending and descending pilgrims; ***and it is on these Michael Son worlds that the pilgrims of time and the pilgrims of eternity first achieve true mutual understanding***. In many respects the experiences of this circuit are the ***most astonishing of the entire Havona sojourn***. ([UB 26:8.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p8_1))

5) ***<ins>It is on this 3rd circuit that the 5th jubilee</ins>*** takes place, which corresponds to reaching the Universal Father.

> _The attainment of the Universal Father is the passport to eternity, notwithstanding the remaining circuits to be traversed. It is therefore a momentous occasion on the pilot world of circle number three when the transit trio announce that the last venture of time is about to ensue; that another creature of space seeks entry to Paradise through the portals of eternity._
> 
> _The test of time is almost over; the race for eternity has been all but run. The days of uncertainty are ending; the temptation to doubt is vanishing; the injunction to be *perfect* has been obeyed. From the very bottom of intelligent existence the creature of time and material personality has ascended the evolutionary spheres of space, thus proving the feasibility of the ascension plan while forever demonstrating the justice and righteousness of the command of the Universal Father to his lowly creatures of the worlds: “Be you perfect, even as I am perfect.”_
> 
> _Step by step, life by life, world by world, the ascendant career has been mastered, and the goal of Deity has been attained. Survival is complete in perfection, and perfection is replete in the supremacy of divinity. Time is lost in eternity; space is swallowed up in worshipful identity and harmony with the Universal Father. The broadcasts of Havona flash forth the space reports of glory, the good news that in very truth the conscientious creatures of animal nature and material origin have, through evolutionary ascension, become in reality and eternally the perfected sons of God._ ([UB 26:9.2-4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p9_2))

It may be noted that some pilgrims fail in their attempts to find either the Father, the Son or the Spirit. Oddly enough, the pilgrims of the 7th superuniverse are the only ones not to fail in these attempts (probably because they are native to the only superuniverse that represents all three Deities of the Trinity). For those who fail, they must return to the superuniverse representing the Deity they could not find, and this for a minimum time of at least a thousand standard years.

The two remaining circles of Havona have several functions, one of which is to complete the instruction of the pilgrims before their final transfer to Paradise. These are the Complements of Rest who accompany the ascending pilgrim to the Central Isle.

> _Near the end of the first-circle sojourn the ascending pilgrims first meet the instigators of rest of the primary order of supernaphim. These are the angels of Paradise coming out to greet those who stand at the threshold of eternity and to complete their preparation for the transition slumber of the last resurrection. You are not really a child of Paradise until you have traversed the inner circle and have experienced the resurrection of eternity from the terminal sleep of time. The perfected pilgrims begin this rest, go to sleep, on the first circle of Havona, but they awaken on the shores of Paradise. Of all who ascend to the eternal Isle, only those who thus arrive are the children of eternity; the others go as visitors, as guests without residential status._
> 
> _And now, at the culmination of the Havona career, as you mortals go to sleep on the pilot world of the inner circuit, you go not alone to your rest as you did on the worlds of your origin when you closed your eyes in the natural sleep of mortal death, nor as you did when you entered the long transit trance preparatory for the journey to Havona. Now, as you prepare for the attainment rest, there moves over by your side your long-time associate of the first circle, the majestic complement of rest, who prepares to enter the rest as one with you, as the pledge of Havona that your transition is complete, and that you await only the final touches of perfection._
> 
> _Your first transition was indeed death, the second an ideal sleep, and now the third metamorphosis is the true rest, the relaxation of the ages._ ([UB 26:11.6-8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/26#p11_6))

6) <ins>Sixth Jubilee.</ins> It is when you touch the shores of Paradise as Paradise citizens that you celebrate your sixth jubilee.

Between the last two Jubilees, you become the caring pupils of the primary supernaphim, who are:

> 1. Conductors of Worship.
> 2. Masters of Philosophy.
> 3. Custodians of Knowledge.
> 4. Directors of Conduct.
> 5. Interpreters of Ethics.
> 6. Chiefs of Assignment.
> 7. Instigators of Rest. ([[UB 27:0.4-10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/27#p0_4))

You start with the Instigators of Rest (not to be confused with the Complements of Rest who are secondary supernaphim) go through the 5 other corps of primary supernaphim and end with the Conductors of Adoration before becoming part of a company of Finaliters.

7) <ins>The Seventh Jubilee</ins> marks your entry into the Body of the Finality.

> The endless service of the Paradise Trinity is about to begin; and now the finaliter is face to face with the challenge of God the Ultimate. ([UB 27:7.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/27#p7_10))

And now the eternal service opens before the new finaliter, and when a finaliter reaches the seventh stage of spirit realization, this will probably signal the ***first jubilee of eternity***. ([UB 27:7.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/27#p7_8)) What will be the next 6 stages of the jubilees of eternity? Only the unfathomable experiences of the Infinite Cosmos will teach us on and in the levels of the coabsolute.

CMR

