---
title: "The Dual Nature of Supremacy"
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
tags: The Supreme, Le Lien, article
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-29T14:02:03.086Z
---

<p class="v-card v-sheet theme--light grey lighten-3 px-2">© 2000 Linda Buselli<br>© 200 French-speaking Association of Readers of the Urantia Book</p>


“For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction.”

This axiom of physics has profoundly influenced our view of the physical world. But if, in fact, this is a “truth” of the universe, then it must be a truth on all levels of reality. In my attempt to understand the nature of the Supreme, I have discovered that this idea is crucial to understanding how the work of supremacy is carried out, not only in the physical manifestations of the Almighty Supreme, but in spirit, in the mind, and even in the personality.

The fact that supremacy must include all finite possibilities indicates that it must be an experience of all levels for a given possibility, from one extreme to another, from almost absolute subinfinity to its opposite. We find this example in _The Urantia Book_ in connection with ascending and descending sons, the passive-aggressive encircuitment of the angelic orders, and even in our nativity sex, traces of which remain in Paradise and beyond.

> “_Human beings have learned that the motion of the invisible may sometimes be discerned by observing its effects on the visible; and we in the universes have long since learned to detect the movements and trends of Supremacy by observing the repercussions of such evolutions in the personalities and patterns of the grand universe._” ([UB 115:6.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/115#p6_7))

Perhaps because I am a woman and feel that there is a gender (sex) bias in _The Urantia Book_, I have devoted much time and meditation to this subject. Not long ago I decided to begin with the relationships between the Creator Son and the Divine Minister, as representatives of the universal concepts male-female, aggressive-passive, etc.; and I have been led to discover a deeper meaning and purpose for these designations.

One of the most disturbing aspects of the Creator Son-Creative Spirit partnership is the relationship between the personality prerogatives of the Son as opposed to the virtually nonpersonal aspects of the Divine Minister, especially in the early stages of local universe formation. “In local universes, the Creators themselves evolve; the presence of the Conjoint Actor evolves from a living focus of power to the status of the divine personality of a universe Mother Spirit; the Creator Son evolves from the nature of existential paradisiacal divinity to the experiential nature of supreme sovereignty.” ([UB 116:4.8](/en/The_Urantia_Book/116#p4_8)).

It seems that as it evolves from individual expression of personality to group consciousness gained through the experience of living in the sameness of the lives of its creatures, it moves from consciousness of group expression to a more individual expression of personality expression. This observation allows for several possibilities of interpretations and expressions with regard to the actualization of personality potentials in the aggressive-passive, male-female, yin-yang roles, that is, one of the dual movements of growth now taking place in Supremacy.

## Interdependence

The Creator Son and the Creative Spirit are uniquely associated from the moment of their creation. “_When a Creator Son is personalized by the Universal Father and the Eternal Son, the Infinite Spirit at once individualizes a new and unique representation of itself to accompany that Creator Son into the realms of space. There it will be his companion, first in physical organization, and then in creation and ministry to the creatures of the newly projected universe._” ([UB 34:0.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p0_1)) And “_The birth of a co-ordinate Creator Son is the signal for the birth in the person of the Infinite Spirit of the potential of the future local universe consort of that Paradise Son._” ([UB 17:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p6_3))

In the growth and accomplishment of the finite actualization of space-time potential in a local universe, the Creator Son and the Creative Spirit must function together. He is limited by space, she (the Divine Minister) by time, but, “...when these two personalities function in administrative union, they are practically independent of time and space within the confines of their local creation. It can therefore be observed practically throughout a local universe that the Creator Son and the Creative Spirit function independently of both time and space, since each has the disposal of the other, who is freed either from space or from time.” ([UB 34:3.6](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p3_6))

## Dual movements of consciousness

The Creative Deities represent two extremes of consciousness in the Supreme Mind. The Creator Son is totally individual “_...each one is unique, diverse, exclusive, and original in his ***nature*** as well as in his personality.” ([UB 21:2.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p2_10)) On the other hand, the Creative Spirit begins as a hardly individual being, but, “_...acquires the group consciousness of a destiny.” ([UB 17:6.4](/en/The_Urantia_Book/17#p6_4)) As the Creator Son develops his consciousness through the experiences of his various beings in living the lives of seven of his created beings, the Creative Spirit grows into a more personal expression of consciousness with each of his (the Creator Son's) bestowals. As the group consciousness of the Creator Son develops, the expression of individual consciousness increases (in the Creative Spirit). They grow together, but from opposite ends of the spectrum of personal expression and consciousness. Thus the growth of both is equal in the growth of the Supreme evolutionary consciousness in their local universe.

## Reflections on a planetary level

All these movements of experiential growth in Supremacy are reciprocal, and are reflected on all levels of time-space reality, from material to mental to spiritual experience. “During the present universe age, this dual movement is revealing itself in the descending and ascending personalities of the grand universe.” ([UB 115:6.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/115#p6_5)) It is also revealed in many other types of relationships, including passive-aggressive roles, and a myriad of spiritual and mental phenomena, in both ascending and descending personalities.

In considering the aggressive-passive roles, we find the two types of consciousness, an individual expression of personality and a more group-consciousness expression. On Urantia, although each personality exhibits qualities of both types of consciousness, males are generally considered “aggressive,” and females are generally considered “passive”; that is, males tend to exhibit a more aggressive individual personality expression, and females tend to exhibit a more “family” group-consciousness orientation. Perhaps this is the source of “feminine intuition,” an awareness of a certain level of mind regarding the minds of others.

This may also apply to the consciousness of entire planets. The Urantian races are regarded as sons of God, and as such are highly individual persons. We are a world of Bestowal Sons of the Father; the Adjusters seek union with the unique personalities who are evolving into the relationship consciousness, the group consciousness required for the growth of Supremacy. “_He in the seventh or sixth circle can know God—be conscious of his sonship—almost as well as he in the second or first circle, but the beings of the lower circles are much less conscious of their experiential relationship with the Supreme Being, of their universe citizenship_.” ([UB 110:6.16](/en/The_Urantia_Book/110#p6_16)) Our progression through the morontia worlds will certainly involve our ability to “socialize,” to work in conjunction with groups of various types of beings.

Let us now consider the planets where spirit fusion is practiced. We are informed that their inhabitants are mortal, as we are, and will ascend through the local universe in the same manner as we do. What, then, is different? Can we postulate that their personality expression develops like that of the Creative Spirit, from group consciousness to personal expression? My theory has always been that Ellanora of Panoptia was able to save a single soul from her planet from being lost during the Lucifer rebellion through the group consciousness function of her world. Perhaps Ellanora’s leadership qualities indicate that she had a highly developed I.Q., being a more individually personalized member of her race and therefore able to exert her influence more strongly through the mind circuit of the planet. I cannot imagine such an event occurring on Urantia with its highly individualized minds. We are only beginning in our society to realize how important group consciousness and cooperation is to our planetary future.

We are informed that Adjusters gain valuable experience working with spirit fusion candidates, but the Adjuster does not return after the resurrection of these individuals. Nevertheless, the Adjuster should have gained experience with the group mind which should be of value in its purpose of helping us evolve into greater group consciousness; and after fusion, this should be of definite benefit on the training worlds of the constellation. According to The Urantia Book, the Adjusters: “...work with the material mind to build, through adjustment and spiritualization, a new mind for your future career on new worlds and under a new name.” ([UB 108:5.5](/en/The_Urantia_Book/108#p5_5)) We cannot automatically assume that our Adjusters' past experiences were only concerned with helping us in our mortal experience; their plans extend much further into the future than that.

## Evolutionary completion of the Supreme

The existence of this divergent but coordinated growth pattern appears to be an inherent function of Supremacy. In terms of the relationship of the Creator Son and the Creative Spirit and their destiny, some speculation can be made even now. “...at some time in the distant future, in the universes now mobilizing in outer space, we believe that the liaison between a sevenfold Master Son and a seventh-stage Creative Spirit may attain absonite levels of service...” ([UB 21:6.3](/en/The_Urantia_Book/21#p6_3)). We know that in the present universe age, “The Universe Mother Spirit, however, never leaves the local universe headquarters world...The Holy Spirit of the Divine Minister would cease to be functional if her personal presence were withdrawn from Salvington. Her spiritual presence seems fixed on the universe headquarters world...The Universe Mother Spirit acts as the universal center and focus of the Spirit of Truth as well as her own personal influence, the Holy Spirit._” ([UB 34:4.7](/en/The_Urantia_Book/34#p4_7)) Nevertheless, at [UB 55:10.11](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p10_11): “_If the Creator Sons are destined to work in the outer universes, the Divine Ministers will not fail to accompany them._” How then could things develop which would enable her to join the Master Son in the outer space levels?

In discussing the local universe stage of light and life, The Urantia Book tells us: “When the fourth stage of development is reached, the Creator Son becomes administratively free. The Divine Minister gradually merges her ministry with that of the Master Spirit of his superuniverse and with the Infinite Spirit.” ([UB 55:10.9](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p10_9)) At the same time that Michael becomes administratively free, she (the Divine Minister) also frees herself from her control over the energy and mind circuits of the local universe. “At the same time, a new status would be conferred upon all orders of permanent citizens such as Material Sons, Univitatias, Midsoniters, Susatias, and Spirit-fused mortals.” ([UB 55:10.10](/en/The_Urantia_Book/55#p10_10)) Please note that the Spirit-fused mortals are the only representatives of the ascending evolutionary sons in this group. Will they have to represent his presence in the future universe age in some unrevealed manner?

The Supreme seems to grow from every possible experiential starting point in the fulfillment of its destiny, and we participate in this growth, not only as ascending sons, but in many other manifestations, such as gender identification, consciousness, personality types, varied situations of planetary origin—a virtually endless profusion of different values and experiences. And all expressions of finite reality are essential to the Supremacy. It is only our spiritual and intellectual immaturity that designates one destiny or expression of the Supreme as having greater value than another. We are all equally necessary to the completion of the Time-Space God, and we will experientially appreciate all of this much more as we progress through the ages.

> “The Supreme is the beauty of physical harmony, the truth of intellectual meaning, and the goodness of spiritual value. He is the sweetness of true success and the joy of everlasting achievement. He is the oversoul of the grand universe, the consciousness of the finite cosmos, the completion of finite reality, and the personification of Creator-creature experience. Throughout all future eternity God the Supreme will voice the reality of volitional experience in the trinity relationships of Deity.” ([UB 117:1.1](/en/The_Urantia_Book/117#p1_1))

Linda Buselli [^1], Dallas, Texas. (Translation)



## Remarks


[^1]: (Linda Buselli has been a reader for 28 years, and she and her husband Bob served as Area Coordinators in Indiana, USA for many years. She is a member of the Publications Committee and currently resides in Dallas, Texas. Both children, Michael (24) and Gina (22) are active members of the Urantia movement.)